https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=24u3QhRuJfQ

 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. My name is David Thoreau. I'm privileged to be the president of the C.S. Lewis Society of California. I want to welcome you to the second meeting that we're having on Jordan Peterson's book, The Twelve Rules for Life, an Antidote to Chaos. We're thrilled to have you here. We're thrilled to have Paul VanderKlay again as our leader, discussant leader, and moderator. I hope you'll enjoy it. For those of you who are new to the C.S. Lewis Society, you can go to our website, lewissociety.org, get further information. We have a number of our board members here, which we're pleased to and privileged to have on our board and also to participate very actively. On the Lewis Society website, you'll find virtually all of Lewis's books and virtually every book about Lewis and many other writers who contributed to these seminal questions and ideas that range from philosophical, cultural, theological, economic, literary, and many other aspects pertaining to major questions that people have and have had since the beginning. There's also information about becoming a member of the Lewis Society. This is how we fund these kinds of events. Our YouTube channel, you're welcome to subscribe. We'll have this video as well as the previous one up soon. So some of you may recall that on May 2nd, we had the privilege of hosting an event in San Francisco with Jordan Peterson. It was a sold out event at the Marines Memorial Theater. And the topic of the evening was called An Evening with Jordan B. Peterson, the Meaning and Reality of Individual Sovereignty. And I think people really enjoy that. And Paul was also there and also hosted a meetup group beforehand, which we were delighted that that was possible. Paul is a pastor at Livingstone's Christian Reformed Church. He went to Calvin College and Calvin Seminary. And his own YouTube channel, I highly recommend, where he discusses Peterson's work and Lewis's work and so forth. So don't let me delay any further. I want to introduce Paul Venterklee. Thank you. Well, it's my pleasure to be back. You might recall, those of you who are here on the 5th, I'm going to, we went through the 12 rules a little bit in the last video. I'm going to go in a little bit more depth tonight. And tonight I want to talk about the pagan and the Christian. One of the big issues that comes up again and again in the Jordan Peterson conversation is how to categorize him. Esther O'Reilly is a blogger. And she, while I do YouTube channels, she often blogs. And her characterization of Jordan Peterson has been a noble pagan. And I think that's actually a fairly good categorization of him. I often call him the unauthorized exorcist. But noble pagan, especially for tonight's conversation, I think is quite apt. In YouTube land, it's always a hot conversation to ask the question, is Jordan Peterson a Christian? Jonathan Peugeot, who knows Jordan Peterson quite well, and Jonathan Peugeot is an orthodox icon carver, calls Jordan Peterson Cyrus. He says he's a heretic. He's his good friend, but doesn't necessarily categorize him as a Christian. Any time I do a YouTube video asking this question, the comments will be all over the place. Jordan Peterson hops back and forth over the line often. Sometimes if you ask him if he's a Christian, he'll say yes. Sometimes he'll say no. He doesn't go to church. And Jordan Peterson's terminology can be sort of all over the map, because he even, in fact, accused Matt Dela Huntie and Sam Harris of in some ways being Christians, which they didn't really appreciate. And so a lot of it depends on what you mean by a Christian. And we won't necessarily debate that this evening, but it's in the back of our minds as we think about this question about what is Jordan Peterson trying to do with this book, 12 Rules for Life? Now the isn't or isn't he question, I often think of it in terms of Jim and Pam in the office. And actually one of my earlier videos, I did an analysis of Jordan Peterson via the characters in the office. And this was the only video that I know Jordan Peterson watched, because he tweeted it out on Twitter. But the question was, well, this tension. And I think Jordan Peterson intentionally holds the tension about his relationship with Christianity. The reason being that holds the audience. And if he were to ever say, all right, I'm going to join the Roman Catholic Church, then the Orthodox and the Protestants and the atheists would be upset. And any group he would join would alienate the other group. So he's going to hold that tension just like a situation comedy for as long as he can, because that keeps the interest on him. A book I've been reading for the past few days is Frank Schaeffer's Crazy for God, which came out a number of years ago. And I'm really enjoying the book. It's of course Frank Schaeffer's take on his father, Francis Schaeffer's work and ministry. He was then known as Little Frankie growing up at Le Brie when people all over Europe were making their way to Le Brie to meet with Francis Schaeffer and listen to Francis Schaeffer talk about God and art and philosophy. It's been remarkable how many people have talked to me about Jordan Peterson and Francis Schaeffer. And for a long time I was sort of puzzled about that. And along my journey I've also bumped into quite a few men older than myself who had actually made their way to Le Brie. Warren Mills who hosted me in Australia had done some time at Le Brie. Bern Power who I've had some conversations with on my channel had done some time at Le Brie. There have been a number of other individuals who spent time at Le Brie and have also kind of been sucked up into the Jordan Peterson movement. And now as I'm reading Frank Schaeffer's book in many ways I can see why. A lot of the dynamics around Peterson are similar. He has been able to work this nexus between Christianity and a number of other broader topics in the culture and bring some attention to it and that draws people. And in fact some of the times when I hear Frank Schaeffer just talking about the kinds of things that Francis Schaeffer would say, saying things like our society was built on Christian values. If we lose these Christian values we're going to lose the kind of stability and prosperity we enjoy as a society. Jordan Peterson, Francis Schaeffer both said very similar things just now some 35, 40 years apart. Last time I was here I asked the question which C.S. Lewis book would you consider perhaps might be a self-help book? And as I thought about 12 Rules for Life and I thought which of C.S. Lewis books would be most like 12 Rules for Life I thought of the Screwtape Letters. And it seems like a strange choice because Jordan Peterson is rather an open agnostic when it comes to metaphysics, when it comes to the reality of angels or demons and even God which we'll talk about a little bit. C.S. Lewis wrote a book about a senior devil writing to a junior devil on how to trap a man's soul. It would seem that the two books were very different but actually both books are about wisdom. And we talked about that quite a bit at the June 5 meeting. Tonight I want to focus a little bit more on myth because one of the interesting contrasts between Lewis and Peterson is very much about myth. Now both men love to use myths and in the earlier slide which is the one I used from this Alistair Roberts from this Alistair Roberts piece. I wonder if this would work. Let me look at that. Alistair Roberts used this quote from C.S. Lewis from the Myth Becoming Real which is what I read at the last meeting. A man who disbelieves the Christian story as fact but continually fed on it as myth would perhaps be more spiritually alive than one who ascended but did not think much about it. Alistair Roberts who is a very sharp English scholar has very much picked up on this when it comes to Peterson. If we take a look at how Peterson uses myth and how Lewis uses myth I think there's a deep contrast. If you read 12 Rules for Life the book is about virtue, the book is about wisdom, and if you watch how Peterson interprets the Bible he's pretty free in terms of well we're not going to worry too much about its relationship to history let's say but what the Bible is is a deep well of wisdom which is communicated through myth and so it is very much myth in its connection to wisdom. Lewis on the other hand deeply implied in screw tape is that myth is a window into ultimate reality. So in a sense myth for Lewis gives you the big narrative. Myth for wisdom for Peterson gives you and very much in a self-help book how to manage your life, things that you can do to bring success into your life. Screw tape of course struck a nerve in World War II England. People imagined wasn't this demon stuff mere myth and Lewis sort of flipped it on its back and said ah but think about these questions look at it from this way of looking at it that you might not think has any value. That England of course during the war was in an existential crisis that forced it to think about good and evil and Lewis sort of takes screw tape and says dare you think about it through this lens. Now myth has been a big part of Jordan Peterson's rise. Myths are for Peterson as is the Bible really the dream sourced and Darwinian tested represented actions that lead to success. And so now this plays in different ways with different communities. When you listen to how Jordan Peterson uses the Bible and there are a lot of biblical citations in 12 rules for life. Jordan Peterson mostly uses the Bible as a conveyor of wisdom. Now if you look at let's say segments of the church evangelicals conservatives who often demands about the relationship between biblical material and history if you actually listen to how many conservative Christians use the Bible they also use the Bible as a source of wisdom a source of examples just like Jordan Peterson does. So Jordan Peterson will say stay fairly agnostic with respect to questions about the Bible and history but he'll very much use mythology for wisdom. And myths like the Bible are proven true by virtue of the success of the civilization that they produce. And so many conservative Christians might look at the Bible and say well the Bible is the word of God therefore it's true. Jordan Peterson comes at it and says well look at our society. Our society has in many ways for centuries been on the top of the world. We don't see a lot of people sneaking out of America to move to Africa and Asia. People are moving from Africa and Asia and Latin America to get into the established West because you have the rule of law, you have property rights, you have respect of the individual. All of these values have been demonstrated in the world to in a sense be on top and the best. What stands beneath all of these values? The Bible. So in other words the Bible is validated and verified by the success of Western culture. That's his argument. And therefore the mythology within the Bible, well that's validated by again the success of Western culture. Now just over dinner James is part of our meetup and we noted over dinner that James has sort of been forest gumping his way through all of the most important churches in the last 30 years in North America. He was a found one of the early members of Saddleback Church while his brother went to Willow Creek Church. These were two of the central seeker churches in America and back in the 90s when denominations were sending people out to Saddleback and Willow Creek to learn how to grow a church, guess what these churches did? Now these churches were fundamentally evangelical in terms of their world view and their approach to the Bible but if you listen to Rick Warren or Bill Hybels they almost always preached out of Proverbs or some other wisdom literature and what they did was say we are going to convince Americans that we have credibility by giving them biblical wisdom and once we have credibility with them on the basis of wisdom then we will move the other religious pieces into their heart. In some ways Jordan Peterson is doing a very similar thing which is really quite fascinating but again this is a little bit in contrast to Lewis. Lewis used mythology for wisdom but Lewis also used the mythology for the bigger pieces of the Bible. Peterson is agnostic at that level but keeps it there at wisdom and again as I mentioned Francis Schaeffer and Jordan Peterson sound a lot of like but their ideas of the source and the validity of the myths couldn't be more different. Now how many of you have ever read Maps of Meaning? Okay getting there. How many of you have tried to read Maps of Meaning? In many ways 12 Rules for Life is Maps of Meaning for the rest of us and he wrapped it in 12 nice rules that he had sort of crowd sourced on Quora to see well these are questions that people are interested in and these are answers that people are interested in and this is a publisher's delight because Peterson already crowd tested kind of the store front materials in his book but if you dig into those chapters what you'll discover is that a lot of the key ideas from Maps of Meaning he is trying to popularize underneath the candy shell as it were of these 12 Rules for Life. Maps of Meaning is the foundational document with the science but this book is for popular consumption dressed up like a self help book complete with catchy chapter titles and images that sort of relate to some of the stuff that he wants to convey. As I mentioned last time here are the 12 Rules stand up straight with your shoulders back treat yourself as someone who you take who you're supposed to take care of make friends with people who want the best for you compare yourself to those compare yourself to who you were yesterday not to someone else today do not let your children do anything that makes you dislike them set your house in perfect order before you criticize the world pursue what is meaningful not what is expedient tell the truth or at least don't lie assume that the person you are listening to might know something you don't be precise in your speech don't bother children when they are skateboarding pet a cat when you encounter one on the street 12 nice simple cool rules but again if you dig down into those chapters you'll tend to find quite a bit of stuff that doesn't always really necessarily connect up with the rule of that chapter. The book in many ways really starts out where Peterson starts out as a pragmatist and in many ways the first chapter is a pragmatist guide to a good life or at least learning to avoid a bad one and this is where Peterson gets into the animal that he's most famously connected with which is the lobster Peterson makes the point now I actually have a niece who is working on her PhD on lobsters so I've asked her some of these questions but she's much more interested in how lobsters are going to fare as the ocean around Boston heats up and the lobsters are moving north that's the area she's working in and she doesn't seem to know much about lobster psychology but the point that Peterson is making is that very deep in our systems we in our biological heredity we share systems with many animals that deal with our motivation and these motivations have everything to do with status. Now if you are an observer of people you will notice this because people are highly attuned to that which improves their status within their peers and that which detracts from their status in their peers. Now actually as a pastor you become very keenly aware of this in certain Asian cultures you have this saying called losing face and that's losing status among your peers. When you gather people in a setting such as a small church you very quickly realize people will not do things that make them lose status. We are all highly aware of this. If you walk into a room and find yourself either overdressed or underdressed you're not going to make that mistake again. If you walk into a room and you realize well if you're a man you walk into a room and you realize there's someone there that's more successful than you has a better degree than you makes more money than you drives a better car than you well you take that into account and you track that you don't even necessarily pay attention but you're watching. If you're a woman and you walk into the room you're paying attention to other things. How are the other women of the room dressed? Am I prettier than they are? What are their husbands like? Where are we on the hierarchy? Peterson makes the point that this is something that we are always processing and it is a very big deal and just like with lobsters if two lobsters square off and one lobster loses physiologically these two lobsters change. Now we as human beings our physiological transformations are a little bit more subtle a little bit less dramatic but it happens to us too. That's why his rule is stand up with your shoulders straight. Present yourself as a top lobster but we are always paying attention to status. Don't be fooled we really are. You're designed to compete in hierarchies and this is tied to your emotional system that you live on. Now one of the beautiful things about human beings is that one of the things we do is we multiply human hierarchies. So maybe I walk into the room and well I'm very tall and so I look around and say who's about as tall as I am and well Andrew is pretty tall and so I look at him and well I'm a little younger he's a little older oh James is pretty tall and he's got that big beard going on so you know we're just all thinking like this even if we're not doing it consciously but I might say oh but I have a better job than James but James has a PhD but what we do then is we multiply the hierarchies. So if we walk into this room we sort of size each other up but we can find some little niche that well I can dominate my little niche. Maybe I'm the best tennis player in the room. I might not even know if I'm the best tennis player in the room but if I think I'm the best tennis player in the room then I have status and so what we do is we multiply these little hierarchies. Get ahead at work, be successful at home, be successful at work, be successful at work, be successful at work, be successful at work, be successful at work, be successful at work. So we multiply these little hierarchies. Get ahead at work, be successful at home, win at a sport, be more attractive, be smarter, be wealthier, be the best chess player, be the best, have the best stamp collection, have the nicest car among your peers. Well maybe your car gets the best gas mileage. Have the fastest lab rat. Have the best trained dog. It doesn't matter. Just have something that in this space I'm on top with and that's a big deal because if you can't find anything well then you're going to be in trouble. Now it's also true that it's not just all these petty little things that we're paying attention to, age, looks, reputation, age, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, looks, income, status at work, marital status, all of these kinds of things. We are actually immersed in a very rich story verse. What I mean by that is, well you might not be the best looking person in the room but your spouse loves you and everything's okay. You might not be the wealthiest person in the room but in your little corner of academia you're a big dog and everything's okay. Well what happens when we get into the religious dimension of this? Just today I put out these horrendously long videos. One of the long videos I put out today dealt a little bit with Protestant Calvinism and resurgence Calvinism through the likes of John Piper and Tim Keller. And I think Tim Keller loves to say, you're a worse sinner than you can possibly imagine. But you are more loved than you can possibly imagine. Oh, God loves me. God approves of me. Well if God approves of me, well then I can walk into a room and maybe I'm going bald, maybe I'm going to be a rich person, maybe I'm not the wealthiest person here, maybe James has a PhD and I don't, maybe all of these things. But God loves me so I can stand up straight with my shoulders back. Jordan Peterson doesn't go here of course because on the big picture mythology stuff he's going to be a mute and agnostic. But the story verse is fundamental for us as human beings. Competition over material objects is a tiny portion of what we care about. Our identities are all avatars in an endless economy of competition and they play out with others on an eternal stage. If you're a Hindu you might be banking credits in the Karma Bank so that you can be released from this endless cycle of reincarnation. If you're a Christian maybe you're storing up your treasures in heaven. There's all these games that we play and in fact human beings have been working this stuff for as long as we've had human civilization. One of the big influences of Jordan Peterson is of course Carl Jung. Carl Jung understood that ancient man in fact wrote his stories in the sky. Whereas we have these things, books and now the internet and computers, in the ancient world you would look up in the sky and all of these constellations would be connected to all of these stories. And you understood your place in the world and the heavens, well in the Psalmist, the heavens declare the glory of God. All of this stuff was the world around us and we lived within this rich story verse full of characters, full of drama but we had our place in it. Now if you take that as an example and you connect it to Jordan Peterson's Lobsters with their hierarchies and their serotonin you have a sense of how in the ancient world and through most of human history without medical technology, without anesthesia and all the powerful drugs that we have today people survived. They didn't just survive, they thrived. They lived in a rich world, a rich story verse full of stories and symbols and this is what helped human beings struggle through all of the pain of life. The church of course came to dominate and in many places, especially in the west, overcome the pagan world but then you lived with a rich Christian mythology and you have the story of Jesus and the stories from the Old Testament and you have the heavens above and the earth below and the heavens did declare the wonders of God and the whole earth was full of his glory and when the church would roll into a new place like northern Europe you would assimilate some of their mythology and put it into your Christian mythology and every winter we all put up a Christmas tree. And then the church would roll into the lives of north Africans or west Africans who were taken from west Africa and brought to places like Espanola. Well the Catholicism and the gods of the land they came from would all mix together and so for the Haitians that I worked with in the Dominican Republic, the ones who weren't yet Christians, to be a good practitioner of voodoo also meant to be a good Roman Catholic and the Dominicans had Santaria and you had all of this rich world in which we lived. But in Europe bit by bit by bit you had the Protestant Reformation in which well we got rid of all the statues didn't we and we tended to keep our ideation and our thoughts well part of the history of the Dominican Republic and the rest of the world. And then you had the pretty Spartan in our spare churches and then you had providential deism develop and bit by bit by bit God got further and further and further away. After Darwin we no longer felt we needed God to provide the material realm. We had all of these stories by which well we could be generated from animals and single cell organisms became multiple and we had all of these multi cell organisms and on and on and on and on and here we are and we have these big brains to make up all these stories but none of these stories are true. God had been floating away beginning at least with the Protestant Reformation maybe as early as the 12th century but continued to provide providential deism and a clock maker universe. And then you can begin to understand why in the 17th and 18th century philosophy and theology became anxious about this God that was retreating and we had to try and sort of explain this God in terms of a feeling of ultimate dependence or all of these other ways of saying well we don't really believe in the God as we used to know him. It's more these other mechanisms, these psychological mechanisms that we have to kind of keep him around. The West had so much sunk cost in Christianity we kept trying to figure out how he would work without believing in the old stories. And in a minute I'm going to show you a bit of a video of how the West was able to do that. And I'm going to show you a little bit of a video. But one of the things that I figured out after watching Jordan Peterson spar with the likes of Sam Harris was that in many ways God got split up in the divorce of heaven and earth in the history of the West. And I call these two aspects God number one and God number two. God number one is built into the world. He is the one who selects and that got replaced by natural selection. And what we mean by natural is not something guided by intentionality or mind. God number one the one who brings disasters upon the ungodly like you might read in the Bible. Now we call these natural disasters. And every time there's a tsunami or a volcano Christians rush in and say well what's going on in the world? And God number one is the one who says well God didn't mean to hurt anybody or some other story. God number one the God whose glory can be seen. Now it's nature's glory just a product of random chance or natural process. God number one is impersonal. God number two is the God that Sam Harris debunks. God number two is a God who has thoughts about your sex life and thoughts about how you spend your money. God number two acts in history. God number two is the one who answers prayers. As God number one receded and receded and receded God number two expanded in order to compensate. And you see quite a bit of this in the middle of the 20th century when the likes of Charles Colson begins a personal relationship with Jesus Christ and goes to his wife and says honey I've become a Christian. And his wife looks at him and says honey we've been going to church all of our life. Oh but I'm a real Christian now. What's taken place in the culture? What's the culture of the Christian culture? Jesus is now my friend. Church goers now become newly alive. They have a personal relationship with God whereas before God was more abstract and more like a government. You have the roots of what sociologist Christian Smith would call moralistic therapeutic deism. When he surveyed North Americans, North American youth, these are the ones who didn't have all the basic necessities of adults and he would sit them down and they would ask them questions about morality and religion and the universe. You had Baptists and Reformed and Presbyterians and Mormons and Muslims and Jews and atheists and what Christian Smith discovered was that they all believed in the same thing. That well good people go to heaven when they die. A few bad people like Joseph L. but it's your job to be good and God is somehow out there and if you need him it's his job to help you feel better about yourself and maybe help you find a parking spot or fix a really bad thing in your life. And everybody sort of believed in that God. Very much God number two. And then Jordan Peterson comes along and the reason I got into Jordan Peterson was I began listening to how he talked about the Bible and I thought well this is kind of interesting and I saw him making stands on things that I wouldn't expect a psychologist from the University of Toronto to take stands on and I thought well this is interesting and then I noticed that he was talking about the Bible and filling up a concert hall in Toronto and I thought well maybe he's some evangelical who has a little church group. No he's filling this place with 600 people charging 40 bucks a head and then I listened to him and I thought he's no evangelical. What is he doing? Why are people listening? And then I began to discover really interesting things about him and I thought well I've been reading comment threads that people were saying things like well when Jordan Peterson talks about the Bible well I think it has some credibility and he's opened the Bible to me and I'm kind of interested in Christianity and I'm kind of interested in the Bible and I'm kind of interested in God and I thought I've been watching churches beat on this door for a long long time getting nothing and here this guy says these things and everyone's now sort of interested in what's going on. So Jordan Peterson had four talks with Sam Harris, Sam Harris a celebrity atheist and Brett Weinstein who was an evolutionary biologist was the moderator and in their first talk in Vancouver they got to a point and the night was almost wrapping up and they never really got to the one question that everyone really wanted to know about. What does Jordan Peterson think about God? Because the atheists had been listening to him and a lot of atheists weren't quite so sure about their atheism anymore so they wanted to know Jordan what do you think about God? So what I'm going to play for you is actually the clip where I started to get this idea about God number one and God number two. Now listen very carefully to how Jordan Peterson talks about what he understands God to be. And listen very carefully to how Jordan Peterson talks about God and listen carefully to what Sam Harris assumes and then towards the end of the talk they're going to talk about prayer. So here's my question for you is if we agree that there is some way in which religious texts carry some kind of value because they allow people to figure out how to navigate their lives in ways that might reduce suffering, reduce the complexity of the choices that they have to make. Presumably you will agree that that would be consistent with an evolutionary interpretation that the fact that the stories themselves are functional would provide an advantage to those who were deploying them. So here's the problem. Isn't it then also true that those stories are responsive to past environments and so the claim that these things might be timeless would be suspect and in fact you would expect a spectrum of durability. Some stories would be right in a brief moment and okay. Yes, all that's true. All that's true. So far so good. Well so far so good. This is actually I think quite excellent then because what we have is a recognition that there is something to these belief systems that has to do with practical realities in the past and we also have an acknowledgement that we cannot trust in these things based on simple faith because even if they can be certain to have worked at some point in the past we don't know what their relevance is to the present. Right. Okay. Fair enough. All right. So I would say that's the point that I would make. I would say that's two things about that. That's exactly why we're having this discussion. And you see what happens in the most profound of such texts is the idea that the process by which your knowledge is updated has to occupy a position in the hierarchy of values that supersedes your reliance on dogma is the fundamental claim. That's why for example in Christianity the notion of the word is the highest of values and that's embodied word and that's the thing that mediates between order and chaos and everything else has to be subject to that and I would say that's not a claim that's unique to Christianity. So for example. Okay. No I think because we're being told we're out of time here so I want to give Sam his reaction to that as well and then we'll move on to Q&A. I'm tempted to just ask Jordan a question here. It's hard to know what to say for tomorrow night but I feel like we've got three thousand people sitting here who would really like an answer to this question. You say you believe in God. You have been. No I say I act as if he exists. You say what. I say I act as if he exists. Okay. So then what. But in this case what. So you act as though God exists. And in addition I've heard you say that I act as though God exists that I can't really. So far it seems that. We'll see. But the night is young. So in that sense I'm not really an atheist. I've heard you say this. Well some of you is. Well if I were really an atheist I would be far more poorly behaved than in fact I am. I would be like Raskolnikov committing murders and assuming there was nothing wrong with it. It would be more likely yes. Yeah okay. So I'm not really an atheist. I'm not really an atheist. I'm not really an atheist. So you would be more likely. That's a big distinction. I need to know. It's a big distinction. That you would is very different than it would be more likely. Taking the safety off the gun is not the same thing as shooting it. The temptations laid open to Raskolnikov would be more at hand. So in what sense do you mean. What is the God that you act as though he she it exists and what is the God shaped thing I must have in my life to prevent me from being a quote real atheist. Well okay first of all I have to point out that there's no possible way I can answer both those questions in two minutes. It's the same question. What do you mean by God? Well I'm going to tell you some of the things that I mean by God. We do have to get the questions. Maybe we're going to do this tomorrow. Well that was a pretty resounding no. It seems like that constitutes an audience question wouldn't you say? Let's do this but let's be deliberate about time. Okay well I'm going to read some things that I wrote because it's so complicated that I'm not sure that I can just spin it off the top of my head. So you'll have to excuse me. So what I'm going to do is sort of paint a picture by highlighting different things. So now I already made one point here. I made the point that part of the conception of God that underlies the western ethos is the notion that whatever God is is expressed in the truthful speech that rectifies pathological hierarchies. That isn't all it does. It also confronts the chaos of being itself and generates habitable order. So that's the metaphysical proposition and that that's best conceptualized as at least one element of God. And so I would think about it as a transcendent reality that's only observable across the longest of time frames, the longest of iterated time frames to your point. So okay so here's some propositions and they're complicated and they need to be unpacked. So I'm just going to read them and that will have to do with the time being. So God is how we imaginatively and collectively represent the existence and action of consciousness across time. As the most real aspects of existence manifest themselves across the longest of time frames but are not necessarily apprehensible as objects in the here and now. So what that means in some sense is that you have conceptions of reality built into your biological and metaphysical structure that are in the sense of processes of evolution that occurred over unbelievably vast expanses of time and that structure your perception of reality in ways that it wouldn't be structured if you only lived for the amount of time that you're going to live. And that's also part of the problem of deriving values from facts because you're evanescent and you can't derive the right values from the facts that portray themselves to you in your lifespan which is why you have a biological structure that's like 3.5 billion years old. So God is that which eternally dies and is reborn in the pursuit of higher being and truth. That's a fundamental element of hero mythology. God is the highest value in the hierarchy of values. That's another way of looking at it. God is what calls and what responds in the eternal call to adventure. God is the voice of conscience. God is the source of judgment and mercy and guilt. God is the future to which we make sacrifices and something akin to the transcendental repository of reputation. Here's a cool one if you're an evolutionary biologist. God is that which selects among men in the eternal hierarchy of men. So you know men arrange themselves into hierarchies and then men rise in the hierarchy and there's principles that are important that determine the probability of their rise and those principles aren't tyrannical power. They're something like the ability to articulate truth and the ability to be competent and the ability to make appropriate moral judgments and if you can do that in a given situation then all the other men will vote you up the hierarchy so to speak and that will radically increase your reproductive fitness and the combination of that process across long expanses of time looks to me like it's codified in something like the notion of God the Father. It's also the same thing that makes men attractive to women because women peel off the top of the male hierarchy and the question is what should be at the top of the hierarchy and the answer right now is tyranny as part of the patriarchy but the real answer is something more like the ability to use truthful speech in the let's say well-being and so that's something that operates across tremendous expanses of time and it plays a role in the selection for survival itself which makes it a fundamental reality. So let me say Sam, I do not believe in a supernatural God but the God that I heard Jordan just describe I do not have any difficulty understanding why he might care if you masturbate and I also don't have any trouble figuring out how he might answer prayers. Well tell me more then. Well I can tell you how a prayer might be answered. Well it's specific so you could let me do that. Well Jordan we've not talked about this. If I heard an answer from him that actually would satisfy me as to what the mechanism of action might be that'd be pretty interesting and if he can tell me what I heard I think it would suggest that we're not just making up stories here. Well it's possible. So imagine that, okay so let's imagine that hellish situation that you laid out. But let's put the extra twist in it because one of the things that we both decided I think was that you also have to build in the intent into that. So let's say the hell that we're talking about isn't the victim of the terrible massacres that you laid out in the jungle story but a perpetrator. Okay so someone who's actually acted in a malevolent manner, truly malevolent manner. Okay or maybe perhaps we wouldn't have to take that extreme case. We could say well perhaps you've decided that, any of you, you've decided that you've seriously done something wrong. And that you want to get away from hell, you want to make things better. Okay so here's an exercise you can try. So what you do is you sit on the edge of your bed and you say okay what I did was wrong. And you have to really believe this right. So you've thought about it, it's killing you. It's killing you. So now you're a penitent and you're confessing let's say. And you're confessing to yourself as much as to anyone. And you say I really want to know what I did wrong. And I really want to know what I could do to put it right. And I'm willing to accept any answer that will manifest itself to me. Try that. See what happens. That's a prayer that will be answered and it won't be answered in the way that you want it to be answered. I can bloody well tell you that. What are you communicating with when you do that? That is a process that I'm familiar with. It doesn't require any supernatural explanation. And it certainly doesn't require that we imagine that any of our books were dictated by the creator of the universe. I didn't say that it required any supernatural explanation or that it required the book. I was asked to provide an instance of prayer that worked. And that's what I did. I didn't do anything other than that. That's fully understandable in terms of human psychology. It's not understandable because we don't know where the answer comes from. We don't know where anything comes from. That's true. But that doesn't open the door. One thing we can know with absolute certainty is that whoever wrote the Bible didn't know either. And there's many other things he or she didn't know. Like everything else we know scientifically. It's not so obvious what people know and what they don't know. So what did you notice? A lot of slipperiness. A lot of slipperiness how? Re-freezing. Listen, if you can remember, what kinds of things did Jordan Peterson describe as God? Consciousness? No. He described a source that we don't understand as a source of answers. That was the thing that responded to prayer. And he seems to describe what we would attribute as God. And he also seemed to take the materialist world-only view of Sam Harris and be very specific on Harris' comments and show where Harris' position is inadequate. And then leaves it. How about earlier in the clip when he sits down with his computer and he starts reading stuff? Do you remember any of the things that he said? Okay. A long time. Something that sorts out. Something that's built in. In fact, if you look at the video, you'll see that he's talking about the world-only view of Sam Harris. He's talking about the world-only view of Sam Harris. And he's saying something that sorts out. Something that's built in. In fact, if you listen to really all of these conversations with Sam Harris, what they amount to is he keeps trying to help Sam Harris understand that when we are born into this world and as we are raised and enculturated and all of this stuff we do, we have inherited biologically and socially and those systems are fundamental in order to make life work. Without those systems, human beings would not be human beings. Those essentially are God number one. And so what Jordan Peterson really does is said, okay, after Darwin everybody said, well, maybe you didn't need God number one in order to have the world. Jordan Peterson essentially says, and I think this is mostly beneath the surface, people pick it up but they might not be conscious of it, maybe you don't need God to explain why we have human beings in terms of our physical bodies with eyes and hands and hair and feet and all of that. But you do need God number one. You do need these structures to understand human beings psychologically. You're not going to get human beings without these things. Yes? Psychologically and I keep thinking ethically is what I think a lot of what he said had to do with ethical beings. I'm trying to remember, there are others in the room who read much more of C.S. Lewis than I, but there's one of his books where he starts out with this sense of right and wrong that we have built into us. That's what I was hearing him do. Right. The question he kept talking about when Harris was supernatural. I'm going to ask you to leave it at that. Because Jordan will say, I'm going to stay agnostic about what we would call supernatural. Notice the conversation about prayer then. Where this really goes to I would say is God and the Turing test. How many of you know what the Turing test is? The very famous test and the test is basically this. Put a person on the phone and can you fool a human being into thinking they are conversing with another human being when they're really talking to a computer. That's something that developers of AI are really working towards. Because obviously once you have a computer that can fool us into thinking there's another person on the other end of the phone, that's something that developers of AI are really working towards. And that's something that can fool us into thinking there's another person on the other end of the line. Well now you don't need to hire expensive things like human beings that have to eat and have families and health insurance. Now you can just have a mainframe do all the talking for you. And every now and then, and I'm sure many of us are having this experience, sometimes you pick up the phone and you're talking to someone and there's these little pause and little hesitations and you just kind of wonder, am I talking to a real person or am I talking to a computer? So then you may be asking oddball unexpected questions to try and trip it up and this is kind of spy versus spy we're playing. But this is the question of the supernatural that Jordan Peterson is in a sense avoiding because what he's asking the question is at what point is the universe already so complex that it's indistinguishable from us, for us, from personhood? And so it's part of the reason he's always vague in terms of the ontology of what I would call a God number two. A God that is conscious. A God that is the source of all consciousness. Now he's agnostic on those fronts and he's open on those fronts. He will say, I'm not ready to say there isn't because the world is a very strange place. But I'm also not ready to say there is because then we're back to the Jim and Pam thing. Now he's sort of in a corner. So when he has a conversation with Sam Harris, Sam Harris gets very, very frustrated because Jordan Peterson just stays right on this line and Sam Harris really wants to attack him in the way as Jordan Peterson characterizes it, the way perhaps a smart 13-year-old would attack him. So as the book continues, basically what you have is Jordan Peterson working these matrices and he uses sections from the Bible in the book and the sections from the Bible are wisdom. And so the Bible is, in a sense, the crowd-sourced dreams hewed by a story verse Darwinian process that distills for us wisdom. And then when he gets into sacrifice, sacrifice is the process of the Bible. And so he's not just talking about the Bible. And then when he gets into sacrifice, sacrifice is in fact the invention of the future where we attempt to withhold gratification, invest in whatever it is that might be God in the story verse out there, and then the groups of people that learn to withhold gratification and sacrifice for the future out-compete groups that don't learn to sacrifice for the future. And the groups that have the best wisdom accumulate it, out-compete the other groups that have lesser wisdom. And here at the end of the story you get Western civilization, the book that built Western civilization, and in a sort of Francis Schaeffer way comes about and says, here we are, here's our book, I'm going to be agnostic with respect to the God stuff, maybe it is, maybe it isn't, I'm not going to say, I'm willing to relate fine with both groups, but if we lose this wisdom and we lose the practice of it, we're going to lose the kinds of things that have given us the prosperity and the security and the happiness that we all enjoy at a greater level than the rest of the world. And that's in a sense his argument. You had a question? So Sam Harris says you can kill a one-year-old, it doesn't matter, is Jordan Peterson, do you think part of how Jordan Peterson really rattles Sam Harris is he is undermining the warrant for that position? Sam Harris and a number of others have basically been promoting the idea that if you get rid of all of this religious stuff, people will suddenly become rational. And what he means by rational is, well you obviously know what is better than what is worse, and so people will choose what is better and then the whole world will become rational. Peterson doesn't believe that because he says with a good bit of evidence, actually if you take away people's formal religious ideas in time, what they tend to substitute it with are usually little low-level superstitions that eventually begin the process of once again rebuilding another religion. In other words, we're incurably religious. If you take away people's religion, they'll either become self-destructive or communally destructive or just start the process over again and once again rebuild another religion because we can't live without it. And that obviously is against Sam Harris' worldview which says we'd all be better if we lived without it. When you compare this with Lewis, you can really see how in many ways Peterson is like a pagan. Now C.S. Lewis had an interesting conversation with a Roman Catholic, I don't know if he was, he was basically running a house for orphans. I forget his name, maybe some of you will remember. Yes, Giovanni Calabria. And if you Google Giovanni Calabria, you'll notice that he in fact became a Roman Catholic. This is a letter that Lewis wrote to Calabria on 15 September 1953. Regarding the moral condition of our times, since you bid me prattle on, I think this. Older people, as we both are, are always praisers of times past. They always think the world is worse than it was in their younger days. They always think that the world is worse than it was in their younger days. Therefore, we ought to take care lest we go wrong. But with this proviso, certainly I feel that the very grave dangers hang over us. This result from the apostasy of the great part of Europe from the Christian faith. Hence a worse state than the one before we were in, than the one we were in before we received the faith. For no one returns from Christianity to the same slate he was in the time of the Christian faith. And we are in before Christianity in a worse state. The difference between a pagan and an apostate is the difference between an unmarried woman and an adulteress. A faith perfects nature, but faith corrupts, but faith lost corrupts nature. Therefore, many men in our time have lost not only the supernatural light, but also the natural light which pagans possessed. But God, who is the God of mercies, even now has not altogether cast off the human race. In younger people, although we may see much cruelty and lust, yet at the same time we do not see very many sparks of virtue which perhaps our own generation lacked. Do we not see sparks of virtue which perhaps our own generation lacked? How much courage, how much concern for the poor do we see? We must not despair. And among us, a not inconsiderable number are now returning to the faith. This is Louis in 53. So much for the present condition. About remedies, the question is much more difficult. For my part, I believe we ought to work not only at spreading the gospel, that certainly, but also at certain preparation for the gospel. It is necessary to recall many of the law of nature before we talk about God. For Christ promises forgiveness of sins. But what is that to those who, since they do not know the law of nature, do not know that they have sinned, who will take medicine unless he knows he is in the grip of a disease? Moral relativity is the enemy which we have to overcome before we tackle atheism. I would almost dare to say that the law of nature is the enemy of the human race. I would almost dare to say, first, let us make the younger generation good pagans, and afterwards, let us make them Christians. C.S. Lewis, 1953. Any questions? Lewis clearly has the story to the end. Peterson seems to lack it. And I think that is what he is, he isn't, he might be so potent with, right? Is that clearly at the end here, Lewis is saying the goal would be Christianity. Whereas 12 Rules for Life doesn't necessarily give a goal, or is there a hint of Peterson's work that gives that goal for the end after they become good pagans? The goal in 12 Rules for Life is wisdom and virtue. That you will enjoy a better life, and if individuals all are better people, society will be a better society. And especially in one particular chapter, if you tell the truth or at least don't lie, that's a hedge against tyranny. And that's why Peterson uses mythology for wisdom, but Lewis also uses mythology for the grand narrative. And that's why Lewis sees this as a hedge against tyranny. And that's why Lewis sees this picture, and Peterson doesn't. Can you point to any evidence that Peterson was not living out the last paragraph where Lewis says, recall me to the law of nature before we talk about God? Can you point to any evidence that Lewis, that George Peterson isn't doing that as M. Scott Peck, who in his fourth book writes People to Lie, the first one, Roadless Travel, and then two sequels. I'm dabbling with Lewis and then he's saying, David, I'm a total Christian. Do you see any evidence Pearson not doing exactly that, staying there first, for quite a while? for quite a while. I don't think Peterson has a master plan. I don't see Peterson as a committed Christian who is running the long con on a few million people in the West. I think Peterson is being completely honest about his convictions and what he believes. And I take Peterson at his word when even if it's a little confusing at times, I take him at his word. I think he's exactly who he is. And I think noble pagan isn't a bad characterization. Yes. I think it's important to have people like that that can meet others of their growing edge. Cause if he weren't exactly who he is right now, he wouldn't have sold three million copies of his book. And there are a lot of other writers that may have a more vocal or committed Christian voice that don't have influence in the culture. And whatever role he is playing, whether you view it as a bridge or as an end, sort of going alongside people at their growing edge like he was with Sam Harris, you can't have a conversation otherwise. And I think that he's the conversation partner that a lot of people need in the culture at this time. Yes. Well, I think Peterson has a couple of really wonderful qualities. One is there's a great earnestness about him. And he's very discerning. And he's hopeful. And those are significant qualities. And what he doesn't, so what he does is he lives his life and he sees things and he says, these are signs about how we can live better lives. I know we're supposed to live better lives cause we can't not have the structure of a God giving us directions and so on so that we live a life that's meaningful and valuable. He just doesn't know where to go with where this began. And so he also doesn't know where it ends up, but he sees it. And yet the wonderful thing is the marked contrast between him and Harris is Harris really wants them the possibility of God excluded. And he's committed to that despite the fact that he really should be chilling because Jordan Peterson's calling on it and saying, you gotta step back. You're making statements and you know that's true. Yeah, Peterson would say this whole matrix of this crowd-sourced, dream-sourced Bible honed by Darwin, given to us, now proven by our success in the world is good enough. It's good enough for us to build a meaningful life on to sustain a civilization on. Doesn't need to know the beginning, doesn't need to know the end, agnostic on those counts. That's right, so he's a pragmatist. He's a pragmatist. That's what sometimes his inferiority means. I mean, it's just, it's kind of funny where he gets, there's authority there. He creates these myths. He creates these stories. It gets very dogmatic about that. And his authority source is usually either they work or we have an evolutionary history or some of these other things. And sometimes it's like, how can you argue with it there? Because it's sort of like, he's almost talking axiomatically there. So it's really, so it's sort of like either you buy it or you don't buy it there. But it's, and so people who are looking at each, looking for something that's a little less, you know, certainly it's something to do there. And it's nothing challenging because there's no person out there that you're responsible for, you're only responsible for yourself there. And it's also a feeling to, to say to you, you and your heart, you know what's good for you, or what's right for you. And he seems to constantly just appealing, do the right thing, but he never defines what the right thing is. He just kind of, he kind of opinion the fact that if you're honest with something, this will somehow figure it out, what's the right thing or the good thing to do and you'll be constructive rather than destructive. And there's no evidence, he doesn't have any evidence to show that that's the case. It's kind of an art act of faith. Well, I would argue that he has a framework that he would say comes from the Bible, that that has been proven by the culture. And so that will be your frame of reference. I think that's how he would argue. Mark. I'm just trying to finally make my way through all 12 rules. So even in his answer to here's there or to my science question, so they're starting to talk about crime and punishments character. And you know, if the proof almost clinically of someone's ethical approach, their axioms and what that would play out as, Harris is trying to defend his own of not being as bad as possible. And it seems to me that the stories that Peterson also brings are his own experiences from his clinical work, right? And in a lot of ways, those are as axiomatic as the collective unconscious in some ways, because yeah, he pragmatically says, you can argue with me all day long about this in concept. I have these real life experiences with people, right? So this chapter rule 10 is about married couples. And he's like, you gotta be precise because if you're gonna diagnose the real evils of everyday living, you have to tell the truth. It reminds me of debates that in the early church, St. Augustine, like he was radical on lying. Lying in early Christianity was a huge deal. And there were huge tomes written on this. And it's fascinating to see some of that almost like play out again in this diagnosis of almost Western culture. Peterson is almost looking at it like a clinician saying, well, we can fight over evolutionary biology from the merits to say, you know, this might be more effective than that. But to me, when he starts talking about the logos, I mean, this is really about precision in speech. He spoke in San Francisco a month and was talking about communications value. And have enough people who have enough communicating who knows what might come, right? And that smacks of almost a theological openness to saying there's limits we assume are built in on the human capacity for not only self-development but the impact that has in composite that if people tell enough of the truth, he's not just being Pollyanna-sure or overly optimistic. He genuinely has seen this in people's lives. And to me, that's valuable, not just for the strength of reference of like a godly pagan or not. The point I want to get to the question for you, Paul, is when you talk about wisdom here, and there's certain limits, you might say, but where's that point of reference where kind of the Protestant humanists who said, they're not wrong, right? It's not that they're wrong. They might be lacking in its further application. Where does wisdom have its merit? What does Peterson mean by logos and what's that relationship to wisdom? There are a number of phrases that Peterson uses, which I call his gospel phrases. And I don't mean that in the Christian sense. I mean that in the sense that this is what he says really is key. And logos, I've used this illustration for my Sunday school class. So the dog peeked his head in the room here for a second. Just maybe not every, none of you saw it, but let's say the dog had gotten loose and run through the room. Suddenly in a small way, a little bit of chaos would have invaded this room. And y'all would have been wondering that, did David let a dog in? What kind of trick is David playing? What's going on with us? And then if I would have said, oh, that's my dog, I told him to sit in the other room, he must have got out. Logos, word, would have taken chaos and brought order and given meaning to a small event that happened in this room. And so that's where the spoken word for Peterson, and he connects John one and Genesis one and says, you know, this is, you heard him say a little bit of it in this clip, that this is why the spoken word is at the top of the hierarchy. Because this is the best tool we have to manage the chaos that people are and bring us to order and create habitable order in the midst of this myriad of complexity that each of us has inside of us and which is multiplied by all of us between us. And so that's why that's so high on there. And I love what you pointed out in the chapter. In that particular chapter, he talks about the elephant in the room or the dragon in the household. And it's only by the logos, the word, that that dragon can be slain and order can be restored in the household. And he's a clinical psychologist. So he sits down and what does he have people do in a room? Talk. It's the best tool we have. Okay, yes. I was wondering if there'd been a debate instead of the Sam Harris, if there'd been a debate with say, C.S. Lewis, if that would be possible, or with Joseph Campbell, what would be points of disagreement have been? So one of the questions I had for my questions for discussion was, what would Lewis think of Peterson? And I think on one hand, I think Lewis would appreciate the mythology. I mean, Lewis also could be pretty, he was a pretty sharp guy. He could have a sharp tongue. It depends what mode Lewis was in. I think Lewis, if he were, if Peterson was a visitor to the Socratic Society, I think Lewis probably would have chopped him up pretty quickly because showing, pointing out, okay, you're using mythology here, but isn't mythology really to fill the skies? Isn't mythology really to give us the great narratives that we live by and you're kind of distilling it for wisdom to help make our little lives work. What about, see, because of course Lewis saw Christianity stepping in as in his chapter of the great miracle as that missing chapter in the book that made the whole book make sense. And of course Lewis talks about die incarnation as the great miracle and all of that. So Lewis would have really, I think, pushed Peterson on, all right, let's talk mythology and pushed him further to say, as I think Barfield did to Lewis, that imagination is actually, can pay out in bigger terms than your small rationality. So in other words, you've kind of got Sam Harris here. Peterson, I think, pretty much handles Sam Harris pretty well, I think Lewis would have been able to contextualize them both. Okay, okay. Second one. It seems to me that Peterson has an intuitive quality sometimes that Harris completely lacks, although I'm not as familiar with Harris. And part of that I see is Peterson having an intuitive understanding of paradox is profoundly meaningful and is transcendently meaningful in a sense because it's beyond intentionality or authorship in a human, aquatic way. It's interesting to me that Harris seems almost to be verging on solipsism or headed in that, like if you keep Sam Harris in Sam Harris, he will end up as pure solipsism because he's kind of expand, it is a thing that Chester talks about, about trying to get the universe in your head and it's like your head that splits, you know? It's the beginning of the board of the box. It just seems odd to me that Harris, while professing to be kind of the expansive liberator seems to me to be a very, to have a totally constrictive affect. And Peterson is open and has an expansive effect almost like yin and yang. And it seems that that's why I think Peterson doesn't commit. I don't see any point in him committing. It's not his function right now. What he's doing is so, he's hit a well, you know? I mean, so why complain that you're not, you know, you didn't hit something else? Like, you know, I found this silver mine but I was looking for gold so forget it. So you talked about meaning and there's meaning and there's meaning but in the Sam Harris world, there can be no meaning and does not expose human beings have to have meaning. Do we see meaning or is meaning an emotion? That's the difference between Sam Harris and say C.S. Lewis especially. C.S. Lewis would say in the Abolition of Man, we see, we've got the capacity to see meaning. So meaning is actually exists and we participate in it. Harris would say meaning is an emotion that we can generate. Okay, James and then you. Two things kind of thinking about juxtaposing with C.S. Lewis and Peterson would be the classic surprised by joy on the one hand, the yoni and the lingam of surprised by darkness and Peterson's focus on the Cold War. One other thing is that Lewis went to war and Peterson got depressed over the concept of war. Now both of them did but one of them experienced it in the fullness of it and the other one was taken to mental health break by it. And so I think that Lewis might see him as someone who's in a process of being ready to be surprised by joy rather than remaining surprised by human darkness. One of the slides that was I took the ending of living in an atomic age. That's a beautiful piece of Lewis's to read thinking about Peterson because of course Peterson gets started out of the anxiety of the Cold War. Lewis ends living in the atomic age by making the point that all of this mythology is, I mean we can live now in the atomic age and the age of the atom bomb because of this mythology and it's more than just a coping mechanism. Read in particular the second half of the lecture, read there, I felt like Peterson at times was kind of almost talking, was almost talking, sometimes he gets himself into kind of he's almost in two different directions there and he's got a lot of time about truth and his truth is rather, well there's no source of truth. You stand for it, you don't lie, you stand for truth and the next minute you say well, but you don't really know anything and yet someone else may know something better. In fact, you get an argument if you're fast, you better, it's more important to say truth than to be right. But truth stands for right. So it's kind of like, what is he doing? What is he doing? Or is he back to the kind of, well whatever's gonna make makes your life go better, that's what you, that's really what's behind it there. Truth is just a method of a better life. It's the method, these are all methods of a, you're using divine truth in order to work with it. Or mythological truth. You're using a lot of this for some other, for some, for some other reason. Is Peterson aware that he's using evolutionary biology as a myth? Yeah, I think he's quite, he's been doing this for 20 years, he's only just now been discovered. But you can find video tapes of him doing this in the 90s and his arguments are mostly there already. And Maps of Meeting was published in 99. Can you, one of the things that I didn't understand reading through the book is, what does he mean by being with a capital B? That's Heidegger. I know he wrote for a friend. So, so, so in a sense, part of what Christians, one way that Christians sometimes use this word God is in the New Testament when we'll say something like he's all in all. Being with a capital B is in a sense, you know, the fullness of everything right here and right now. Heidegger of course with his at handness. So, so Peterson uses that as sort of the, you know, the most basic comprehensive reality that we experience, being with a capital B. Actually if you read C.S. Lewis's Miracles, notice where Lewis capitalizes reason with a capital R. Lewis often does that same thing and I think this goes back to Heidegger. So, so, so for Peterson being is finally, again because he doesn't have sort of an end, a consummation like a Christian would have, being here in this moment is kind of the all encompassing now in full richness. It's hard to put this stuff in the words. Yep. Yeah, there's some comment about truth and the lack of metanarrative. It might be true for some people that they have to find the metanarrative and then their own life suddenly makes sense but I think for many people, they first have to make a little bit of sense of their own little lives before they even have interest in fitting into a bigger picture, especially in very chaotic times. And I think those are the kind of people that he's speaking to and that the truth that, that the chapter on the truth was the only one I listened to twice, I had the audio book because I just thought it was profound the way he correlated sacrifice and truth to an age that doesn't understand ritual whatsoever. And he brought it down to earth and said, well actually we do this all the time when we're just thinking to ourselves, are we gonna sacrifice our errors for the truth? And I think honesty might be a better term than truth since you can believe complete nonsense but you have the choice still to be honest about that with the people around you. Well you don't think it's nonsense but you know, it might be in some ultimate truth kind of way but you can be honest about that or you can lie about it and be a people pleaser. And I think that's the kind of truth that he means is the truth of the here and now of whoever you are or whatever you're thinking and being honest with yourself even if you recognize or the people around you recognize that it might not align with ultimate truth and that ultimate meta narrative that you might at some point have enough structure in your own life to align with. Peterson's a lot older and in my experience, I mean people often want to talk, so Peterson and the Christian thing and then people wanna say, well Peterson is making his way towards Christianity. That might be the case, who here made the point that right now he's getting a lot of reward for being right where he's at. I could imagine Peterson becoming a Christian but something's going to have to happen in his life for that type of transformation to take place I think. And the point you were making about ritual is at some point I hope to sit down and have a longer conversation with Jordan Peterson and the really interesting oddness about his life is for a man who talks so much about symbol and ritual and acting things out. The lack of church going is not just a question about what tribe he's in but this is all your stuff. Please tell me how you participate symbolically, ritualistically, liturgically and all of this stuff that you talk about because it's kind of interesting that he doesn't, I mean he gets at it with his art in some ways but that's a question that I'd like to ask him. It could be, I mean he has access to higher status conversation partners now than he had before. There could be movement in some of these ways but again I think especially for him, it's in my opinion Christian conversion as Lewis said is a rebel laying down their arm. It's a surrender at that level and I think we don't finally surrender often until we find ourselves in a corner. That's my experience. A lot of hands. You haven't said anything. I'm wondering if you know just some of the impact that he's had in academia, in universities. I think he is having more of an impact than will be publicly seen. I have had a number of, by virtue of doing my YouTube channel, I've got a degree of visibility. I've had a number of interesting conversations with academics who won't fess up to following him or finding his work productive. James had a, James is a very creative person. James had a, James is a very courageous man who works in academia. He made a, tell us about the proposal you made to your school James and how that went over. I proposed that we as a college utilize 12 Rules for Life as our book that is shared across curriculums to create a unified dialogue thinking that it touched on multiple fields and that it spoke to seeking truth and they removed it from the selection process saying that it didn't meet the guidelines for our college. Did they mention any particular guidelines that it didn't meet? That would have been wonderful. But no, it was surreptitiously removed without comment. So much for clarity. So I think in terms of academia, I think people don't want to touch him because they're going to lose status. Yes, Phillip. I was just wondering, I assume that the meaning of myth is falsehood or illusion or something is a secondary meaning. Do you know when approximately in time that developed? Because it seems that Harris totally is focused on that almost like that's God number two, and myth in the more creative real sense is God number one. And there's also kind of a strange parallel of Gnosticism with like the Demiurge and so forth. Gnosticism having corrupted just about everyone in the 20th century academically at least. I'm wondering about the myth. I don't know when that second meaning of the word came into vogue. I would assume probably after the Enlightenment. You can guide with this well. Because you can practically see them not quite grasping that they're using the word differently. Harris is always trying to spin the ball. Ira next, then the gentleman with the blue shirt. I actually think Peterson is quite aware. He actually spinned the word close to that. But for reasons you mentioned earlier, staying in that tension. His stats, I guess a lot of metaphors, bridges, frontiers, conversation, partner. You need to be there. You can't put on a jersey on one side. It's inaccessible. You mentioned the different organizations in faith are trying to knock on that door, trying to get through that door. And they literally wear uniforms. Yeah? I think Harris for me is a bit dogmatic. Which is interesting. I first learned about Harris from watching a video long ago about the four horsemen. We had Daniel Gannett, we had Doc Gannett. I was like, who's Harris? Who's this guy? It's funny now that he's such a large on the radar. I think Mr. Paul was saying, Harris is kind of stuck on God number two, if you can use your terminology. It's a really wonderfully put way of describing it. Because I think, sorry, but this is simply. There are many people who are seeing, I'll argue that God number one is much bigger than God number two. And God number two is very low hanging fruit. It's quite fashionable to take punches at him. It's easy. You make fun of the fool who's religious. You don't take on the well-trained priest, you might get knocked out. Anyway, Emerson Harris is deliberately friendlike, but he's just so used to taking on that characterization. Does that make sense? He's made a career out of it. Yes? Nobody's mentioned the thing that came through more strongly to me when I read this book, which is this. I thought that the main point that I got from it was the balance between the masculine and the feminine in our society. That being completely shifted in the wrong direction. Yes, yes, yes. That's very strong in the book. And in fact, when, oh, I don't know if that's, in the Australia trip I made, one woman, she said she almost didn't get past that first reference of the relationship between chaos and feminine. She almost didn't get past that. But that's very true and that's very right, and that is a very big point in the book. And I think I've been watching, and now I'm going to get in trouble. I've been watching the Synod of the Christian Reformed Church this week, and I think this is the safetyism synod. And there's a very strong feminine ethos. They're worrying about safety. Can we have watchers and guardians and rules and protections to keep everybody safe? Safety is a very important thing. That's in a sense the feminine. The masculine is mission. Will we go out? Will we conquer? Will we take new territory? And it's... You ride skateboards. Yes, you ride skateboards. That's right. That's an excellent point. I'll let Ali talk about that. He's been listening to a lot of Harris lately. Go ahead, Ali. As a bigger fan of Harris, I would say his mission is to incorporate meditation as he learned from a lot of Buddhist gurus and the time he spent in the East into a more secular perspective. And he's trying to teach people that you can actually enjoy the benefits of spirituality and all the good things that come from it without the burden of having to believe something based on bad evidence. So I would say no briefly. Lack of free will and transcendence of self are actually the two sides of the same coin. And what Harris tries to get people to accept is that once you get to a position, a state of consciousness, you can actually get to a state of consciousness and you can actually get to a state of consciousness where you no longer identify with the self, which is absolutely compatible with accepting lack of free will. You actually access higher states of consciousness that can help you be a better person in the future or live a better life in the future. And they're actually two sides of the same coin. But isn't the idea there's no free will an idea that you choose? Well, in that sense, you can say that someone who doesn't believe in free will doesn't get to choose. Why would Harris write a book to convince people there's no free will if the other people's views are determined that there's no free will and that Harris' views are determined? The whole thing has to do with that. So his... I think... Have you read his book, Free Will? I've read parts of it, but the idea... So he's not a proponent of fatalism. He's a proponent of determinism. Fatalism would be this. God or whatever set the clock, and then now everything can be calculated and we don't get to choose anything. But determinism is actually compatible with, say, randomness at the quantum level. And what he says is that you don't get to choose the thoughts or the actions that you take. But it doesn't mean that those thoughts and actions are actually determined. What I'm saying is he is inferring certain things. He is asserting certain things as a truth. Like what you just said. So if you assert something as being true, that means there's some objective standard you're comparing to another idea. So you have to have free will to make the comparison. So the idea that you have no free will itself is an admission that you have free will. As Alan Planting would point out, that no influence can be made without a tautological assumption that you have free will. There's no backing out of that tautological necessarily. And I think that's part of what Peterson is also getting at. Because Peterson is saying that if you are this materialist, essentially, everything that you claim is you're denying that you're materialist. Because ideas exist independent of matter, and you're choosing those ideas. Well, this is a much longer conversation. And in short, I think that's the point. This is a much longer conversation. In short, I would say that materialism has been maybe simplified in the culture. When someone says that they're materialist, they're not saying that they don't have a conscious experience. For instance, they're denying that their experience as a state of consciousness is not real. Because consciousness is subjectively irreducible for each one of us. So if you can put someone in the lab and study them objectively, but each person cannot produce their own subjective experience. So I would say calling someone a materialist doesn't mean that they're not identifying that their own experience is real. The person in the lab who studies... This goes back to Lewis's work on subjectivism, including the Aboriginal man. He points out that the conditioner, is essentially presiding over the study of the person whose consciousness is objective. That person's consciousness is objective too. So there's no possibility of having science at all. Well, again, a long conversation, but I would say it's the best that we can manage. I think he's right that there are materialists that don't deny their consciousness. But there are materialists that do deny their consciousness. In 2017 there was a conference meant to determine once and for all that consciousness was an illusion. And if you think about that for about 30 seconds, an illusion is a form of consciousness. So it just proves it's tautological, like you said. That's not what Harris would say. But it is a little bit of a charade if we're saying that there's no choice, but we're spending a lot of time worrying about our consciousness and raising our consciousness and becoming a person with a personhood as an objective goal, as a real goal. A subjective energy goal. Aaron, Phillip. Before I try and hit those, these are pretty tough not to crack. You had a couple of follow-on questions on why is Sam Harris doing, I think there's a couple of them, why do meditation? I think at a more practical level, it's been pretty well studied now that meditation is quite good for you. In some sense, it's not unlike Jordan Peterson, these things work. They help people, help entire societies. Maybe not at the level of the argument that Oldsmeckel is the Western civilization, has been able to reach some really good heights, but there's also an Easter tradition that's a lot of people. If you were to put the locus of humanity, if you weren't wrong on that, you just have a number of people, somewhere like in India. So these traditions have worked quite well for people for a while. Harris said, yeah, well, we measured in the lab, people are calmer, more focused. We're in Silicon Valley area. A lot of CEOs meditate, they schedule it in their super tight schedule, don't do too much. That's a low-hanging, more practical side. I think Harris is focusing on that sort of stuff. On your last point, through meditation, you can actually get to a non-dualistic state of experience. I'm talking out of experience, I'm not just reading a textbook. You can experience a state of consciousness where center drops out of your experience, and you truly experience that non-dualism. But it's something that you've got to... And as a Christian, maybe, if you've had any experience of being in the presence of God, or feeling rapture, it's pretty much the same experience. It's very joyful, but you can actually get there with us, any sort of superstition or religion. Mark, maybe a plug for maps of meaning, I think when Peterson is at the beginning trying to talk about Russian behaviorist degree, and rats in the lab, part of this, by the title, the way in which highly advanced rational creatures order and map the universe, is a fundamental flaw in this probably, not only intermural scientific community debate, but maybe even the broader cultural debate about whether fear and anxiety that's created is simply an objective internal thing, or if it's, excuse me, I said it wrong, an internally subjective experience, or there's objective content to the way in which the chaos of not only someone's dog coming in, oh, now we know who it is and what's happening. He makes this argument maps of meaning about... It's not actually the behaviorist theory that, well, you're messing with the rat who was stable, and your experiment is the problem. It's actually that we are constantly, as creatures, in this state of trying to map and measure and find better things. Measure and find balance, and that natural habitat psychologically is what is almost irrefutable now, scientifically, and I think this is a fascinating conversation then about how the role of the awareness of the self plays into these, not only mythologically, but even religious conversations. What do we mean when we talk about the freedom of a personal will, or things being purely material? I think maps of meaning is tough. Please keep helping us as you chew on it, Paul, if you can. There's a lot there, but I think this subjective, objective debate, I think Peterson has more to offer to that argument that's healthfully going on. Well, and the scrutin conversation was good on a lot of that stuff, too. One of the early clips from that I used quite a bit just in terms of, it's quite bizarre the way our minds work, the way we so naturally see ourselves in this room full of other people and map this so naturally. There's a lot going on that, in terms of a lot, we're bringing into the experience of receiving that we're simply not aware of. Philip? This goes back a little bit to the conversation, it strikes me, having been in the Bay Area for 20 years and been involved with Vedanta and Buddhism and things like that, as well as Christianity, I've noticed in the four horsemen or whatever type of area, although I'm not that familiar with them, that there's still kind of this weird sanctimonious affect, like when they start talking about meditation and things, like somehow this is just shrouded in this like gooey light of cozy happiness that is entirely adapted from other religious forms. I just have consequences. Richard Weaver makes a point about religion, it has power to bind, you know, religio, and the people who are always doing the spirituality thing are very much averse to him. I mean, Weaver doesn't make that, but I think that's a logical extrapolation. Another kind of loose point I was going to make was that in, I think, Orthodoxy or else in Heretics, but I think it's Orthodoxy, Chester makes a point about like London having developed in, say, 1908 to the point at which somebody in London can doubt that London exists. And I don't think that somebody like Paris, who sees himself as a hero, can quite see that, he doesn't see things as a decline over history, he sees it as an ascension away from the past. It's very interesting how these conditioned teleologies like totally control the grounds of the discussion. Well, I think part of the angst that Harris brought to his conversations with Peterson was nobody, your hatred of a traitor is doubly passionate. And so we were supposed to be marching towards rationality and away from superstition, and here comes Peterson, and he blows up, and I was going to have a reference to another video by a guy named Mouthy Buddha, which basically walked through, you know, why is Jordan Peterson eating Sam Harris's fan base? It seems like Jordan Peterson has gained at Sam Harris's expense, and that history is supposed to go one way. And so actually I had some very interesting conversations with a number of atheists, including Peter Boghossian, who one of the things that happened in the atheist community was a big split between Sam Harris, Peter Boghossian, and then this whole group of atheists that have very much gone on the social justice warrior platforms. And so that's, I had no awareness of it until the hoax papers with James Lindsay and Peter Boghossian and Helen Pluckrose came out, but there's a huge fight going on right now in the Church of Atheism over this stuff, and I had no knowledge of that at all, just like they don't know the little fights within the Christian Reformed Church. What is this fight? Do you mean like the elevator pitch of what they're fighting about? There was, well, it's a fight over science. Science is supposed to continue to ascend and remove all superstition. And now you've got an argument that, well, science is the fruit of patriarchy. Science is the fruit of white supremacy. So you've got classes in Africa that are saying the sciences that have been given us are basically the stories of our oppressors sent to oppress us. And so we have to deconstruct this science. And of course, someone like Sam Harris, Brett Weinstein, Peter Boghossian, they look at this and they're saying, oh my goodness, they're giving up the crown jewels. And that's a furious fight right now. And that's what led to the hoax. It's part of what led to the hoax papers. Well, Lewis, if you think that quote says something along the lines that for science to exist, the scientist's own views cannot be determined by the system that he or she is analyzing. And so if you have this reductionist view in this postmodern, which is what Peter is attacking, of course, you're going to end up with this view, so-called post-normal science, right? That there is no science as meaningless and it's just a tool of oppression. Of course, the idea of oppression itself, where does that come from? I mean, it's just incoherence. Moral isn't behind how relative it is. Yeah. So we were talking about what would C.S. Lewis think of Jordan Pearson. What does Jordan Pearson think of C.S. Lewis? I asked him that question. A number of people have asked him that question. He has referenced the trilemma, Lewis's famous trilemma, and Peterson found that quite persuasive and used that in a conversation. I don't think Peterson has referred to Lewis as a Christian apologist. Now, many of us in this room would say, well, he's certainly that, but he's a lot more. I don't know that Peterson has taken the time to look into Lewis at the level that a lot of people in this room have. Just a follow-up, has Peterson at all addressed this idea of the cart before the horse, the myth versus the outcome, or versus myth as the ultimate reality? Has he addressed that at all in Lewis's stuff? No, not that I've heard. I mean, that would be the question I'd like to hear. Yeah, yeah, that's a good point. I think in very simple terms, I think that for me is the key difference between a person like Lewis and a person like Peterson. Peterson is missing what I would call, and Mark can help me on here, the auto factor. He uses the word transcendence, but he's not talking about the same thing that Rudolph Otto talks about. Right, right. And so I think that would be a wonderful way to engage Peterson via auto and of course Lewis, the beginning of the problem of pain, the numinous. Do we have a faculty by which we apprehend the numinous? Just like we seem to have a faculty with respect to morality. So we have our five senses, and that gets into the question of meaning. Is meaning simply an experience that I produce by chemicals in the brain or is meaning something that I participate in and sense? It's outside of myself. Can we have one more? Let the myth invade our lives. Right. Which is young, I get it. Yeah, one more question. James. Thinking of the question before about what would Jordan Peterson think of C.S. Lewis, how would you expect him to think through the trilemma of C.S. Lewis? Even with the language he uses about Christ as the archetypal perfect person? Yeah, I don't know. Because it's always important to remember Peterson as a Jungian, and that comes through often. But the context in which he referred to the trilemma was sort of a throwaway comment, but he said it, and he said, I don't know a way around this. That's what he said. But again, right. But the thing is, again, when people look at, well, is Peterson a Christian, or will he become a Christian? Again, part of my conviction about Christian conversion is sometimes we creep up to it and find ourselves over the line, sometimes, like Lewis, England's most reluctant convert. So I want to thank Paul for this beautiful...