https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Mzp1RDOzghQ

 Hi, this is Paul and we're gonna have kind of a free for all today about Synod, but first I have a couple of other Christianity Forum ministers with me. David has been on the channel and if you're curious about his backstory, we had a lovely Randall's conversation. I'm gonna have a Randall's conversation with Nate coming up soon. Nate Bendonan actually shares some New Jersey roots with me and he's also one of the three moderators on CRC Voices, this little Christianity Forum listserv that some of you have migrated over to. I just learned both of them were in seminary at the same time. They're both serving churches in Canada. I have a disproportionate number of Canadian pastors on my livestream and things. In this little corner as well, Canada doesn't have that many people. So, David and Nate, let's start with you Nate, because you've never had a Randall's conversation. Give us a little bit of introduction about who you are and why you're here. Well, let's see, as Paul said, David and I went to seminary together. Maybe insight into who I am comes from the fact that I studied philosophy and chemistry at Calvin and I didn't really know which track I wanted to go on. So then I went to Washington State and I went to first CRC in Shoreline and there was working in a research lab, actually a cancer research lab where we were trying to use DNA vaccines to vaccinate mice against cancer. So something that maybe came into play a little later. But I did that. Take it down from YouTube like Jordan Peterson and Robert F. Kennedy Jr. No, no, no, we're not talking about vaccination. We're not talking about that. I did that and while I was doing that research. I was also leading a group we called Theology on Tap at one of the Seattle pubs and there was a group of Calvin grads there and we were talking about the fact that we weren't really Mark Griscoe Christians, but we also weren't like Seattle, you know, has an Episcopalian high church feel there and we weren't really that either. So where did we fit and I realized how much I enjoyed my Tuesday night conversations way more than my lab work and realized if I don't go to seminary that was spend the rest of my life wondering if that's what I should have done. So drove back to Grand Rapids and then became a pastor in the Christian informed church in 2010. All right. All right. And for those of you who are Nate Vanden and you can take out your PVK bingo card his grandfather was did a really a lot of important work in Patterson, New Jersey that my parents were tremendously involved with and in fact your grandfather and my parents all three of them in one year won the Calvin and Calvin College Distinguished Alumni Award together for the work that they had done in Patterson with the Don Tritter Christian School and Ecomp and a whole bunch of that stuff in Patterson and and still the legacy of your grandfather lives on and Patterson some really cool stuff is still going on even that you know sort of after after his death. So I got some pushback in my affirming CRC thing actually just got an email from David Hookah to about the video which was which was fun. I invited him on the channel but I consider myself CRC at elite. I might not be I'm too affirming for some people's tastes and not affirming enough for others people's tastes. So there we have it. But I do consider myself CRC elite because I don't know how I could not given the intergenerational nature of my family now my status and all this stuff. So yes I am CRC elite and that is not a slam. But anyway David are you CRC elite. I don't feel that way. No yeah no I don't think so. I don't know. I am always trying to locate myself and yeah I don't have a great answer to that question yet. Okay all right well let's let's start with first impressions. All three of us watched Senate. None of us were delegates. I'm going to have some delegates coming on to the channel after a while to talk about their experiences. But all three of us watched Senate. First impressions of this Senate. Maybe can I do like a tertiary impression. Absolutely. One thing that is interesting to me is to look at who can sway the body and who doesn't sway the body. Right. And so if you kind of take the three people that we talk about have been talked about a lot. So you have David Strzok and then you've got is it Vanderplug. Vanderplug. I don't remember. Scott Vanderplug. Scott Vanderplug. And then and then the president of Senate Paul DeBriese. So Paul DeBriese he steps out of the chair right. Has this it's not a big speech. It's a short speech right. But it captures the moment. Like I wrote a little thing on CRC voices about this. Like he's he's the head of the body and the head has a mouth and the mouth speaks. And all that emotion that had been building up to that moment comes out of him and he captures the moment. And you say this is why this is a I think this is why this is a deliberative body and it proves it because there were about 50 percent of that body that was prepared to vote against what DeBriese was saying. And and he swayed. And I don't think that was a misuse of power. I think that's exactly how Senate's supposed to work. Somebody kind of captures this whole movement of what this body is doing and is able to articulate it in a very clear crisp way. And yeah maybe I'm a little more conservative kind of went a different way than I expected. But but I felt like that's that's how Senate should go. And and then Vanderplug was able to do that not in a way to like you always have an advantage when you have one issue and you're dealing with people who have a million issues. Like that you're and he could work that advantage but he could talk about something that Senate also very much cared about. And that makes a difference. And both of those two also and I think this is important. They spoke to synod. And when you're speaking to people who aren't in the room which I don't want to criticize David's truck too much or really at all because I didn't I understand the emotions of being in a moment like that. But it is the case when you're speaking to the delegates at synod and if you're speaking to people who are outside of synod who are watching synod who are then you're not going to sway the body in a way that that the other two were able to. That's excellent. David. Yeah, my initial thought is just I was just struck by how emotionally heavy it was, especially of course Wednesday and Thursday. And I've done a lot of learning on like family systems theory, and even my own life. What happens to me when I am triggered. When I when emotions are running high. And what happens to me is I become very inarticulate. Like I don't know what I believe I don't know what I think I. And my well trained my well worn path is to be whatever is needed for the sake of the group to sort of calm things down. So that's my, my default is that I've been trained that direction. And so I was just noticing oh my god, I was kind of analyzing things from that perspective. And so now really emotional moment with Rita and whoever was the Steve's work, Steve's work. I was feeling that, and I was in a way like I went my default path to like I wouldn't know what like I don't know what to say either like I am completely unable to speak. I would not know how to respond. And then of course like two days later, I'm like, Oh wait, no, there's good answers to that question. And, and they could have been, they could have been answered but I think in the emotion of that moment, it's actually hard to communicate. Well, at least that's for me. Some people actually get very articulate. And they go the opposite way and they tend to take control of things and, and I but I always have to step back and I have to think I have to write. And then I can reengage. But I know so that's me, and everyone's got their own style of what happens to them when emotions are running high. And I think you saw that on the floor a bit. And so I was kind of thinking about things from that, that perspective and what I found myself longing for afterwards is sort of like a debrief like these delegates they need to debrief their experience. Somehow together and that's really hard to do with, you know, however many people are there. It's like, is it 200 somewhere around there? 180 delegates plus staff and such. Yeah. Yeah, but I wonder if there couldn't be some sort of follow up where people share their experiences and thoughts they had later not to rehash the debates necessarily but to speak through those, you know, a precious moments of clarity that you get after a significant event like that, that you want to share. So anyway, that's what I found myself thinking. Well, hopefully we can do some of that online. I think part of, you know, I did that video with Sean Baker and the group that had participated in his, in the little process thing that he's been doing. And I think part of what, I mean, for a long time, you know, I've been known for admonishing our denomination that we need a confessional conversation. And certainly a synodical meeting is a place where we do part of that, but that's definitely, there are limitations to that forum for this. Nate and I just before we got on, we were talking about CRC voices. And, you know, part of what, and this struck me too with the Senate and you both touched on it with respect to the speeches. We, it's a deliberative body. We want to convince each other, we want to influence each other. And we're so, most of us are so remarkably bad at it. And so, we, we, we sort of have this idea that a big speech is going to do it. That was why I did that video on Scott Vanderpluge because part of what was just so absolutely remarkable about that is that almost never happens. And in fairness, it's, it's an easier sell to pass an overture, whereby all of the, all of the, everyone who's going to have to schlep the synodical business after synod, now you've given them all work, but nobody in the room, it's necessarily going to cost them anything, which is different of course from the, the same situation where many, many people on all three sides, whether they're for against or somewhere in the middle, it's going to impact all of them. So, your, your observation about Dave struck. And you know, part of what again makes the CRC so connected is of course Dave struck, he was in my sister's class at Eastern Christian, I ran cross country with him my freshman year. He, he's been he's a longtime pastor he he's pastored one church in West Michigan area for a very long time and done so successfully. So, so then, you know, and I, Ryan struck has been fairly visible because of this issue, and he has gone on to have, you know, he's a producer at CNN he's worked, he's worked other things fairly high profile journalism things. And, you know, he had mentioned he had written that piece in the reform journal just before synod. So I mean part of the CRC is it is, and of course, Rita and Steve's moment on Wednesday night I mean that just came to the floor. And I don't know if I've ever seen a synod where there was just so much sobbing on the floor. So, how, I don't know. What's it. What does, what does he not even healing, what's our way forward with this. I mean because then Thursday was just a debacle, just a debacle and to have people speeches of protest and leaving, I have, I've seen a lot, I've never seen that. And that to me also spoke of influence from outside that's not a CRC thing to do. You know you don't walk out you might lose you might be angry you might give a speech, but you don't walk out. So, any, any thoughts on that. I will say like it, it, it made me, made me angry. I had like a, because I felt. And I, I felt as though. Well, I'll say these words, and I don't mean to mean lead but kind of like a little bit of a power play. Like I'm making a. So I say that and I don't, I don't really want those words to kind of, because I think I don't want to attribute motives. Do you know what I mean, I don't want to do that. But that's how I was like, this is. And that's one way of when things get anxious that's sort of one, one possible way that people deal with them. It's like I'm out of here. So that was my initial emotion when I saw that happening. But then I think it was also the time crunch that was impacting things, and people saw what was happening. And they're like, we're rushing something that's got major significance. And that's what they felt and I think there was some legitimacy to that. There was like we've got, you know, an hour and a half or whatever make this decision. That's actually kind of weighty and has ramifications for who knows decades, certainly for a lot of churches. So it was a really tough spot for the lead, I think. And I actually, I, I think they probably made the right decision to. To push it on to next year. Maybe we had enough. Significant decisions to make already that had already been made. So I think the protests were. I think also in response to that, like, okay, we're making a huge decision on very short time. And I can't, this isn't right. I'm done. Right. Like, so for those who protested for that reason, I get that. Like that does. That seemed that seemed like a fair. Maybe there was a healthier way to say that. But as other than protest, and I think Kara said that. Right. Like, I think she was the one who articulated it without without leaving. Baiting me into being critical. I don't think I'm going to necessarily, but I. I feel like. You're you're a delegate, which means that classes has elected you and has sent you to listen to debate and to vote. It's no longer in a sense about you. And so I did initially, yeah, frustrate me too. Like, you are here because our church is working through this. And you're there by our church to work through this. And you're well, you're giving up. And I so I did have a reaction to that initially. Like, I mean, and that is a reaction. And I hope people hear that not as a judgment. I still need to think about how it all played out in individual people's minds. But it kind of words like, you know, what's becoming of a synodical delegate or what is what is decorum here? Like, how do you conduct yourself, especially on I mean, YouTube changes everything to write like. I mean, part of me wants to write an overture and say, these videos need to come down within about 10 days. Like the official record of synod is what's in the minutes. Like, I don't think it's good to have these like highly emotional. It's kind of like, you know, especially just out there so that everybody can kind of rewatch and rewatch what somebody said. And felt and did under incredible duress in some cases, like if you're worried about the the salvation of your kids and you speak out of that. If you want that on repeat on YouTube, as people like take you apart and say, well, you shouldn't have done like, I don't think that's good. I mean, the minutes can reflect a negative vote and the banner can write an article about that person's negative vote. I think that's better. I think. Yeah. It'd be interesting to know if protests would have happened or it wouldn't have happened without the YouTube. I mean, we can't really get into that, but we don't know what would have happened. Well, the protests weren't on YouTube. So I was a delegate at 2022. And so this year was very interesting for me, sort of comparing the two experiences watching because when I was there, you'd leave the the FAC, the Fine Arts Center at Calvin. And there were the protesters outside. They also closed the gallery and I I didn't know whether it would go OK with the gallery open. Apparently, no, didn't hear it. Didn't hear boo from it. So apparently that worked. But I mean, Nate, your point is an interesting one. And I think it's it's one that I've been thinking about, too, because I'm you know, now suddenly lots more people are watching Senate because of me. And I feel some responsibility for that. And and I'm I'm conflicted. It's a positive and a negative thing because this is the Christian Reformed Church that there's another thing to discuss that whole family element to it. To what degree is is this a family thing? And to what degree is this, you know, an open thing where the Church of Jesus Christ, this is about transparency. So, boy, there's so many issues here. Where's the point at the liturgy where you say, kind of humans depart? Yeah, but I was talking to Paul, not just of like sort of outside protests, but the protests walk off, right? Yeah. Yeah. Leaving in protest. And what would happen to our council meetings if they were all YouTube and put out there? It's like, I wouldn't want that, you know. But I also have, you know, like, but our council meetings are open. I mean, a lot of this openness is basically CRC polity. We have open classes meetings, open council meetings, open Senate meetings. Part of this is very reformational. This openness is intentional. And, you know, we are to bear witness. So we show the dirt to the world, too, because, you know, we've got all of this other, all this, this whole other narrative going on in our society now about, you know, bias and an insider and behind closed doors. And so the emphasis is open, open, open. Go ahead and see. Meme it up, boys. That's, I mean, we could derail, we could go in that whole different direction of the role of technology. It's an important one, right? Like, okay, an open council meeting means that maybe one member who's a bit irked about something is going to show up and wants to make their point. An open Senate on YouTube means everybody with an Internet connection potentially can tune in, some of whom have the context for what's going on, some of whom don't. And that changes things, too. And then, I mean, I feel it like, and I'm sure we all feel it when now that we're preaching online, like, you kind of have this awareness of, you know, I how I say this, I could say it a particular way to my monoculture congregation here. But I got to be mindful that this is going out into the greater world, too. Well, the, the change that this, I mean, you're right about the context and the culture. One of the things that surprised me was how many people told me that they tuned into Neelan's worship service the Sunday after. Okay, so I mean, I still, I still, I'm just trying to get my mind around this. And we're going to have to talk about CRC's family and CRC's church, because that has been a major issue in this thing, too, where people, people on both sides, but right now it's, it was the, in 1980, it was decided to be the elite progressives who were championing the burning of wooden shoes, because this is how we're going to, this is because that's just on the heels of the racial reconciliation movement, of course, which is the context that I grew up in, to be a denomination that welcomes African Americans. Race in America in the 60s and 70s was black and white. It was not, you know, brown, Asian, all over the map. And so you burn the wooden shoes so that you can be a welcoming and inclusive denomination. But for, but the cry that goes out, especially Wednesday night was, and I've heard this, we've seen this on CRC voices, and we had a big discussion of this on CRC voices, you know, this is my family. And so it's David Hookama, Anthony Hookama's son, who writes in the RJ. And it's Paul VanderKlay, Stan VanderKlay, and Hiram VanderKlay's son and grandson, Barb VanderKlay's son, Stan and Barb stood up with Herb Vandenen, you know, to receive the Calvin Distinguished Alumni Award, you know, close to the years that I graduated. I mean, in the seat, we, you hear it all the time. Church is a family. Well, in the sense of the Christian Forum Church, yeah, we really take that seriously. I mean, we've got all of these blood ties. And then you've got Mo, of course, you know, Mo's been doing some, he's very much in this little corner, he's been doing chatting things, he's on Voices right now. A lot of people, I mean, one woman in my church has been here, you know, over 40 years, probably now over 50 years. And every now and then she'll, she's an African American woman, every now and then you'll still hear her say something like, their church. And, you know, even though most of my council is African American, significant, you know, the leadership of the church is African American. I mean, this church has been an extremely diverse church for a very, very long time. But, you know, all you need is a trip down to classes and Rippen. And even though, you know, our classes would still be a majority Dutch last names, you've got significant Korean contingency, you've got other ethnic groups there. So, and so then, then you have the thing of, okay, do we keep this closed because this is family? Or, and is the internet actually public? Or is it something else? We don't know how to answer these questions. I think on the Canadian side too, the family dynamic issue is also very tied to immigration for certainly the older folks. And the way that plays out, I think, which will make this issue really, really hard for the Canadian church, is that you tend to be very loyal from the From the bottom of your heart to people who help you. And so I've got elderly people in my church that, you know, hopped off the boat with nothing and end up in Holland Marsh area working in farms, you know, for 25 cents a day or whatever. But they get a job and they get help and they get start to get established and you are like, I would be very loyal to people that help me too. But then all this gets connected up in the church world. And now we've got to divide about HSR and, and what kind of decisions to make. But meanwhile, there's people like, but those are the people that help me. I'm not going to leave. I'm not going to leave them. And I'll be loyal. And similar thing in my own family history with with the passing of my grandfather when he was, you know, in his mid 40s and all, all my, my dad and his siblings were, you know, between their teenage, sixth to teenage, right? And the church really stepped in to help them. And so comes time for women in office in the 90s. My dad's pretty conservative on that. But he's, he's not going to leave the church. You know, we shopped around a little bit. But came down to it. There's people here that helped my family. When we were in crisis, they helped me and you don't just sort of pull out from that, right? Without serious, like that's for me, that's the relational. The relations very strong and, and not unimportant. But then at the same time, I really liked your video, Paul, that you posted about the relational order dynamic. And I think it's, I think you made various two points about the downside of only the relational without the order. And anyway, I'll stop there. But from the Canadian side, that's, you feel that you hear that in the, it's in the air, like even my own church, I think we're pretty traditionally minded, generally speaking. But if we had to leave classes, Toronto, that would be very difficult for the church because of the relational history. And there's so many other things that tie you to a church, right? Like, and like I, I had the same experience when I came to my first church in, in Marinatha CRC in Woodbridge. And that church went through a pretty nasty split over women in office. And, and they lost, it's actually a fascinating story. They just got a new pastor, the new pastor's chair of the council. So at one of the council, early council meetings, he, the executive committee meets and they say there's going to be this motion to leave the Crescent reformed church. And so he, so he's the new chair, maybe it's his second council meeting. And he says, just like all the priests did, I rule this motion out of order. You called me as a CRC minister and that is what this church is. And the whole thing erupted. He said to me, because he was a member there in retirement, and he said, 40% of the congregation left and we had peace ever since. It's an interesting observation. But the people that left, I came to discover, were just as conservative as the people who stayed. And the people who stayed, stayed because they were CRC and they didn't want some segment of the CRC to own the CRC. They were CRC. And for the, exactly for the reasons that, that Dave had articulated, like this CRC was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CRC that was a CR CRC picked them up after they stumbled out of Holland in the 1950s, poor and destitute and, and gave them a place and, and built schools and built a university and did all that in like 40 years. Like they have a lot just invested, even if you look at just the financial side of things, you're working in a farm and you're building a Christian school with every spare penny. And they did it. Like there is a lot invested in the institutions of the Christian Reformed Church, especially among the older, the older folks in Canada. Go ahead, go ahead, David. I think then the flip side is, is that great, that great quote you had, and you'll have to help me with it, Paul. But immigrant, well, new immigrant churches like the Korean Church of Latino, and there's less of that happening in Canada, maybe a little bit, but less of it. They're like, oh, we came here for the doctrine. And you and then we found out it's like, well, we're not really a part of things, right? We came here from the doctrine, but basically you you own the place. You had a great quote and I think that's very true. And that will have to be worked out over time. We have to kind of find our identity there, I think. I'm bringing Sam in. I invited a group of we've got some of our regular corner folks here. And Sam, if you guys have watched the channel, you've probably met Sam. Sam has his own interesting story and inclusion and exclusion with respect to this issue and inclusion and exclusion with respect to. So Clay Leibel in one of his peripatetic things mentioned a creedal and another CRC clergy said, no, this is a confessional conversation. This isn't a creedal conversation. Now with Sam, we bring in the creedal. We bring in the creedal level. So but this insider, outsider, relational versus confessional or even creedal. What and for this little corner, when we talk about we talk about these four for Vicky P's, you know, the propositional. These are all the things we have in paper, but we have the participatory. You know, my grandfather Hiram in Owen Sound, Ontario. It's interesting listening to the stories from my aunt and my grandmother about taking that call to Canada because my aunt and my grandmother did not want to go. They did not like it. They were they did not feel welcomed by Canada at all. They felt discriminated against. My my aunt, especially in the school, was picked on by the other Canadian students. And and then because my grandfather stayed there so long. He had trouble getting calls back to the United States because some people said, well, we're worried he, you know, we're worried about his English, which he grew up in, you know, Western Michigan. He spoke English, Dutch and Frisian fluently, you know, but so all of these layers and, you know, Sam story is interesting because Sam, of course, was part of his story. He was in the university and and Sam being a biblical Unitarian, you know, is always sort of. I mean, I think Sam, in some ways you are you are culturally evangelical, but of course, you're not credibly on the same page. And so you've you've been having credo conversations with evangelical churches for a very long time. And and and it's always strangely intertwined with the sexuality and marriage question. Like, basically, I cannot tell you the number of times where I've explained to pastor clergy or some other important church person for the first time what I believe and don't believe regarding Christology. And like one of the first things they say, well, that would be like believing in same sex marriage or something like that. And it's like. What what it's and it's not just once. So this connection happens so many times that there has to be something going on. And and my my story from the university, if you I don't expect everyone to remember this. But before I got pushed out of my Christian fellowship at the university, what happened is that the university was trying to push out a Christian fellowship for not allowing a person in a same sex marriage. Or a same sex relationship to be the president of their Christian fellowship. And so a Christian fellowship at the university, the leader came out as gay, took a boyfriend, and the Christian fellowship was like, OK, you can keep attending, but you can't be the president anymore because of that. And then that caused a firestorm on campus. And that firestorm on campus then brought more attention to the creeds within the other Christian fellowships, which then rooted me out. And that like there is a strange number of times where people who will vote me out of a church or out of a fellowship, then later turn out to be gay and then come to me later and say, Sam, I'm so sorry that I voted against you. And by the way, here's my new lifestyle thing. And I do not for the life of me fully understand what the connection is between my non-Trinitarian stance and the same sex marriage question is other than things that we must believe in or something like that. But it's it's really weird. And like I'm watching this CRC thing as a very curious outsider. And at the same time, I'm being pushed out of my current church for Christology stuff. And it's like, why? What am I like? God, what are you trying to tell me? I don't quite get this. And so I don't know what we're going to comment. Your secret, sacred self is gay. Somehow I don't think that's it. I've had with three children. So I but something's going on and I don't know what it is. I this is really interesting, Sam. I might have stayed by the way you could see that, but we've never met. What's really interesting is because I had made some notes here when I got the email about what do we want to talk about with Paul on this talk. And one of the things Paul keeps saying is this is a confessional conversation. And then there was also kind of a comment at one of the classes meetings I was at that was about how, you know, all we're talking about is is love. And so this shouldn't really rise to the level of deep theological conversation. It's two people who find companionship. That's what we're talking about. So I was thinking about that and I thought, well, you know, if you look at the history of the church, the first thing the church. At least that had to talk about was who is God. And you arrived with either the doctrine of the Trinity or that Aryan position. And then the next thing was, well, who is Jesus? And so then you arrive at the Nestorian position and or versus the Chalcedonian tradition and Nestorius. It has a lot of influence in the East, which we don't hear too much about. But anyway, then you get the Reformation. And now we're going to talk about what is the church and we're going to talk about what is the tradition of the church. We're going to talk about scripture. And here we are 500 years later from the Reformation. And the key question is, what does it mean to be human? I think this is a creedal confessional moment because it's not just us who are talking about this. And it's not just in the realm of human sexuality that we're talking about it. We're on the verge of transforming our species through technology into something that's not human. Like we like this this fundamental question of what does it mean to be made in the image of God? What is it? If you're a Chalcedonian Christian, what does it mean to say that Jesus is fully man? Is is the question of the time? And so, yeah, sometimes it does come down to one iota, as it did in the Trinitarian discussions. Like it gets that fine tuned as this plays out. But I think this is as significant of a moment when we try to understand what does it mean to be human as the Trinitarian conversations of what is it, you know, who is and what is the nature of God. And another another thing that's interesting, like as I'm currently going through like my third process of getting pushed, although gently or harshly out of a church or fellowship, which maybe at some point three strikes, I'm out and I should just learn from the process. Sam's standing outside the church with all the with all the gays that are kicked out. Yeah. And being like, I'm not quite sure what we have in common, but something but they seem to think we do. And the thing that I keep saying is like, look, I feel like I belong here before you knew what I believed you had no problem with me. And I, you know, by some way or another, this time it happened to be my YouTube channel, so that's slightly my fault. But you found out about my beliefs and now you have a problem with me, but I haven't changed. So why did you think that I wasn't a problem before you knew my innermost convictions? And why do you think I'm a problem now that you know some of my convictions on these things? Because I feel like I was participating in the spirit of the church just fine. And you seem to think so, too. So that's that's one of my questions. Like, you know, Luke is trying to say that I'm a confessionalist. I'm not quite sure if that is true, because part of me does have some sincere doubts about whether the statement of faith or, you know, like CRC has an even bigger thing than a standard evangelical church's statement of faith with your confessions and all that sort of thing. Part of me is like, is that really what's holding the church together on an average Sunday or even an average year or even an average lifetime? Or what exactly is the role that that is doing? Because why does it seem like I can get along unless we're talking about the statement of faith itself? And I think that's a question that I see like, man, watching this whole CRC thing, like, in terms of the sexuality question, I'm a traditionalist. And like, I have no qualms or doubts about that position. But watching the proceedings because of my unique place, sometimes I'm like, oh, you know that I feel for the affirming side sometimes in a way, not because I agree with their position on the specific question, but in terms of them talking about belonging to the church or something like that. And then sometimes I'm like, man, the traditionalists totally have this one right. And I'm like weirdly caught in between. And so I don't know. I didn't have a point. But those are some of the processing thoughts I'm saying as I'm watching all this from my interested observer outsider stance. You bring up a good point, Sam, in that. Yeah, what are what what is the impact of confessing the Trinity for the life of the community? Right. And for those who don't confess it, can't what impact would that have? I would say, you know, you had a group of people coming in that did not confess the Trinity. And it would be interesting to kind of, I would want to think about that for some time before kind of giving an answer. But that's the question I'm formulating right now. You can even make it like an intra Calvinism dispute like super lapsarianism versus whatever your other lapsarianism. So those things are relatively abstract. Right. And I'm not saying that they don't matter. But like what how does someone who believes in one or the other of those things live their lives differently? And that would be really hard to figure out an example. But the same sex marriage question is not like that. There is something very, very clear behaviorally in individuals and community. Like, can two people of the same sex walk down the aisle and make vows to each other or not? Are you encouraging same sex behavior within a marriage or not? Like those are like an alien who doesn't speak the language can observe that difference. But the difference between Trinitarianism versus Unitarianism or super lapsarian versus the other lapsarian, you know, I'm like, I'm not sure. This is this is one of those things where I agree with what Paul said that this isn't necessarily a creedal discussion. It's a confessional discussion, but it's also a very much a behavioral discussion, too, in a way that some more abstract theological points aren't. So to that question, historically, the doctrine of the Trinity was a church state question. Because God the Father is associated with the emperor. God the Son is associated with the bishop. So who has the final say in a Trinitarian understanding? Well, the father is in the son and the son is in the father. If you take it so practically at that time, if you took the Aryan perspective, the emperor has authority over the church and the churches. Then the church's authority is only up to the the walls of the church. So the church can say to the emperor, you have to confess before you come in here. But but the church doesn't have claim over the palace and the throne. Yeah, that's a good point, Nate. And the only other time recently that I've seen a Trinitarian discussion like actually seem to matter. This was seemingly a big question among the Baptists recently about the eternal subordination of the son question. And because it's mapping to gender roles, because there's that verse in First Corinthians that God is the head of Jesus. Jesus is the head of man, man is the head of the woman. And then it's like, OK, well, if the son is subordinate to the father, then women should be subordinate to men. But if the son and the father are eternally equal, then that's not describing some subordination relationship between men and women. I'm not sure what they think it's talking about, but something else. Right. And so if a Trinitarian question gets mapped to a practical question, then all of a sudden the Trinitarian dispute matters. And it mattered in the Aryan dispute and some level. But unless it gets mapped practically, it's it's abstract. And that's because someone at the Synod asked what I thought was a really good question was like, I'm not going to even if the church rules in the traditional favor, I can't magically change my mind. You know, this is a matter of conscience for me. And so I can't like I submit to the church, but my conscience can't just magically flip what it thinks is true. And I thought that was a very interesting question. And that's sort of a difference between how a Protestant confessional church works and like a hierarchical, more Catholic like church works. The Catholic Church was like, look, we at some level, we don't totally care what's going on in your mind as long as you think we're right. But a story about that where it's got my favorite story that a guy had converted to the Orthodox Church and he says, you know, there's some parts of the creed that I can't say. And his priest looks at him and says, say it anyway, it's not your creed. But that is that is one of the things that I've noted just in this gets back to the technology, the openness, the transparency thing. Watching Mo and Hank and Mo and Hank are both part of Sam's whatever they call their little section of this little corner in Chicago. But in some ways, part of what's what's true about Protestantism is we all get to we all get to play and participate in church in terms of church leadership. Synod is ostensibly half non clergy. And, you know, whereas in the Orthodox and the Catholics, the hierarchy is the clergy, those who wear vestments are the ones and part of what's sort of, you know, risen up in this little corner is, you know, questions about vestments. I mean, it's been amazing to me how many how many issues that in the Christian Forum Church seems safely tucked away and Williston Walker's church history now suddenly become alive and are active in in public debate again. And at least if you're a Protestant, you know, Hank, well, Hank went to Rome, so he can't participate anymore. Lance went to the Orthodox, so he can't participate anymore. But, you know, you don't you can be an accountant and a lawyer and you can go to Synod and you can give a speech right there with the guys with the revs. Yeah, I mean, I will say like and I said this last time we talked Paul is I'm starting to feel there's there's a part of me that's like uncomfortable with that. And I've got to work that through. Uncomfortable with what? Just like the level of lay participation. Yeah, I mean, that's I don't want to be against lay participation, but I feel like when it comes to society. He says sheepishly to his next council meeting surrounded by them. Yeah, yeah. What I what I don't like is the sense that like this just comes down to a vote by the majority. And the majority, you know, majority wins. And like that's how we discern truth. That's that's sort of. And part of me is just like we need we need a father figure. And I suppose what we saw say in a poll to freeze is that right his he was he was in that moment, but he doesn't have he doesn't have the vestment. He just has his voice, but it moves right it has influence and impact. But I know on the flip side that there's all kinds of troubles with the hierarchy. And I've, I've thought I've thought that through too and that could really get bad, especially when it becomes like status or people looking for power. So but I feel that I feel the like, oh man, like, I'm hearing speeches and I'm thinking, ah, we need someone wise to speak into this and cut through some of the noise. Anyway, that's what I'm feeling when I when I stand back and look at it. Jacob Federechi are how would we describe Jacob to non watchers? You know, he he he said, well, it was remarkable in one of these conversations as well. The problem with the Christian Reformed Church is essentially what he's saying is you don't have bishops, which is sort of your point where, you know, the bit we do have bishops, but our bishops tend to be, you know, people who have been in the classes a long time have built up credibility. They don't have any positional standing greater than anyone else, but their voice carries more because of their reputation. And they may or may not be at Synod. Well, well, that that was another that Jacob brought up too, because somebody asked, it's been it's been amazing watching people watch Synod from the outside because someone asked basically, who are these people on the floor? Are these like the brightest and the best of the Christian Reformed Church? And the answer was no, these are the randos of the Christian Reformed Church. And again, in our culture, that sort of goes both ways because, you know, we've got a lot of Thomas Jefferson in our cultural formation here. Thomas Jefferson had a lot of radical reformation in him too. And the Thomas Jefferson got his ideas from radical Protestantism, not vice versa. The idea that really the ultimate authority is basically the Holy Spirit in an individual person. And that authority needs to bubble up from collective agreement on that as opposed to like, I'm not saying that the Catholics and Orthodox don't think that individuals have the Holy Spirit. But basically their spirit of leadership is something that Jesus gave to Peter and Apostles and then they give like a top down chain from that that's continuing into the present. Whereas we view leadership as inherently built into the power of individuals that then can lift someone up to speak on behalf of individuals. And that's really, I think, the difference between those two approaches. And I'm not saying that the, I mean, there are pitfalls in either direction, but I much prefer the pitfalls in the direction of democracy than, you know, it's like if you think that you're going to get some super wise, Omnibenevolent person in charge just by virtue of some sort of power that tends not to be the way it works. Yeah. Well, it's not like the Pope has always been the brightest and best of Roman Catholicism. Just saying. And yet Calvin Burns served us. What do you think, Paul? Like, what's your thought on that? On the, well, I can't even remember the question now, but you asked a good question. I want to hear your answer to it. You know, it's been interesting, let's say watching the United Methodists who do have bishops. And from some, at least I haven't followed the United Methodists closely. But watching at least some of what's happened where these bishops just completely ignore the teaching of the church in their positions. And even though they might have a gracious separation policy, the bishops won't let conservative congregations out without paying because they want the money. And I mean, a major part of the motivation for the Reformation was clerical abuse and corruption. And the response to that was both politically and ecclesiastically, distribute authority. Because if you distribute authority, you're probably going to have, and this is where you get into the relational. I mean, people like, no, no, no, it's got to be about relationships. So what you're saying is that if I like you, I should use the power inherent in my position to favor you as opposed to the policy of the body. We call that corruption, but that's relational. And so I don't think either system gets you, you know, removes you from the problems of corruption. But you're looking at the Christian Reformed Church, which is highly democratic in that, again, local property is owned by the local church, not by the classes as in the RCA, not by the denomination as in other churches, because the local church paid for it. Frankly, they actually deserve it. Generally speaking, and also as a difference from the Reformed Church in America, sin is sort of binds itself a little bit to the decisions of past synods. But synods are enormously powerful to do what they want. And so people look at that both with aspiration and fear, but it's also the case that the next synod can turn around and undo it. And so then we have all of these rules about this needs to be ratified by a subsequent synod. And even if this doesn't pertain to that, it's still going to be treated by the next synod because of all the dynamics we're watching in the church now. So you have these. So I've been reading. I was reading, you know, these books on Vatican One and Vatican Two, where in the 19th century and in the 20th century, the Roman Catholic Church is really, you know, reeling from this. And now, of course, you have the let's see, what do they call it in Germany? The Senate on the family is the Senate on synodality. Yes, synodality. Someone asked what is the most Orwellian sounding thing ever. So you've got, you know, the German groups of churches, they're sort of running their next reformation and they want to be open and inclusive. And of course, this is within the Roman Catholic Church. You know, Father, Father Eric is in the comments section and talking to Cale, who couldn't make it today. But, you know, when I talk to Roman Catholics, they're like, yeah, you know, we have all of this hierarchy and top down and everything. But at the same time, you've got you've got Richard Rohr and James Martin out there that can say seemingly whatever the heck they want to with absolutely no consequences. And in the in the Democratic Christian Reformed Church, Nealon Avenue is under the gun for their lesbian deacon. So but yet at the same time, looking at I mean, it's difficult to to communicate for many people the. So, of course, I grew up in the progressive wing of the Christian Reformed Church, the racial reconciliation ring. We were all the liberationist things going on in my wing of the church. What's what's happened at Synod 2022 and 2023? This is the death of their church. And if you go to the progressive wing of the church, this is the death of the Christian Reformed Church. So I'm also from the progressive side views that as the death of their church. Yes, this is that they since the Second World War, they have been cultivating a liberal dream of, you know, the church. And so, you know, people ask, what is the end of the liberal dream? Well, that's a little difficult. That's difficult. More compassion, more compassion, more inclusion. But and that's where this and it is so wild, because again, you've got a ton of racial minorities. These people, most as this more eloquently than anyone, these people are they pride themselves as the vanguard for inclusion. And they're basically saying ethnic groups keep out because we just want to like Motel Six, keep the light open, keep the light on for our gay and lesbian children and grandchildren, hoping maybe they'll come back to church. Whereas the truth is, they're not coming for for issues completely different from anything with regard to their sexuality. Right. I mean, that might not be everywhere, but that that's that's certainly a trend. I think one of the greatest ironies that was sort of revealed in the CRC Senate is that the progressive wing, which would theoretically want more racial diversity, well, racial diversity needs something that will allow the CRC to scale beyond its dutchness. And that is confessions. And so the side that would theoretically want racial diversity needs to be loyal to its confessions to invite them into something. And then there's the weird thing that happens where it's seemingly the people who have their identity in the church, most based off of ethnicity, family and history that are the ones most likely to be on the affirming end of the camp, because they some in some sense feel like it's theirs that they could change. And and that just seemed like some contradiction that never really got aired, even though it was sort of visible from the outside. Well, and I think Canada, this is where, again, my my great grandparents came to America in the 1890s. And what you said, David, about Canada, my grandfather was bringing getting people off the train in Owen Sound, Ontario in the 1950s. And so, whereas in America, this this this losing the children to the church, there are there's no one there's currently no one in my local congregation, the exception of one, but he doesn't come often, who actually grew up in this church. That entire generation is gone. Most of them don't go to church at all. My question, because this is definitely there's definitely a U.S.-Canadian difference here. It seems that there's is it familial loyalty or are the youth is that generation still staying more in Canada than in the United States? I don't know. It's a question. I would say no. I mean, I think this is what I'm what I'm seeing is the glue is coming. We're coming unglued from what used to hold us together in Canada, in Canada. And so for people like me, I mean, I'm I have my dad was Dutch. My mom's longtime Canadian. I don't I don't know anybody at the other CRC churches in Classes Toronto. I'm not related to any of them. I don't have any history with them. The youth aren't getting together. In fact, in many of the Classes Toronto churches, there there just isn't any. And so some of the people at my church are pipeline people. But the pipeline is Kiper and Redeemer, not Calvin. Right. Kiper College. Yeah, Kiper College in Michigan. And they're more traditionally like like they're very passionate about church. And then they both grew up CRC as well. But that's not I don't think the future for the CRC in Canada is not from people who grew up CRC. I just don't see the next generation taking taking hold, at least not in my my area. But then again, the next generation can't afford to live in my area. Like no one can afford to live here. So they're all moving away. Yeah. Which is New Jersey, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Chicago, to a degree. You guys got all that land up there. We're still pretty affordable. You know, our our our state government does its best to scare people away, said to keep prices down. But it'll be I will say it'll be interesting to see what the next 30 years brings and and and what will what will re glue us together, if anything. Well, what's your take on this, Nate? I mean, I snapper talks about these and David Snapper talks about these bubbles or circles, and I'm definitely in one like so. Chatham has three CRC churches in town of a population about one hundred thousand. And then we've got another three CRC churches that are just on the outside of the city. There's a Christian school and high school here. There is a so within Chatham, there's a lot of families who are connected. There's a lot of there's still a lot of pressure to go to church that doesn't I think exist in other places. People are still going to church. There's a lot of there's still a lot of pressure to go to church that doesn't I think exist in other places. People kind of go to the they do kind of circulate around. Sometimes it's the Alliance Church that's like has the kids programs and is the go to. And now it's the Baptist Church in town where it's probably had just a whole bunch of former CRCs who are going to keep in that place up and kicking. And so here my situation, I guess, is different than the rest of Canada, because I do see people kind of grew up in this community. And you don't necessarily want to go to the church where your parents or grandparents went. But there's another church for you to go to then where you can kind of figure things out and stay connected. But even here, like by the time you get to the third generation and I do a funeral, I'll do a funeral for somebody who died in their 90s. You kind of look through and you can you can tell who knows the songs and who don't. Who doesn't, right? Like you kind of can see that. Yeah, this what was really strong in the first and second generation is definitely by the time you get to the fourth generation is pretty diluted. And I think going forward, I'd expect that growth in the CRC in Canada is going to be similar where you've got church in in Toronto that's like exploding with Iranian immigrants. You probably maybe come across that information. So new and this was my experience in Woodbridge, which is north of Toronto. We were picking up first generation immigrants from all over the world who found the CRC liturgy, the CRC kind of very similar to the Protestant churches that they attended wherever they were from. And so at one point there were 14 first languages of a congregation of just over 100. So, wow. So that but the the people who started that church and had the big split and like they were starting to dwindle in part because you got to have a million and a half if you want to live in the neighborhood around that church. That's just how it is. Well, I think class in the Christian Deformed Church is very much a part of this. So my impression is that some people thought of this mirror. I don't mean it as mere the affirming elite of the Christian Reformed Church. Class wise, tend to be laptop class. I mean, Ryan Struck is a producer at CNN. The pattern in the Christian Reformed Church has been get a great education at Calvin College, very much mainstream out into the business, intellectual life, where at this point, or the academy, you know, the celebrities and the Christian Reformed Church of the post World War II era tended to be the ones on stage, Alvin Plantinga, Nick Waltersdorf, George Marsden, Richard Mao, you know, tended to be academic, tended to rise in business, tended to rise in law, medicine, all of these things. For that particular group of people, an affirming stance is table stakes. June is Pride Month. And, you know, it's like you're the Obamas. You might live like a Puritan, but you're going to show up. I mean, it's basically what's left of the main line. You're going to show up and be open and inclusive, and that's going to be your public posture. And this is a lot like Jews. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you Dutch people are kind of similar to Jews. That's the comparison. If you ain't Dutch, you ain't much. Yeah. And so what's happening in the Christian Reformed Church now is also that, okay, you've got these immigrant populations coming in from more traditional societies. Very passionate about this position. The Christian Reformed Church has lost New Jersey, Wyoming, Michigan, a lot of blue collar communities. White and Massachusetts to a degree, too. A lot of blue collar communities from immigrants. These people have sort of migrated off into the evangelical, into the evangelical woodwork. And so, you know, the complaint, getting back to sort of the leadership question, when I read Calvin and comment on this and the, again, this is an absolute catastrophe for them because this is the destruction of the post World War II vision of CRC immigrants getting a great education at Calvin College, going out into the world, making good incomes and those incomes will continue to feed the communities and they have. But now we have a we have a posture on this culture war issue that actually makes us persona non grata. And of course, Trump and Jesus and John Wayne are right around the corner because that's the broad brush it's painted with. And so that's where the abide group with like with like Lloyd Hem Street, it was on the who's been on my channel and out of the chat. It's their fault. And it's the fault of the the neopuritans. So that's that's the way it's playing. But then there's no small amount of class condescension that is underneath that. You very much. You know, nobody said it, but you wouldn't be surprised to have the reform journal write about the deplorables. I think I think it's yes. Yes, I'm nodding my head. I'm like, I totally I get that. But I'm I'm not the elite, right? Not like me. Yeah, I don't have generational ministers in my background. I'm blue collar. Sometimes I feel like I should be working in the trades. Probably. Anyway, I won't go that direction. But I think when I hear you talk this way, sometimes I'm like, I think he's might might be brushing with too broad of a brush stroke there. Although I do think there's in one way. Well, for instance, a while ago, you talked about the impact of sentence decision on, say, churches in Grand Rapids East. And you made the comment that these people won't go against their children and grandchildren. Something to that effect. They will not kick their children and grandchildren out of the church. They don't want to. They don't want to have this close the door on them. Yeah, this won't kick them out because they're not in it. But one of the things that came to my mind there was. I think more people in those churches have had to make hard decisions in their life about, you know, following Jesus or pleasing their children. And I think tough decisions have been made along the way where they're they haven't just necessarily are bowing to the next generation or children. I think. And, you know, you can paint with a broad brush stroke, but you start to hear stories and you're like, oh, people have made a lot of sacrifices to follow after Christ. And so when I hear I tend to be I don't like brush strokes, but I hear that I think I think the story is more complex on the ground. And I think you'd be surprised how many parents have had to make hard decisions with their children based on their trying to follow Christ, you know, as best they can. So, I don't know. I think it's true. Here's a question I have for you, CRC folks. If you burn the wooden shoes like fully and really just try and move into full blown, we're a confessionally identified church. Yes, we have Dutch history. That's how we got here. But that's not where we're going. Then all of a sudden you have to compete with every other denomination that's doing the same thing from Presbyterians to other sorts of reform to the evangelical mega street on the corner, etc. And what exactly would the distinctive advantages of the CRC be in that competitive interdenominational marketplace? Well, I don't. As long as we continue to baptize our children as infants. We always maintain this deep family connection that will that does separate puts us more aligned with the Orthodox and the Catholic than with the Baptist. And that's it. And so, you know, there's a whole lot of Baptists in our Christian school, but they don't quite understand this kind of gets to where does where does theology hit the rubber hit the road like we were talking about earlier, right? Like when you believe that your children are Christian, so you've baptized them and you're going to raise them in the faith so they understand how to live as Christians, you establish a school. And then you'll get a Baptist preacher who will come in and he'll do an altar call at chapel and my daughter will come home and she'll say, we already know this stuff. Like, why don't like I'm like you need to water the seed is what she said, which I thought was really brilliant thing to say like you need to like, I'll go to chapel so you could like water the seed right like the seeds already been planted like you don't need to tell me to believe in Jesus yet again. You see this, this tension but I think like what it's a kind of when we relate to other denominations in a sense what we are offering is also the thing that is is causing us all this pain. We're offering the fact that you become a part of this family and so to your children, and some of those children might be gay. And this is our I mean if we're like believers baptism, then then it's easier, right? Like you believe with us, you believe what we believe then then you're in and you make the decision. But we're saying no, you were baptized in this church. We raised you. We taught you and now you're having this deep struggle over your identity. And we made a vow when you were baptized to walk with you through that like we, we are deeply tied to these, especially people like Ryan struck who was obviously baptized in the Christian Reformed Church we, we can't just say why now you disagree with us and we disagree with you like it is deep. And, and other people I think are attracted that in a sense like, you know, you're, you're part of this and once you're part of it like you are part of it. And that, that transcends culture and, and then some, you kind of see where does the Christian Reformed Church take off it takes off in Nigeria, Presbyterianism takes off in South Korea, what are the Dutch and then Nigerians and the South Koreans have in common I don't know, but they seem to have this kind of like sense of election sense of like God sovereignty sense of many things that that come through and mark how we how we think about things and made the connection like my dad used to say the CRC they're Christian Jews, but it's kind of true right like we have a strong view of election which is like the chosen people of God that's anyway, rambling on a bit. Okay, Sam I would say that's a really good question and up up here in Canada, that will be what we'll wrestle with over the next. While we're wrestling with it right now but we don't know how to articulate it. So how do we market ourselves, I guess, in an era where you can't rely on the glue that once held us together and caused us to grow and flourish. And that's going to be just part of the next leg of the journey is what our is. Do we have a reason to exist. And what is that reason. And how do we communicate that to to people. I feel the crisis of that because I have trouble articulating that myself, I really actually just, I have to sit down and write, because that's the only way it'll happen for me but I think it's a really important question. The question has been asked again and again in Christian Reformed history. And it keeps getting revisited what is, because the church. The church was founded by a group of people who immigrated from the Netherlands, and they didn't articulate it, but they wanted church they wanted something of the home country back in America, and then later in Canada. Of course the First World War and forced them to start doing church in English because the stupid Americans couldn't differentiate Dutch from Deutsch, and everybody hated Germans during the First World War. And this, and of course the Second World War drafted that an entire generation of youth and sent them out shoulder to shoulder in the military, and over in the military. It used to be it was just our thing. Suddenly they go to the military and decide, discover. We're sort of like everyone else we should participate in these broader conversations. And then after the Second World War, the church lowers begins lowering its walls, different ways in different places, then during the racial reconciliation era, you know our Dutchness is sort of bigotry. And now, I mean, Nate's grandfather and my parents founded Ecumenical Committee for Urban Ministry in Patterson, and they start out basically, we have these Christian schools, and the Dutchmen are getting wealthier and moving to the further suburbs. I'm just gonna mute you. You can mute yourself. You're fine, David. Okay. And so, and then the African Americans moved into the old neighborhoods, and I mean that was Neeland's thing. I got, you know, I was challenged in one place that, Len Van De Zee challenged me on voice and says, Hey, wait a minute, Neeland Avenue, Bates Street, all these churches in Grand Rapids. They were down for racial reconciliation and they worked really hard at it. And fair enough, that was Patterson, that was Sacramento Church. And so, EECUMP, Herb Vandenen, Nate's grandfather, my parents, we're going to do the Christian reform thing and we are going to raise money so little black boys and girls from the inner city in Passaic County and Patterson can go to Christian school. And we're going to try and keep the Christian schools that are still geographically located in the neighborhood functioning, but now they'll have little black boys and girls in with some of the Dutch kids that haven't moved out to Wyckoff. And I mean, this has been my story. This has been my story. And, but the, you know, the immigration with each successive generation, now then of course with radio and then television and the internet, all of the formation is done out in public. Whereas I don't know any denomination that has been more focused on the formation of their children by their confessional identity than the Christian reform church. We wanted to have them within our walls, cradle to grave. You're baptized in the Christian reform church. You go to a Christian day school. You go to Calvin College, now Calvin University. You might get some, you know, you might get your PhD somewhere else, but then we're going to establish Christian reform churches wherever our people go to in North America so they can have their church there and their children can be there. And then they go back to Calvin College or to Redeemer. I mean, this has been the Christian reform plan. And the truth is since the 1980s, it's all been breaking down. We've been assimilating and so now this vast network of Christian schools, the school I went to in northern New Jersey, besides Peter Crieff, all the distinguished alumni work in the, work in the entertainment business, including the Jonas Brothers. I will tell you the graduating class of 1981 of Eastern Christian had nobody like the Jonas Brothers. Nobody. And in that sense, those schools have, those schools have already made the transformation. Calvin is struggling. He's struggling. Dorr is thriving as a conservative alternative. I mean, this is where we're at. And again, for my parents' generation, who are sort of on the progressive wing, the CR, I saw high profile people in Calvin and common right at Christian reform churches dead. It's dead. Well, their vision is dead. But Sam, your question is exactly mine. What exactly was that vision? Well, it sounds like part of it is that we're a highly functional, lovely, extended family that you can join. Yes. And that, you know, yeah, we have the confessions, but we also have this network that you just described, the super organism network thingy. And, but we're open to non-blood relatives joining. And I think that, you know, like, I'm not Dutch, but I'll give you Dutch people some compliments. You guys are very competent, trustworthy, and trusting people that had something special going on. You're really good at commerce and intelligence and keeping your identity at the same time in a way that, yes, the Jews were also kind of good at in a very similar combination. And some of us are Jews too. Some of you Dutch people are even also Jews. And so it's sort of an invitation to join that thing. Like, you know, like when someone who grows up in a not great home, if they go to like a barbecue at their classmates house and they're like, oh man, their extended relatives are here. No one's fighting. This is really nice. I wish that I could have dinner here instead of at my dysfunctional home. And it's sort of like that kind of thing. But you're saying that thing is also dying. Yes. Well, here's, I mean, one thing I've been thinking about, Paul, for a certain, like, maybe I'm painting with broad strokes here myself, but Hard not to. Yeah, with in my previous church, you know, a lot of the older folks had terrible experiences, maybe growing up in the CRC was too rigid, too harsh. And it lacked what they felt was maybe like relational love, compassion, patience. It was all rules, right? All rules. And I think you have an experience of rules. And that changes you. You're like, I don't want that. I don't want that. Never again will I be part of a church that, you know, swings the hammer hard. I don't want that. We need compassion. And then all the, you know, all the teachings of Jesus, all his engagements with people, it just let the book of the Bible lights up. And you just see all the compassionate things he did. And that's not the way of Jesus, right? And so that starts a, you know, a movement of sorts. And for a lot of people that's, they're still living that, that sense of I experienced the harshness, the hammer, the rules, the order, and I'm not going back. I'm not going back. And, and then that just, you know, then to use a Paul phrase, the cake is baked, you know, in a sense, right? And I see that. And now I'm younger, you know, still south of 40 by a little bit. And I see, oh, it's like, hold on. Now you kind of things are changing. It's not that I want to bring down the rules. But what, but then all of a sudden I'm seeing, you know, I'm reading the New Testament, I'm reading Jesus and I'm like, oh, but he's like, he's defined. He's setting a course. He's got a way and that way is narrow. And I'm all of a sudden those scriptures are lighting up. And meanwhile, I'm in a culture, especially out west where I was on Vancouver Island. It's like everyone loves social justice out there. Everyone loves it. They're rescuing bunnies off the side of the road and trying to ship them to their natural habitat. You know, like this is what's happening. Right. And, and, but no one cares about the way of the way of Jesus. And so, so I'm like, I'm putting all this through and then, you know, experiencing in a kind of a painful way the hard edge of what happens if you cross someone who feels like compassion is the way and you're not doing the compassionate way. And actually there's a lot of uncompassionate responses sometimes. Right. So that's part of my story too. But what the big what am I saying? The point I'm saying here is it must be hard to get older, to have your experience, your wisdom, your all that you have learned along the way with you believe, you know, God's been at work in that. And then to see like another generation coming up behind that doesn't share that vision or they had their own experiences. And a lot of, yeah, I feel like it's tough not to get jaded. And I want to be humble because I'm eventually going to be seventy five eighty two and I'll have my own story. My own, yeah, right. My own formation and the cake will be baked and I'll look back and like, what are they doing to the church? These crazy 35 year olds with, you know, the Bible and I don't like these sermons anymore. Right. Like so I've been thinking about that dynamic and I wonder for a lot of these Calvin folks. Yeah, they're starting to retire. Many of them. Right. And they're they're into the 70s and 80s and they fought a battle and they took what they thought was the path of integrity based on their experience. And now there's that's not necessarily shared by people in their 30s, 20s around here. I mean, my church would probably grow if we didn't have women in leadership. Do you know what I mean? Oh, yeah, that's the situation. It's it's like that probably hinders us in some way. And if we were to become a Fermi, it's like it's game over. Like they Christians in this area wouldn't because we're we're in a different time. We're in a different time. Anyway, I'll stop there. That's a good talk. Yeah. I think it about my sermon on Sunday will be where Jesus says, I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and the learned and revealed them to the little children. Yes, Father, this was for your good pleasure. I think about, you know, when we talk about how who shows up at Synod and otherwise the learned, but they're not everybody who's there. And I hope that what we try to accomplish as a church is to make sure that the little children, whoever they are, who have been have the revelation of God get a chance to speak. And I think that is I mean, if that's what the progressives mean by the CRC is we want to continue to make sure that those whom God might be speaking to and whom God might be calling to be in our church have an opportunity to do it, to do so. That part of the CRC is not dead. I think we all have an ideal who I wish was in my pew. And, I mean, that was something I had to put to bed as a pastor pretty early on, because it's never the people I wanted. But it's always the people that blessed me like. But you can talk like for years with somebody who you're like, I just wish you would become a Christian. And then somebody else just shows up and they've been read the Bible on their own and they're like, hey, I'm just ready that I'm ready to sign up. Tell me what I got to believe. I'll do it. Oh, it's true. It's true. Well, I mean, I know just one other piece is like I. So my grandfather and my grandmother on the bandana side were deeply enmeshed in the Christian Reformed Church. My mother's side, the houseward side, John Adrian Houseward was a pastor in the Christian Reformed Church and one of the few CRC pastors that I know of who is a member of the NAACP. So I got it on both sides. This like this racial reconciliation piece. But we. I was a member of the Christian Reformed Church growing up, pretty like two and a half years in Madison Avenue in New Jersey, and then for about a year and a half in the Cincinnati Christian Reformed Church, which is an hour and a half from where we live. So that really wasn't sustainable. So, you know, you talk about spiritual home and one of the other hats you were wearing. For me, I did, in a sense, becoming a pastor in the Christian Reformed Church was a coming home after my parents had been away from it and they're still away from it where they live for quite some time. So I skipped a generation in a way. Like I'm not, I didn't grow up in it. Instead, I'm coming back to it and I'm relating to the older people better than the younger people. So shall I award you elite status? Is that something I can do relationally? I like Nate so I'm going to give him elite status. Elite status. You get something to be dodged elite status. Ah, you populists. Paul, I mean, I don't know when you want to wrap things up. I only have 15 minutes left. But one of the thoughts that came up for me with the relational versus order, if you want to go back there. Sure. I'm happy to take this back there. But one of the thoughts I had watching or listening to your video or I listened to the podcast, I don't have time to watch videos. I do other things while listening to you. But I guess one of the pictures that came up into my head, maybe on the order side is like being in like a government office where sort of it's all order with very little relationship. And you just feel like this cold, this coldness, no one here really cares. I'm just sort of in a big stack of papers. I'm right there and it's hard to get any kind of understanding or nuance. And I feel like that might be the other side of the coin or maybe what Pete's talking about is we don't that sort of there's all relations, you know, I mean, you talk about the bounce, there's all relationship, which is not good. It can be very bad. But then on the other side, there's like the all order, where it feels kind of like a government office or Captain Von Trapp's house without Maria in it. Yeah. And I mean, I think that's another part of this is that the order versus compassion thing, it's very much a masculine versus feminine traits thing. And I think that this is something I think this is another aspect of why the Senate captured a lot of people's attention outside is that it's such a microcosm of the macrocosm. And I think that just masculinity and femininity are having trouble getting along right now. It's like a dysfunctional marriage in so many different levels, like America's politics basically seem like a dysfunctional marriage or something like that. And I think that the hope in that is that there's something about masculinity and femininity that inherently love each other. And so it's hard to keep it apart for too long. Captain Von Trapp needs Maria to bring the sound of music back into his house. This is pretty hot though you got to give her that. She just couldn't she just couldn't play catch. So, so what is the balance I mean obviously you just you have to kind of go back and forth. But I feel like that's it's a really important dance to sort of get good at dancing, you know what I mean, that that balance. Sorry I don't have anything else to say. Well not just balance but the Christian Forum Church has long had a dance between relation and order. The Dutch, I visited the Netherlands for the first time I toured it with Job and John van Donk. And it's a lovely country and it's incredible country. It's a very orderly country. I mean the Dutch and those of us in the Dutch subculture, that sort of, you know, it's, you have a front room, you have a parlor and maybe you'll never have a anybody who enters your home who's good enough for your parlor, but you maintain the room. You, you know, there were dishes in my mother's cabinet that I think only saw the light of day four or five times growing up because, and as a kid I'd be like, why do you have these well these are the good dishes. And, but but then, you know, if you come over and you have the good dishes well then it's formal but then it's also distant. And now if you come over and we have the everyday dishes well you're not special but now you're part of the family. All of these, all of these things have their dance. And in the Christian Form Church we've been highly relational. You know Paul de Vries grew up in the house that I live in today. I swam in Herb van Denen swimming pool growing up he has this great swimming pool and I used to love going over there for meetings. And I mean it was this family thing but we also had this order. And so we always managed to do this. And, and for a lot of issues you could sort of move between those two things. But then comes this issue of, of, of some same sex attraction. If anybody, I'm always pushing the rest is history. They just did a two episode thing on the trial of Oscar wild. And it's fabulous it's incredible. It is. All of these little stereotypes about, you know, oh the oppressors blah blah blah blah it just breaks them all just right and left. But this issue comes and for a Christian Form Church that's so family oriented. These are our children. These are this is this is David Struck's child. Can he turn his back on his child? No. But yet we've also had, it's helpful to remember that Jonathan Edwards, you know, one of the most celebrated American philosophers and theologians was kicked out of his church over whether or not they would baptize basically the grandchildren of non practicing people in the community. And the grandparents are like you'd better baptize my grandchildren child and Jonathan Edwards is like no. You know you don't you don't get baptism isn't something that you inherit with the good plates and your mother's. This belongs to well if he belongs to God it's like he belongs to no one but it also belongs to everyone. And so you can't run the rules of baptism according to the fact that you know if your grand if your if your children want their child baptized they don't even really care to have their child baptized and so we're not going to bobble the keys of the kingdom like they're your personal belonging. That's where all these tensions go and for the Christian Reformed Church I mean Wednesday night that moment was just it was just heartbreaking because all of those tensions they're right there and so on one hand you can say no we'll baptize anyone when baptism isn't special. When baptism isn't special there's nothing special so it's it's just all right there for us and you can't just say anything goes but then it's not special and it doesn't matter a family is special partly because it's exclusive and so when you're welcomed into the family from another tribe then suddenly it's the So it's no wonder it's no wonder. Yeah, we'll have to end. Yeah, we can now I gotta wrap it up too high. So yeah, well you guys you guys can you guys well we can we can land the plane now we're close enough or actually you guys can run and I can open up the room to the rest of the estuary sea monsters and maybe maybe I'll do that so thank you David and Nate for coming in and I really appreciate you guys and yeah if you're interested in CRC voices you can find a link somewhere or just Google it. It's probably about time I joined I tend to think well through writing and I need reasons to do that so maybe that's maybe that's a good spot for me we'll see. I think I think it is someone recently who joined recently said this is the best place to discuss Christian Reformed issues online. It's far better than Facebook or anything like that because it is long form and people get in there and they sort of just like everything they've sort of vomit everything they've had built up onto the listserv and it was just clear that stuff and they know eventually if they settle in they can be part of a family so. Thanks Paul. Thank you very much. Yeah, take care. All right. Nice to talk with you gentlemen. I'm bringing in the link. I'll stick around a little bit because I got here late. Any any other impressions from synod Sam that you want to sort of put out there. I mean to extend the masculine feminine, you know dysfunctional marriage analogy you know it's not like the masculine wants to just win. It's not like the traditional side wants to just win and establish order for the day. It needs to figure out a way to redevelop a healthy relationship and I can like I think Jacob said this in a stream recently and it was true like there were a lot of mean things said to the conservatives and the Traditionals during synod and multiple accusations of misogyny racism and phobias and isms that were not substantiated that were not gentle and stuff and you know mostly the Traditionals just took it like someone you know getting yelled at by a spouse sometimes just takes it. But that leaves some harm and some damage done and I don't know what how that's going to get fixed but I that was not pleasant to watch. No, no. And there's class in there too because you know the establishment and the ruling class. They've, they've been in charge. Chad are you making noise there. Oh, I didn't know you brought me in boss. I brought you in Chad. Joe. Welcome. Welcome back. You know, Joe. Joe. I'm just talking about the family and stuff. So he doesn't have time to deal with all these crazy randos. No, Sam, your point about treatment. And this again. I mean nobody said the word deplorables but part of that is again you have these national resonance that get James Scott who who's a writer at door at the CRC is 150th anniversary. Well, he wrote a I've linked it in a recent video. He wrote a piece that basically said part of what's different about the Christian informed Church now is we used to be like it used to be our thing. But now there's just proxies for the larger culture and their to a degree always have been but it's it's much more racial reconciliation didn't come from the inside. I didn't know you did. We're all done. Well, it was the Dutch. You're free. You know, if we could finally make peace with between the freezians and the Dutch but John and Don continues to set relations between freezians and Dutch back. Joe, Joe mended it. He sent me a freezian Bible. I have it right up there. So. All right. What what say you, Joe? He leaves. Andrew Blair. I don't think we've met before. Andrew. Where are you from? No, we haven't. Probably some context. Can you hear me? Yes. Yeah, I'll be honest. I'm struggling because it's the first time I've ever joined a one of these. Okay, so background Christian, Christian, Roman Catholic with a teenage years spent with my evangelical friends and being evangelical and kind of like couldn't find how to get that to continue, if you will. So the Roman Catholic Church on campus was doing. So I have a story about he essentially did estuary. You know, he would just say I'm not doing a sermon. Tell me, you know, what are your questions. And like all you know he dealt with all of the usual questions slash slurs slash complaints and it was just awesome. Yeah. I did the math. He said I'm not doing a sermon, but I will do the math. That's. Yeah. And I guess you know there was that joke about say the, say the, the creed anyway it's not yours. Yeah, I feel like I actually not. It's not that I heard that joke. It continued in that he said, say the creed and pray for those parts which you are having difficulty with. Yeah, I feel like that is I get that's a clever joke, I get it. But I don't feel it's helpful. It's helpful to say, say the creed and pray for the Holy Spirit to guide you with the parts that you're having difficulty with. But anyway, mostly Paul I want to jump on and say I, the service that you and this little corner are doing for the Republic is just incredible. We are so divided and you, you are modeling and showing us how to work through ridiculously difficult problems. And it's just not any theological problem. It's literally a problem that is dividing every institution across the Republic. So that's really what I jumped on to say. Thank you, Andrew. That's very kind. I appreciate it. I appreciate you coming on and sharing some of your story too. Good. Well, he says I didn't invite you because you're running this show without me. So I'm glad you jumped in. I watched all of your chats. It's kind of funny with those chats because to a certain degree it's made me, it's given me a bit more attention than I imagined it would or some kind of status that I'm not quite there. Are you looking for elite status in the Christian Foreign Church? No, but it's weird because like, so the first was initiated because the guy from my church, Dan Wagonmaker, said you should do a Just Chatting with Jacob about this. And so I was like, well, I've done a bunch of just chattings. Then all of a sudden it's getting thousand views. And I'm like, whoa, wait a minute. And then I'm still with nobody. I mean, I'm a commissioned pastor of a small CRC church plant. And so it's been very fascinating to be kind of in the middle of this conversation. That to a certain degree, I don't know that I've earned my place. We are Protestants after all. We let everyone talk. Sam gets to talk. Job, you dropped off because you don't want to talk or because you had technical difficulties. Satan fiddled with my Wi-Fi, so I had to switch my watch. Well, what are your thoughts, Job? You've watched some of this from afar. You're watching it from the old country. Your 6% post that you did in Voices, that one really grabbed me. What was that? Okay, so what are your thoughts on that? Because I'd like to hear them. Why don't you summarize a little bit about what was told to you? Okay, so there's a letter that's been going around that's been written by a group of youth that calls themselves the 6%. There's been a worldwide research on Christian expression worldwide, basically. And according to current statistics for the Netherlands, there's about 22% of youth that would call themselves a Christian. And about 6% of that would not be considered only culturally Christian. And they are writing to say, hey, we'd like to reach the 94% of youth in this country that aren't having a relationship with God. We care about the climate, about injustice, about discrimination, etc. And we have different ideas about what the church should be. But we are kind of worried because we do not think that the church can help us. And as an elder in my own Reformed church, for particularly that segment of age, I was kind of puzzled by the letter because I'm thinking, why do you call yourself, why do you say the church cannot help us? Why do you not consider yourself part of that church? Why is the church something that exists outside of you, even though you write that you attended in different ways, depending on which denomination you're a part of? So for context, I wrote a little post on the Voices listserv that Paul sometimes talks about. Basically just ranted about what I really thought. Yeah, so that didn't get too much interaction, Paul. So it's kind of hard to see here that you had thoughts about it. You know, part of the reason I made the Reverend Vanderpoo goes to Synod video was I knew, I agree with Scott that actually the question about the larger question about church and culture and participation is the big question, not the same-sex marriage question. But I knew that once, for the Christian Reformed church, once the same-sex marriage question got underway, it would blot out the sun for everything else, which is why I'm glad Scott got his overture through. We'll see what comes of it in practice. But the questions about church and culture that have haunted Tom Holland and many others are profound. Can we really have the West without church, where the church has been so dominant? And that doesn't mean that the West is the only place that the church has been. But the formation of the cultures that we all participate in comes from the church. And Tim Keller's comment that in the clip that I play often on my videos in terms of American culture and the functioning of American culture sort of relied on the fact that this formation was sort of implicit and pervasive. And without that, where does it go? And so, you know, I think the various cultures that we see in the West are products of Christianity. But where will their trajectories wind up? I don't know. I don't know. So I think that just to hear that only 6% of Dutch youth are active in church, that's a tiny number. I have a question about this. Yep, go ahead Chad. It relates a lot, I think, because I made a little video about this this morning. In the organization I belong in, you know, they have something like a center every year. And a couple of years ago during the pandemic, some things got passed, kind of seemingly under the noses. Seemingly under the noses of everybody else. And everybody started to freak out. And what I started to notice was like, well, now you guys are freaking out. But you guys haven't been participating in like the service structure in any way when you were completely free to do so for all those years. And now that things have changed, you will. So the question I have is, is like, where did, I know it's kind of a bad question, but like, where did the ball first get dropped in your estimation? Where did the line first get broken between un-synod and the rest of the, the rest of your church? You know, that's very interesting to me because to me that whatever is in that answer is going to help as you move forward as a church. You dropped out a few times. I heard, I heard two questions. One about, but it's been very interesting because the Christian Reformed Church has this dual quality of an ethnic family aspect and a confessional aspect. I had, when people, so I had an exodus in my church about nine months after I got here. The people that voted me into office very quickly became upset with me because I wasn't doing things they expected me to do. And I basically said, you know what, we have a council and the council is going to decide and I'm going to implement what the council decides. So I played the order card. It wasn't that, you know, you pick me up at the airport. So I'm going to do what you want. And they said, no, we have a structure. We have a council. I'm going to do what the council decided. And they left. And a lot of these people, I think if I had established a virtual Christian Reformed Church that would have somehow given them a virtual experience of all of the things that they had in their youth of this close knit, you know, Dutchie culture. They would have loved to have been there. But, you know, don't, don't, you know, take my Sunday mornings. And that's a lot of that has been happening over my generation. Many of the people, and with each successive generation, it's, it's, it's gone down. And so, yeah, you have people show you have people very upset at what the Christian Reformed Church is doing, but they haven't been in a Christian Reformed Church for 20 years. And in a sense, you look at them and you say, you know, I was talking to, you know, my, my daughters at one point were sort of laughing at some of their high school classmates that already had children and were married. And, and I said, Who do you think is going to be running the country 30 years from now? It's the people who have children and the people who participate. And so, you know, I don't have a lot of sympathy for people who, you know, really sort of want to be telling what the Christian Reformed Church should do when they left it a long time ago. It's like, you got to stay to play. But they don't want any social embarrassment costs from their hangover identity on them now. And so they want that to do the things that are socially acceptable to them now. Right, right. Like Jews that don't go to synagogue but get mad when Israel launches rockets at Gaza or something like that. Right, right. Go ahead, Mo. You were going to say something. You were talking about, you know, Tom Holland and some of these guys talk about the West and the inability to separate the church from the West. It made me think about, I don't know if you guys are familiar with the Percy Jackson novels? So in the first section of the series, basically there ends up kind of being this war between the Greek gods and the Titans. Because the Titans were defeated way before the Greek gods, but they're eternal. So they can always come up. And so I feel like part of the West or some of the excitement of the church and colonization was the ability to expand Christianity and bring in the kingdom, so to speak. And we're done with these Greek gods and whatever, and these ethnic gods. We're going to start our religious affiliations. And then eventually the race stuff really came in, the Black versus White, as kind of like the new gods, the gods of race. And then those have been losing. And now you have a revisitation of a lot of these older gods of nationalism and things like that. And it seems to me it's like these, the spirits, they're always going to be warring. We're fighting these powers and principalities. And that's always going to be a struggle for the church. And so I kind of see in that light that we're still fighting these old spirits and the battles. It's good to look back and see how those battles were fought historically for potential wisdom as to how we move forward now. Yeah, I've said enough on this, Paul, in many ways, but I really you have opinions on Senate Lance. I haven't heard you've not said enough yet. Lance, I wanted to jump in first off, Sam. I think you are really good when you popped in here and when you come in with Paul, I think I think you're a good third party observer to continue with this conversation. You are a tremendous thinker and your insights are great. It's Paul, I'm listening to you. Paul's the soft side of Lance in some ways and you're the middle ground. But I'm but I'm listening like I under I take the criticisms. But I would say something's interesting is I am a writer. I've been writing a lot, but I feel like this is my this is Christian age Tarsus time. I haven't been disclosing it. A lot of my writing, by the way, a ton of people have subscribed. You can unsubscribe when I start posting about Christian mysticism and saints and Jesus prayer. But but I've gotten some people that have messaged me. And here's the message, Paul. And I think, Mo, you've seen this and I wanted to speak to why you're getting this. A lot of people were saying is they appreciated the honest way in which we're talking about it because they don't feel like they can talk that way. And so just to see people speak and I can do that because, listen, if I were a CRC pastor, there are things that I would not say. It was interesting having Lloyd on because you've got a church to manage, you know, it's like. Well, and I have noticed you mentioned you're well trained and rightfully so, which is when you take that vocation part of it, this is this is the same in any organization when you're a leader. No, you're part of this organization and you don't have a free speech. You have an obligation to do what's right. And you are you are representing both sides of an issue. And so that's appropriate. So I think I do think I just wanted to communicate and it touches back to the gentleman who was sounds like holding those amazing conversations for Thrive. The one thing he mentioned was people who agreed with the traditional stance felt like they couldn't speak up. And so I would think that I think so I think, Mo, what you're doing is like there. I think there is a need for that. They don't necessarily need the guy like me going on and on about it. But I was repetitive in my article a little bit. That was a technique to that because the Senate was repetitive. I wanted to there was a sense that I wanted to keep repeating certain things because I was taking notes as I was going along. But anyway, I really appreciate this. It means a lot to a lot of us. But I thought I would just want to share that privately. And by the way, people didn't leave these messages publicly either. They didn't want to put the comment on the subset. And here I just threw that up. I've got like three hundred fifty one subscribers all off. I mean, that's kind of a pretty a massive deal or three hundred fifty one views. But it just speaks to this. This I think this undercurrent is there. So anyway, and Joe, you need to go on the just the just and Sherry's job series. I've been waiting for Joe to join them to talk about Joe. It needs to happen. It needs to happen. Well, that's that's been a big part of, you know, downstream of Peterson trying to create a space where people can say what they feel. Now, you might disagree with them, you know, good, bad, right or wrong. But every community is going to have its valence. And and and, you know, David, a little bit ago, David Salver that talked about the fact that the Christian Reformed Church before before the boomers, the Christian Reformed Church was very much a church of order. It was saboteur and you did and you didn't do these things. These were the rules. You stick with the rules after the boomers and the counterculture. Then you sort of had this inversion. And again, this is this is culture wide, too. You have this inversion where it's expressive, it's expressive individualism. It's all of that. And it's all system had the exact same thing. Yep, yep, yep. And so now you're sort of coming back. The boomers are dying. The Xers are coming in and the Xers are kind of like, you know, I kind of like parents that keep milk in the fridge. You know, you can go out there and you can smoke your pot and you can get drunk and you can sleep with everything. You know, you can sleep with others. You can bust up the marriage. But what I really wanted from you is stable parents and a good household. Can you please do that just for my sake? I'm a general story. Yep. I'm a Gen Xer. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. That's the national story. It's like, yeah, you did all that. You did all that hippie stuff, but your kids paid a price and it wasn't fair because you didn't they didn't get a vote in that. And, you know, we we started talking at the Chino conference about Quest for Spiritual Home. And, you know, part of the reason I forefronted the question of divorce so much in my talk was that's such a big issue right now. And, Sam, what you said has been so true. These CRC households, marriages were intact. People were dutiful. They did the right thing. People would come in from the outside and look around and be like, yeah, people are sort of thumbing their nose at Ward and June Cleaver. Give me more of that, you know, because I've I've lived out there in chaos land. And if you're a kid, it sucks. And, you know, you listen to Catherine and Amen talks about, you know, Amen's parents who both came from broken households and they got together and said, we ain't doing this to our kids. There's going to be there's going to be food on the table and backpacks for backpacks for school. And our kids can rely on us. And when you had that in an entire community, I remember one situation in my extended family where one of my cousins was in a bad marriage. And, you know, my aunt sat down her son-in-law down no longer in the family, but said, you know, let me tell you something. In this family, we don't yell at our wives. We certainly don't lay hands on them. And the money that you make at work goes into the family. It isn't it isn't for your private amusements out there. This is the way we do things. That was all you know, it was. But you do yell at new husbands. That's true. Well, I just want to know what it's like. You guys want to know what it's like to live in a family that's just chaos. Well, I mean, you want to know how they turn out. Just look at me. So all you weirdos out there trying to be weirdos with your families should probably find a way to live well because you don't understand what it's like to have to go through that kind of stuff. Or maybe you do. I don't know. I think that's why maybe there's something something of a resurgence in church because there are so many people who just were told this lie about it. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. No, that's true. That's true. You know, for the Christian Form Church in North Jersey, where I grew up and where Nate's, you know, grandfather was a was a very instrumental guy. Nate Nate Vandenen. You know, this was we saw we saw, you know, what had been done to the African American families through slavery. I mean, I mean, the stories are just horrendous. And so after slavery during Reconstruction, I mean, the Black Church was absolutely instrumental in terms of trying to, you know, help these people build a family, stay true to each other, build a community, even during Jim Crow, even though it was completely stacked against you. You maybe can't control the racism that's around you, but you can control how well you treat each other. And so, you know, those are those are. And of course, you've got Thomas Sowell looking at the counterculture and saying, that's the absolute worst thing for, you know, people who are already struggling because intergenerational with these things to sort of sort of put on top of the hierarchy, expressive individualism. It's a disaster. You know, elevate the models of a faithful husband and a faithful mother and obedient children and good values. I mean, it's it's still the same thing echoing through our country today. There's a metaphor that I'm reminded of. I remember navigating this with my wife when we first got married. We will talk about homes, specifically front doors. I remember seeing the front door. I'm like, oh, man, I, I wish I had a front door like that. I just love the way that looks. She's like that grosses me out. That's like every front door I ever saw growing up. And I'm like, yeah, my dream is to have everything that you had growing up that I was denied that I didn't have access to. And it's just like, it's so easy to become ungrateful for the blessings that God brings to us. And I feel like we're living in an age where a lot of young people are like, yeah, that stuff that you think is so lame. We just wish we had it. Yeah. Yeah. There's worse things than lame. Yeah, there's worse things than lame. And I think, you know, hearing what you were saying, Paul, about how the CRC really invested in forming its children from, you know, K through college in a way that, you know, like my wife grew up Lutheran and they might do like K through three. And then you're kind of in public school land and Catholics, you know, pick your mileage. Your mileage may vary on how much Catholic education that you get. But that's like what it would take to really keep a strong counterculture multigenerational. But you can only accept in so much stuff from the outside before it sort of kills the thing that you're welcoming people into. And I and that balance, I'm not sure if that was struck well, I guess, over the last half century. Yeah. Well, and the and the same sex attraction, same sex marriage thing is so difficult because, of course, in the CRC, if you have all those marriage values, you know, I had the I had the experience, given my age where, you know, there were no gay kids in. So I grew up basically with 100 kids K through 12, same 100 kids. There were no gay kids until like the 2000s when suddenly we learned that all these people that we grew up with were same sex attracted and some of them came out of the closet. And this is a difficult thing. And you begin to have an understanding of the burden that they bore the burdens that they bore and and a lot of that narrative and and there's real truth to it. So then you have the question, well, OK, how and in the Christian Deformed Church, it's basically been why not just the same sex couple getting in line and acting like everyone else? How could you be against that? And that's really where the debate is in the Christian Deformed Church. And if inclusion, how so? And under what terms? And but but part of the difficulty of synod was because the battle is to the point that it's existential. That kind of fine tuning negotiating. It's hard to do at a Senate floor. Well, like you guys are left with and Paul, you know, watching your videos and Jordan Peterson talked about this in one of his early biblical series about everything. Society's everything is built on trust. Like it is that thing that binds and there's such a lack of trust on both sides. Like Sam pointed out very fairly, there were a lot being someone who's traditional. There were a lot of shots and we know what those shots are and what they say about us. Right. And then also the actions, which is like there's been the slippery slope across the spheres. And so we see this stuff and we're concerned about it. And so the difficult task you guys have and I know this is what you're trying to do is do you can you start trying to find a way to build some trust? Because that's what a marriage counselor would do when you're on the verge of divorce. Can can we start to get some level of trust back together? Because if if you can't get that, it's just not going to work. Yeah. Yeah. Isaac, did you want to did you want to say something? Great to see you. This was so fun about going to a conference is that I got to meet Isaac. It was wonderful. Yeah. Yeah. It was wonderful that the Gino conference was really nice. I don't know how much I it's definitely a third party experience going through all this stuff, but I watch all your videos. You know, I was like, well, what's what's up next? What's the Senate stuff? I have no idea. But one one thing that jumped out at me in in the stream so far was this. I don't know if you made the point in your commentary so far. I know it was said today that there is this kind of general push of kind of the left ish kind of agenda that said that you go to school and you do all these things. And then, you know, how that class kind of gotten shaken up. And all of a sudden that's we're in a place where we don't know anymore. Like who who's our who shares our our our our handshake? Who's who? Yeah. Who? Who? We are. And that kind of stuff. And on on the one hand, I see that and it's kind of like, well, you know, if there was that structure, it has this one effect over here being orientating. But on the other hand, it maybe have had a little bit of tyranny going on. And so like maybe a good question is in this whole process, like where people didn't feel that they could say and speak their mind and Senate, is that going to just then whoosh and going to create its own backlash? And how do you bring those people and bring everyone along for that ride so that no one and that's that's a hard question. Yeah. How do we get it right for every single person? Because eventually, you know, because you what you said about the family being something that excludes because it's important and it's it's it's its own thing. It's an entity that gives things to some people, not others. So maybe it's an unanswerable question, but it's a it's a. Well, it's it's nobody is a member of Senate unless you're a delegate to a Senate. You are a member of a of a local Christian reformed church where there will be complexity, diversity, nuance. And so you want to have a structure that has enough shape and order to have cohesion and identity, but not too much so that you have tyranny. And basically what the Christian reformed church had before was the most part of Don't Ask, Don't Tell. I will tell you, I know for a fact that that deacon from Neeland was not the first gay deacon in the Christian reformed church. It's just that when it happened, everybody at the local level knew about it. They didn't run anything up the flagpole. And they said, we know you, we trust you. This is what we're going to do. We've got issues with this. But see, with that personal relationship, you could sort of manage some of this complexity. And that's where rules tend to get bent locally. But as long as it's sort of within a framework, you can live with it. We had this with women in church office. So women before the fight about women in church office in the 70s, 80s and 90s, women are doing all kinds of things. And then suddenly when this conflict comes up, then suddenly certain churches start to stop women from doing stuff that they had always done before. And so these conflicts have this nature. And so part of that is why you have, I mean, Catholics will call it subsidiarity, but you have authority at different levels so that you can have exceptions and rules. Because that's what you need. You need exceptions and rules. And you have to figure out how to make that work in a way that is true to the whole body. And part of the problem of a conflict like this is it's harder to do that. So, yeah, yeah, yeah. It's interesting because, like I said, it's definitely a third party thing. I think I told you out at the conference, I had never heard of the Christian Reformed Church or anything like that whatsoever. And so it's like it is an interesting kind of it did. It is another interesting point that was brought up as how even though it's this, you know, it's all these people coming from different places, different churches. You really feel like, like you said, that there's like this, it's even though there's like this, like you have the committees decide making decisions. It's this really for being broadcast for all to see on YouTube. It is this really intimate thing, because then all of a sudden this is just kind of put out on on YouTube. And, you know, there's there's maybe like a little bit of for some people that would say that like, you know, maybe this is isn't such a great idea to have this broadcast. It's almost like you're kind of Aaron laundry, Aaron dirty laundry. So that doesn't that doesn't help anyone feel any more connected. But maybe it's just like, well, we're kind of used to kind of the the the we're used to set and we're used to the the the the mind control that affects us all each day. And we're used to seeing all kinds of things through these screens. And so seeing controversy through the screen, especially post hoc away from the thing, you can immediately other people and say, oh, well, the only reason why so and so said that was because of the. Whatever. And so, yeah, it's all it's all very interesting. Yeah. Well, thank you, Isaac. Grim, one of my favorite YouTubers. Hello and welcome. Welcome. You said the existential battle and I'm clinging to that real tight. I don't know if anybody's familiar with the concept of fifth generation warfare. So let me give you another one that might not make sense and call it spiritual kayfabe. It's not insignificant that the oh, what is being affirmed? Let's let's just say for for the purposes of this discussion, it's a pride affirming or not. Are we going to affirm the pride? And that's a thing that's on flags that bringing up a nations across the world on our White House. This I think the significance of what's happening here, if you look at it only at like these people are deciding what to do with their church is you're at the wrong level of the kayfabe. This is probably part of the crucifixion of Christianity again, because patterns and that that they pulled it out as something to to enrage their global like global rage bait. Look how they're doing in the CRC church out on CNN is not at all insignificant. And I hope you guys realize that God loves us all. Thanks, Grant. He's gone already. All right. Now it's just us. I should probably land the plane here and bring this to a close. I don't know if any of you have any last words you'd like to say. Oh, you're muted, Andrew. I still can't hear you. We heard you before. No, still can't hear you. Oh, technology. No, can't hear you now. No. Yeah, probably say same demon that fiddle with my Wi Fi. That's right. That's right. No, can't hear you. Well, anyway, maybe we'll we'll we'll Federechi says he's so tempted to jump in. That's because we have absolutely no idea of any of his opinions about any of these things. Otherwise, I'm going to I'm going to close the live stream and thank you all for coming. And now, oh, yeah, we hear you now. Oh, there is. All right. Yeah, Paul, I really can't hit enough about and I've seen your videos. So I know you're aware of it. Something happened. Jordan Peterson and I'm going to miss all the names. There's another one that makes up with Paul VanderKlaai, then black, you know, it's the it's our awakening from the meaning crisis. Verveki, Verveki, something happened, something nearly magical. If you're Christian, you're allowed to say the Holy Spirit moved, you know, something moved when that series of people I can't bring to mind. But I've I've heard you speak about that's why I know that you know about it. There's there is a series of voices and people like me know about them because the YouTube recommendation algorithm ran out of stuff to show me. You know, it's so funny because I'd be getting your videos and I'd be getting World War One videos for some reason. YouTube is convinced I needed to learn about World War One. Which was awesome, by the way, but no, my so I had a couple of questions and for this group, especially you, Paul, what I'm really interested in is the role of women, which from a I know like, wait a minute, you're Roman Catholic. Don't talk to me about role of women. And going back to that priest that I mentioned, he did a great job of answering that question. It's like, oh, excuse me, there's all of these holy orders for women. Plus, there is the calling of being a mother, you know, you know, so that, you know, I'm wondering in CRC in CRC before the the halfway point, you know, the halfway point, you know, the halfway point, you know, the halfway point, the halfway house that you guys ended up with on some churches can have women and some don't. All churches can have women. It's just whether or not they can be in office. Okay. So, is there an equivalent to like the Holy Roman or the Roman Catholic Church's holy orders for women, is there something that they're supposed to be, you know, if they're feeling a religious calling that that's what it gets transmitted into officially now. Okay. Yeah, this is a no win. So, I'll go on. I'll go on. Okay. Officially, no, but Johanna was a pioneering missionary in Nigeria. So, what you'd see was that women, women did all kinds of things. Women led in all kinds of ways. And this is this is part of the problem when everybody looks part of modernity is that suddenly everybody is looking at one thing in in sort of a mechanistic corporate way and saying this is the only thing that matters. And the truth was that in a broad community, there's all different kinds of power. In fact, I was, you know, I was working on my sermon this week, which is on First Corinthians 13, and I was trying to, I was, I was using AI to get some pictures of motherly love. And I thought, I'm just cooking up a Madonna and child here picture. And, you know, part of what's been good for me over the last few years and getting to know more Roman Catholics and doing all this work on symbolism is is recognizing that cultures are massive things that manage to express these archetypal needs in a variety of ways that tend to be fairly perennial around the world. And, you know, I think I probably grew up with a lot of prejudice against Roman Catholics and, oh, they worship Mary. And it's like, and if you talk to Catholics, they're like, that's not really fair. That's not what we do. We don't really worship Mary. We venerate Mary. And, you know, then, then you begin to learn, oh, okay, I, and now I have more appreciation for how Mary functions in the Roman Catholic imaginary, because here, here is a, here is an ideal woman and her child, even though I mean, these things are enormously complex because you know, the Protestant sort of, part of Protestant sort of elevated the family mother. And in Roman Catholicism, you had the Virgin Mary. You have a woman who's perpetually a virgin and she's sitting with her child on her lap. What's that about? So it's just managing these things in different ways. So it's pretty cool. Wow, thanks for that. Yeah, that's still one question I need to round back to a Catholic priest because I don't have that one nailed down. I've got questions. So another one is, it seems like for, it seems like the weakness or a problem that Protestants run up against over and over again is the schism thing. And it seems like CRC is heading towards a schism. I think it's not fashionable to ever say schism now. But I'm wondering, yeah, yeah, exactly. But is there a church governance structure that allows for there to be like a CRC core and then a CRC adjacent? I wouldn't be surprised if we develop one in the next few years because Protestants have used structure in to do things differently than the Catholic Church. The Catholics have a ton of diversity within a structure. And so, but you still have priests that obviously feel well within their rights to tell the Pope to go jump in the lake. So, okay, so you're all in a structure, but how does that work? And so in a lot of ways Protestant churches are working in a different way and they're modulating and dealing with pluralities via structure rather than some of the other ways that the Roman Catholic churches do. So, yeah, Protestant schism is a problem and it's been a problem for a long time. And it's, it isn't ending, but it's helpful to remember that you have the Arian Church and the Catholic Church, you have the Donatus Church and the Catholic Church. I mean, one of the impressive things about the Catholic Church is they've endured, but you've also got all the Orthodox churches and they've got their national expressions. It's just enormously complex. But yeah, yeah, I, my vision for what I want to see the Christian-informed church do is figure out how to have an affirming and a traditional Christian-informed church sort of next to each other that clergy and pastors and members can swap beneath. To what degree can they share institutions that would have to be negotiated and worked out, but you're definitely going to have two different synods. And it might be that the groups then sort of go like this over time. But again, we're still one family and I don't want to say goodbye to my affirming friends. Yeah, that sounds awesome compared to this A versus B pick one only. Yeah. We'll see. We'll see if we can get there. Jacob Federechi is going to have opinions about that though. And they won't be expressed with nuance. They'll be expressed with passion. Excuse me, I always express things with nuance. And passion. It's not one or the other. It's both and. Nuance is incredibly important to me. But that doesn't mean that once you look at the nuance, you don't actually have a position. Nuance is not the opposite of actually believing what you believe. True. It's not the opposite of conviction. So two things. One, Paul DeBreeze needs to step up and start talking to people. And if he doesn't, I am going to put him on blast. Well, I don't understand put him on blast. What does that mean? So you put somebody on blast by calling them out on the internet. Well, it's kind of like I put you on blast for a while with my Paul VanderKlaas fired stuff. Why not talk to him? I would love to talk to him. Okay. He is welcome to come talk to me. But if he doesn't talk to anybody, I'm going to put him on blast. Mohammed won't go to the mountain. The mountain will come to Mohammed. Talk to him. I am willing to talk to him. What makes you think he's willing to talk to me? He would probably talk to me. Would you like me to approach Paul and see if you'd like to come on and talk about it? It's up to him, but it seems to me he needs to take responsibility and actually answer questions that people legitimately have. He didn't in any way break any rules of Senate in what he did. Everything he did was perfectly within his rights. Oh, well, I guess then if you're perfectly within your rights, then I guess he's done that. I would love to have Paul come on and talk. I've known Paul for years. It would be great to sit down and talk with him, do a full-fledged Randall's conversation. You know, everything, yeah, it's the complexities of leadership. I think he's not going to have that kind of responsibility. You use it and people are going to have opinions about it. He's not unused to that. And I think he should. I am surprised he hasn't put out a statement yet. The thing is that this little corner now maybe because of the videos that I've done about Senate, we've got a little bit more CRC visibility. But for the most part, we're, I don't know how much we're on the radar with. I mean, I think Paul probably knows what I'm doing, but I wouldn't be able to put him on blast if I did not have the audience that I do. Thanks to you, Paul. I have to go back to class. But I just have to reiterate the comment I made in the comments. It has been really, really weird for me to see Christians take their straw man of Judaism and profess it as their faith. I don't know what you mean by that. So you talk about baptism being like circumcision. And then you have this idea of circumcision being salvation. And then you have people come and talk about how, oh, well, once you're baptized, once saved, always saved. And it's like circumcision. Now I understand kind of like Paul, like Paul of Tarsus, his criticisms of supposed Judaism is taken by Christians as like actual Judaism. And they try to reconcile their faith with it in a way where like baptism becomes perfectly what we as Jews do, like the heresy of believing, oh, you're sat, you're, you're, you're circumcised. So I guess that's it. And somebody is not circumcised. God hates him. It's just mind blowing to me to experience somebody professing a straw man of my faith as part of their faith. Well, yeah, well, it's part of you only know what you know. And so you're gonna have to give people a little bit of grace for their ignorance. And there's a it's a big world out there. And just like trying to get your mind around all the variations and nuances and intricacies of Christianity. And, you know, one of the things that you've taught me, Jacob, is, yeah, I mean, I've learned a ton from you. But if I talk to Chazzy or if I talk to Yosef, they've got differences with you, too, on how they see this stuff. Oh, public service. Oh, what, what, what, what, what? Here we go. Jacob's birthday is Wednesday next week. So are you gonna have a special birthday live stream, Jacob? If I do, it'll be on my Hebrew birthday, CW weeks. It won't be on my secular birthday. Oh, now we have to have two birthdays, too. Oh, you religious people. I'm going to close down the stream. Thank you for coming on, Andrew. Great to meet you. Thank you for coming on, Jacob. Always, always, always a pleasure to talk to you, Jacob. You always bring such interesting things into my life. So thank all of you for joining us. Take care. Yeah, thanks. Stay the course.