https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sANRgWpXvTI

 Anyway, hi, this is Paul and I've got Esther on the channel today. And to me, that's always a fun time because Esther, I probably have more, I have more DM back and forth with you in the Twitter DM than anybody else, not even close. Esther is always sending me good stuff. Oh, did you catch this tweet? Did you read this article? This is my thoughts about this. This is what's going on with this person. And so Esther has been a conversation partner pretty much right from when I started on YouTube with the Jordan Peterson stuff. And you can find Esther's stuff on various blogs. And are you going to get in Substack? I mean, you're going to do that instead of Pathios or what are you thinking? I don't know. I mean, Substack is what all the cool kids are doing. I don't know if I'm a cool enough kid yet to do that. The Pathios is a mixed, it has its pros and cons. It has reach, which Substack doesn't quite have. And also I like free content. I don't like people having to pay to read my stuff, but I could always just make it free. So thinking about it, mowing different things. So Esther also has a chapter in, let's see, I should have the book here somewhere. This book, The Myth and Meaning of Jordan Peterson, which Ron Dart, who's been on the channel a number of times, Ron edited. So Esther has a chapter in there. Esther's followed the Jordan Peterson thing quite closely. But where do you want to start today, Esther? There's been a lot going on. And what's up at the top of your salience hierarchy right now? And we'll see where we go from there. Well, so one of the most recent things that just came out that I wrote, I actually wrote it a couple months ago, but my friend Owen Strand, who's kind of a bigwig, it's in a certain kind of conservative evangelical tribe, approached me and asked me to do a profile of Douglas Murray for a new magazine that he has called Permanent Things. And I'd done something more generally IDW related for him before. So I wrote that and was really proud of it. I just really, really enjoyed getting to highlight elements of Douglas's work that I find really interesting but most people don't talk about as much, that don't get kind of hit in his press junket interviews where you can always predict exactly what he's going to say. But because I've actually read really widely and I know all these different kind of facets of his stuff, I was able to pull that out and pull it together. And Douglas actually retweeted it, which was nice. Very, very kind of him. Well, you've been a big pusher of Douglas Murray. I know she, Esther, as always, you need more Douglas Murray on your channel. Do more Douglas Murray. And he just has never really, you know, I've looked at his Madness of the Crowds and his other book and, you know, I have appreciation and he's a tremendously skilled writer. And, you know, he's so witty. He's just got such a sharp wit. But what about him do you think is besides some of the obvious things? Yeah, he's a sharp wit. He's a clever writer. He's as obviously as a gay man. In some ways, he can push on this stuff in ways that I can't, let's say. But what about his work is so important, do you think? Yeah, the problem with Douglas is that, so like some of some of his best stuff is like buried treasure. Like you kind of have to be really going back through the archives of things he's written and his background and stuff to kind of turn over these gems and start to form a more complete picture than the super witty guy who writes about woke stuff, you know. So you see bits of it in The Strange Death of Europe, I think. I actually prefer that book to The Madness of Crowds. But I mean, I think partly what attracts me to Douglas, I mean, it's also part of what attracted me to Jordan Peterson, which is that I think he embodies a kind of older form of humanism, which I which I talk about a lot. But what I mean by that is a very humane view of mankind and history. And one of the things that Douglas has written about quite a bit, but he's never put it between covers, so people don't really touch on it much. But he's written quite a bit about euthanasia and suicide, assisted suicide and life, life issues. And he comes at it from a British perspective. And so it's a little alien from the American perspective. I mean, when when American conservatives and Christians talk about life, pro-life, pro-choice, I mean, these these these tribal lines are drawn in certain ways with with certain focal points and hot button issues. So it could be a little hard for people to kind of get into a British writer's perspective on that, because so many things that are hot button issues in America are really not so much in the UK, you know, like so many ships have already sailed, right? Like there is no pro-life struggle back and forth. It's not something that politicians talk about. And there can also be a tendency, there can be a tendency in English culture when it comes to to end of life, to suicide, kind of an old Roman perspective, that it's better to choose the time of your death and to die with with dignity than to be reduced to being old and decrepit and helpless. So Douglas really has fascinated me in his writing on that topic because he takes a much more life affirming view saying I believe that life is actually valuable even if. Even at the worst moment, even in the weakest moment, I want to affirm like Peterson affirms that there could be meaning in that. And he'll draw on literature, on Shakespeare, on a moment at King Weir when a man, a man's son stops him from committing suicide. And the last moments of his life, he discovers everything, you know. And he was he was arguing about this with a guy who was pro-suicide and and Douglas was trying to say, no, like, I don't think our bodies are actually our own. I don't think that we have the right necessarily to make that choice. And it almost sounds like C.S. Lewis a little bit. Almost echoes things that Lewis has said. And so that's just like one one element. And then I think also I'm just in general very fascinated by figures who are haunted by faith and Christianity. So Roger Scruton might be another example of this. But this sad kind of deconstruction story of having grown up in the church and being terrified by what he thought was the pulling back of the curtain and realizing there was nothing there. But that now it's like he keeps kind of wandering back and he'll and he'll go to Nigeria. It's a personal risk, you know, and he'll encounter people who are living out their faith in this incredibly stark, authentic manner. And it just hits him like the, you know, like for Vakey's piece, the sort of the participatory. I mean, these are not analytical or intellectual people. They're just living out their faith. And Douglas is sort of attracted to that. I can really I can feel it in him. It's almost it's like a moth to a flame, you know. And he it's like he's longing for that, but he's trapped in this kind of arid post-Christian UK European West. But it's like he catches a bit of it when he when he hangs out with people in the Middle East or people in Africa who are actually under fire for their faith. But he can't get there himself. And so there's something really compelling and haunting to me about that. That's interesting. That's really helpful. I, you know, I haven't read Murray anywhere near as deeply as you have or paid as much attention to him, but that that that helps me understand your your fascination with him. Well, you know, one of the one of the conversations, you know, we all sort of imagine, oh, I'd like to see these two people talk. And how do you think a conversation between Douglas Murray and Tom Holland would go? I think they would agree on a lot. You know, of course, you'd have to get past these kinds of conversations. They always take their time to unfold that generally just as they're getting really interesting, it's time for it's time for things to wrap up. So this is why I like the long form dialogue much, much better. But, you know, I think I think Tom might. Tom would be careful, you know, I mean, Tom's Tom's not certainly not like a missionary for Christianity because he himself is in such a tentative position. Although he's been on he's been on Justin a lot. I mean, Tom, Tom, Tom in his. Tom has been doing interesting things on that anyway. Keep going, keep going. I shouldn't interrupt. I think I think Tom might. Tom might ask Douglas. What he would think about about leaning into the story or surgery to the story, the way that Tom talks about. And Douglas would probably say that he sees the appeal in it that, you know, he. Wouldn't fault Tom at all for doing it. He can understand why, but he would just say. I just can't. It's just not it's not really going to work for me. It would probably be something similar to what he said in our dialogue when when Justin Justin always pops the question, you know, the way he does. He does. What we take for you, Douglas. It's so gentlemanly, Justin, but he's always, you know. And I mean, what I appreciated, I appreciate so many things about about that conversation, but I appreciated how Douglas was very careful to say. That he didn't feel like it was his intellectual integrity that he would be giving up if he were to become a Christian. He was like, I'm not saying that. I know some people will say that, but that genuinely is not what it is for me. That I feel like the only way to. You know, to be intellectually complete would be to not become a Christian. And then I'm kind of thinking. Yeah, I mean, I can I can I can see that. I could see why. And I think also Tom and Douglas would share this year's this year, maybe the same fears. Maybe the same fears that that we're losing something that we're kind of on the edge that the center can't hold, you know, to quote the poem. So then it would kind of come to a well, what do we do now? It's like, well, and you've kind of touched on this in some of your videos. I think Tom, I think Tom is closer. Tom is closer to. To getting over the edge, but he's he's he's not there yet. And I mean, the way I've been thinking about it is that Tom needs a good marriage counselor between the two different parts of himself. That's really clever. But also, I mean, I think that's a good point. But also, I mean, Tom's not gay. I mean, we just say that. OK, I mean, there's there's so many there's so much there with the gay thing, which certainly as you've you've very astutely pointed out, and I would completely agree with you. That does not mean that Douglas is in a hurry to run into the arms of a gay affirming church. In fact, I think Douglas probably with the kind of integrity that we would expect of him would say, oh, stop it. Oh, come on. It's like, you know, you don't really I've I've read Romans one, you know, like, you know. So so I like that that's not really going to be like, oh, OK, well, we'll put up a rainbow flag. Is that going to? Well, no, not really. You know, but anyway. Now, that's that's I had a conversation yesterday with someone from it was we didn't have the conversation on the Discord server, the Bridges of Meaning Discord server, but we he got one of the rando slots and we did a conversation and we recorded it. Now I'm putting pressure on him because I thought it was a really good conversation. And but of course, I always tell people, you know, you can listen to it first. And I will I will not post it without your permission. There's no question about that. But now I get to kneel him because he he is someone who didn't grow up in the church but has, you know, sort of was swept up in the the Jordan Peterson thing. And so, you know, came to the Bridges of Meaning Discord server, watched my videos. And he, you know, obviously there's a there's a heavy Christian contingent on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server, sometimes too heavy. And, you know, so I was talking to him about, well, what's, you know, let's talk about the church and let's talk about why you because he's, you know, some of the people on the Discord server are COVID is always a complexity, but are going to church or are sort of getting closer to the church. And this individual, this individual isn't so far. And, you know, he talked about he says, you know, I, I sometimes think we sort of need a, you know, kind of a 50 percent, a halfway. And I got a ton of thoughts about that idea. But, you know, when I look at when I look at Murray and I look at Holland, that's sort of where they're at, you know, not necessarily identifying with them. That's a little distinct from Peterson, who, you know, lying pastors, I think will I think will sooner see Murray and and Tom Holland sneaking into church. And that that partly has to do also with the UK culture versus North America. And of course, Canada is different from the United States. So. Right. At this, I mean, I should I should say to what why why Murray particular appeals to me in a sense, I, I understand Murray really well, because in a way we come from the same tribe as far as our our church background, because I grew up in the Anglican Church. He grew up in the Anglican Church. So all the all the language of liturgy at the, you know, like the King James Bible and the Book of Common Prayer and all this stuff that's just in his blood, like, you know, it's part of his frame, you know, even though now he's an atheist, he still carries all that stuff with him. I carry all that with me as well. And so Peterson didn't have that growing up in the United Church of Canada. He just had this kind of, you know, boring nominalist going through the motions so Peterson never really understood the appeal of church. You know, he never said appeal. Yeah, right. He there was well, because there was there were no aesthetics for him to latch on to, you know, there was none none of that none of that power of the language and the beauty to stir the soul that Murray knew and Holland knew. And so they're still haunted by that in a way that Peterson isn't. He just doesn't doesn't understand it, you know. Oh, it's it's boy, this stuff gets this stuff gets complex because of course, I mean, Tom has talked about Tom Holland has talked about the, you know, the dinosaur issue. And when did Murray I mean, I don't know Murray's story as well. When did he sort of divorce from the church? Was he in it longer? That's a good question. I think they were about of an age when they kind of officially made their break. But but with Murray and I mean, it's it's funny because even though in a way he's culturally very, you know, alien to the American experience, there's a lot of elements in there that kind of sound like stuff, Rhett and Link and all these other, you know, deconstruction people are saying. But when he was in high school, I, you know, I get the suppression of a very, very intense nerdy high school kid with whom I probably would have been thick as thieves if we'd been friends together. But, you know, that he was just devouring all kinds of books on his own and going to bookshops and libraries and grabbing whatever he could find. And he actually landed on like some old higher criticism, like 19th century stuff, like not even I mean, it wasn't like the newer stuff that's out now. But he just kind of sat down. It was like trying to kind of wrestle his way through these really big, long, thick books. And he freaked out because it seemed like, oh, my gosh, they're they've they figured it out. They figured out that the Bible, I can't actually trust the Bible and these texts are da da da. So that's when he was like 1516. And so then he said he stopped reading because it was just like too scary and he didn't want to think about it. He was just like, I'm just going to go back and keep kind of going through the motions because this this scares me too much. But, you know, it just kind of ate away at him as he as he got into college and then came out as gay around like 22, which obviously played it to it. He's like, well, hey, you know, the Old Testament, it says you should stone gays. And so that seems obviously immoral. And I don't see how the Bible is going to be a guide to to moral living and in the West today and that kind of thing. And and he said that it was actually studying Islam and the providence of the Koran that was like the straw that kind of broke the camel's back for him because he was like, I mean, I don't think that the Muslims guy heard voices. So why am I still sort of clinging on to Christianity? If Mohammed didn't hear voices, why do I think my guy did? And he felt like he was applying a double standard, which he couldn't in honesty and integrity keep up. And so he kind of publicly kept it up for like another year or so. And when the spectator did a survey like how many of our writers believe in the virgin birth, he said, yes, yes, I believe I do believe in the virgin birth because it seems like, you know, why why why go haves either you believe it all or you don't believe any of it. So he said that. But then a year later, he did a coming out piece where he said, I lied to this newspaper a year ago when I said I believed in the virgin birth. I actually in my heart really didn't believe it. But I said it because I was still in this in between phase. But now I can't do this anymore. I have to I have to come out and say publicly that I'm that I'm an atheist. And then he went into some of the history I just gave in studying Islam and that kind of thing. But what was interesting is that he even though he was friends, he was really good friends with Christopher Hitchens and some of those new atheist guys. But it's like he kind of felt like they had done all of the work as as new atheists, like kind of putting Christianity to bed. And he was not going to go after Islam. So then that was the trajectory that his career took that he didn't become a professional atheist in the same way that they did. He became a political figure and that that took its took its course. But so I mean, that's that's kind of his story. It's a sort of classically Victorian story. And I mean, if you read about, I've read quite a bit about 19th century crisis of doubt, crisis of faith. And it feels it's very Dover Beach, the melancholy bong withdrawing roar, where you just feel like, well, it's over. It's just can't you can't you can't go back. And of course, I'm over here going, yes, you totally can. You totally can. But he doesn't think he can. And so that, you know, it's very, very. Yeah, it's it's sad. It's a sad, sad story. Of course, Lewis, you know, made his way back. And Lewis was living in the 19th century, unlike the rest of these guys. And barely. But yeah, barely. But, you know, I was I was thinking about who was I thinking about this morning? It wasn't Lewis. It was someone more recent. But this this this echoing meaning crisis that we see and, you know, Lewis's. It's it's interesting. It's interesting to me the way Lewis and Tolkien just seem to endure in this space, how they oh, I remember what I was thinking about. Have you ever read Shantung Compound by Langdon Gilkey? No, and I just I put it on my list when I watched your latest video. But that looks like the kind of thing I should should read. So yeah, that'll be a little tasty snack for you. It's a it's a it's a very fast read. I love that kind of thing. Yeah. Oh, yeah. It's very engaging. And Gilkey is interesting in that, of course, he's he's an American of sort of East Coast liberal Christian establishment. But just just observing, observing what he did in that compound. I read that book and thought, wow, we're the Catholics and the Protestants and the fundamentalist missionaries versus the liberal missionaries. Of course, I haven't posted my my conversation with Byrne Power yet. Byrne Byrne kind of wants me to post it a little later in the month. I don't know if we'll be able to hold back so long. But there's just there's just so many moving pieces to this thing. And it's, you know, I've never been to the UK. I don't know much about the UK in most of what I'm learning in terms of culture and characters are now through conversations on the discord or back and forth on Twitter or Glenn. And it's it's, you know, watching Tom, you know, because I've watched Tom more closely than I've watched Douglas Murray. It's it's interesting how there there is a sort of a redux happening with these guys with respect to Lewis is a funny saint for evangelicals in a lot of ways. You know, he had a his his how how he got how he got into his relationship with Joy Davidman. Hardly a nice clean narrative. His you know, he's got a lot of views that many evangelicals in the United States would not be terribly not be terribly comfortable with. But yet he sort of comes roaring into this space as an as an odd saint and a teacher. And, you know, I'm, I'm, you know, I think you especially, you know, always keeping Douglas Murray in front of me and now watching Tom Holland, it's going to be very interesting to see what happens in the UK with respect to the church and religion. And again, another thing just listening to you a minute ago, noting the the commonality of sort of the what what, you know, being confronted with Islam sort of becomes like a pail of cold water. And and we're just sort of, we're just sort of drifting off into post-Christian, you know, nostalgia, and we like the buildings, and maybe we'll, we'll sneak into a church for even song. And, you know, we we don't really care. I mean, it's almost like the royalty, you know, we, we love to snip at it and be snide about it, but don't really want to get rid of it necessarily. As long as it doesn't cost too much, we'll leave it hanging around. And then Islam comes onto the fore and it's like, Oh, oh, and and of course, Tom Holland sort of roaring in with dominions saying, you know, with it with an Islamist saying, well, you know, hey, pick on your own religion. It's like, okay, and doing the spade work and finding himself going in some different directions. And then only, okay, now that I've, now that I've read this stuff, and talked about this stuff and learned this stuff, where does it go in my life? And then listening to him, I thought the conversation he did with Justin Briarley, and I forget who the third party was there about the pandemic. That was other guys. Yeah. Yeah. And I thought Tom Hollins, Tom Hollins, he's just an interesting guy anyway, because I follow him on Twitter and he is a fun guy and he comes through in his writing, but his, his take on the church and the pandemic has been fascinating and sort of a, a deep longing for re-enchantment. Yes. And I mean, he, he and Douglas were like, they were like practically tag teaming each other all through the spring, like writing variations on the same article, severely burning the C of V, the bishops. And, and Douglas wrote an especially heartbreaking piece about this, this old church, St. Margaret's, which has got all this history attached to it and his family church. And then the building closed because of the pandemic. And, and Douglas was just so heartbroken and angry about this because, you know, the way he put it is I, I had, I thought, well, people might leave the church, but the church wouldn't leave the people or would it, you know? And he talked about, there was this, we had this community, there were like maybe 300 people there. They came from like a variety of different backgrounds and stuff, but they, they were sitting next to each other in pews and forming bonds. And now it's like just gone, just dispersed. And it was so, so sad. And I think there's a, there's like a mingled sadness and contempt there, like just the impotence of, of the church of England. And back to Islam, Douglas especially will kind of make this contrast when he'll talk about friends of his, he knows, like he'll talk about the woman who's at a club drinking and suddenly realizes that her life doesn't have any meaning. Well, what's she going to do now? What's she going to find? Well, increasingly those people are, are fighting Islam because Islam comes in and David Nasser coming out of a Muslim background will, will bring that in too. And Islam is tough and muscular and it has these, these regulations and it's sort of compelling. It offers a higher purpose. So a lot of these young people will kind of drift towards that. And Douglas will say, there's no voice like that. There's, there's nothing similarly compelling on offer from Christianity in the UK or Europe today. And so that's not where they're drifting. Instead, they're drifting to these other, you know, much more dangerous things. Well, what's happening with, we've got two Americans talking about Europe, but where is, again, but, you know, I think about Tom Hollins. He's mentioned this in a number of, because I follow, I follow Holland, not quite as closely as I follow Peterson, but I follow Holland fairly closely. I mean, he's mentioned the, the experience he had watching the Pope stand next to an icon in a sealed off, you know, St. Peter's square. And, and then of course, Holland hearkening back to, I think it was Thomas Beckett and another, and other pandemics, of course, because, because Tom would know these things. And, and, but just, you know, you, you would think a lot of the, a number of the, a number of the people I'm getting to know on the discord server are European Roman Catholics from, you know, from Germany. And, and because, you know, people often don't recognize that there are a lot of Roman Catholics in Germany and the Netherlands and England and some of these spaces that we, we tend to associate with Protestantism, but the Roman Catholic Church was never fully exercised for many of these places. And when one would imagine that if the, if the Anglican Church is weak, well, where are the Catholics? But, but very quickly you get the sense that these in Europe, the, the religion, the religious in the, in the secular definition of religious, the small religion, the small our religion, that plays quite a bit differently in Europe, partly due to the long history. Whereas here in the States, religion is, is much more of a modern enterprise in terms of these are, these are voluntary, these are voluntary communities. There's no state support. You, your religion is either going to live or die on the vibrancy of its, of those who embrace it. It's not going to linger in the buildings and the stories and the history like it will in Europe. Yeah. And then Rod Dreher story is so instructive and interesting to see like his, his tracing his journey out of the church. And it, I mean, it's interesting to me that Tom was, I mean, I understand why Tom was struck by that, that image of Francis. I mean, it's a very compelling picture, certainly, but the grass is not necessarily greener. And if you, if you talk to a lot of Catholics, both European and American, there's a great deal of, of Sturm und Drang about Francis and just like divisions within the church. And sometimes I'll hear a Protestant go, Oh, I'm thinking maybe becoming Catholic. Like, I just love the unity. I'm like, unity. I'm like, no, no, no, no, no, no, let me, let me explain. And like, somebody on Twitter said, I'm old enough to remember when the question is the Pope Catholic was rhetorical, you know? So, I mean, I get it, but at the same time, there's way more layers under, under the surface of all this stuff, you know? Well, you've written recently too about deconstruction and I've touched on it on my channel. Where, because we've had our own, you know, the, in the evangelical churches, there've been many, you know, Rhett and Link, they often seem to be people from Christian rock bands, at least those are the ones that, that make the news. So it's interesting, let's say comparing this to Europe, which let's say as a massively as cultures in different ways deconstructed. And again, with the, with the fire in Notre Dame, that was an interesting moment, I think, because suddenly you had this sense, this maybe Tom Holland moment when are, are we or aren't we, or why do I care if that building's burning or why is it not just a building? Here in, in many ways in Protestant land in the U.S. or at least in North America where religion is this, it's got to be a lifestyle choice. It's not something you can inherit. And of course, you've got deeply Protestant revivalist strains within that. If you're not living your religion consciously, intentionally, purposely, you don't possess it. And so obviously the deconstructions you have to come out saying, you know, I, you listen to Rhett and Link and they all, you know, they pretty much say, I, I felt, I felt disingenuous unless I would do a video making sure everybody knew I wasn't one of them anymore. It's like, oh, that's interesting. So yeah. So, so what do you, what do you think about that? So you're asking, what do I think specifically about what's going on with these deconstructions and why? The American deconstruction template. But that's, but that's of course happening while we've got, I mean, Anthony, Anthony Brandt on Twitter, he probably caught it, had tweeted something about Jordan Peterson. And of course I jumped on that and said, you know, my disgust that the American, so much of the American church and American clergy, that was happening. And they're like, yawn. And I'm thinking, this is, this is one of the biggest things I've seen in my ministry lifetime in North America. And the church is just kind of, well, you know, it's like, act, act. Yeah. Yeah. I know. Although I did note on Twitter, I noticed that he was, he was asking specifically, are there any people with PhDs at the social sciences? Who have that? And I was like, well, why, I mean, why limit it? But I mean, you know, he likes to, he has a little, a little bit of that academic snobbery about it, you know, but, but, but I sure. But downstream of him, people were mentioning, you know, and really fine Christian leaders. But to me, those answers reinforce the point. It's the communication that's lacking. And then Tripp picked up on that and made a good thread of his own that I thought really worked. Yeah. Okay. The American deconstruction story. In the context that we got this American deconstruction story while we've got a Douglas Murray and a Tom Holland feeling the, you know, the haunting of the faith and Jordan Peterson with, you know, gosh, hours we could talk about the complexity of that whole picture. And all of this happening at the same time. Yeah. I think even though there are differences, I do still also see certain certain similarities though. Like I think, I think Douglas is in some sense, victim to some of the same things that, that Rhett and Link are at some of these other guys. And the main sort of commonality that I see is just this, it's just sort of assumed as a matter of course, that there's this friction or tension between religion and science or faith and reason, or, you know, being a good Christian and being a good historian, being a good Christian and being a good scientist. And Holland feels this as well. Like he'll talk about how, oh, like I want so badly to surrender to the story, but then also he's a historian. And so he's thinking, oh, on the one hand, but on the other hand, and it's almost like he feels like he has, he's holding two hats, the, like the would be Christian hat and, and the, the proper modern historian hat. And he's not sure if he can wear those at the same time exactly. So this is a, a sort of assumed rift or sort of assumed friction that's been handed to all of these guys. It's handed to all of them when they're, when they're young, but starting to ask questions. And then they, they encounter this and then they panic, you know, like, like Doug was panicked, like Wright and Blake panicked. They're like, oh no, no, no, no. And now I'm, I'm, I'm like, doomed to be a schizophrenic forever. Unless I, unless I pick a side and jump. And I think Tom is on the verge of maybe picking the Christian side and jumping, even though he still has questions. But these other guys have decided to pick the atheist side and jump. And Wright and Blake even make that analogy. They said, it feels like jumping off the side of a ship into, into an ocean. But I have no choice. Like I have to do that. And it's just, it's, it's, it's sad to me to see because I think it's not true. Now, along with that, you've talked about in your video, when you talk about the real difference between Christians and atheists, it's not that Christians believe in God, but atheists don't believe in God. It's more like, well, you can correct me if I'm wrong here, but it seems like what you're saying is the actual difference is atheists, atheists don't want to worry what's on God's mind. Like, like Eric Weinstein puts it, you know, that, that, that atheists don't want the world to be like that. Like Thomas Nagel puts it, you know, whereas Christians have made their peace with the world being like that. Is that accurate? Yeah. Well, I think that's, I was just thinking that again this morning, listening to someone who, oh, I was listening, I didn't finish it. I was listening to the Guy Sangstock, Jonathan Peugeot conversation this morning. And of course, Guy is, how to categorize Guy. That's really hard in and of itself, but there's a, there's a real, I think there's a, there's a deep fear of tyranny in, in atheist and agnostic circles. And it's a fear of a tyrannical church, and that's probably Protestant post-traumatic stress. It's in generations. But I, you know, when, when I heard, and actually I should be upfront about this, it was, Eric Weinstein was on the Portal Discord server when he, when he said those words. And when he said it, it was like, bang, you know, right there. That's, that's what I've been sort of seeing, but nobody just sort of put it right there. And because there's the, there's the terror, and of course, Lewis, you know, writes about this quite vividly, there's the terror that, that if this is true, you know, the, then, then you're sort of falling into Lewis's trilemma and you're, you're beginning to recognize that if this is true, then there are consequences in terms of my life. Right. And yeah, it was, I forget if it was Redder Link who was saying, if I, if I don't have to believe this, then why would I? So, I mean, like, there's the two pieces of this. There's the, I'm looking for a reason not to believe this, in some sense. Like, I don't, I'm really becoming deeply uncomfortable with believing this because of everything that you just said. But then also trying to, to read around and say, well, but like, if it were really true, then maybe I would have to believe it even though I don't want to. Oh, phew, looks like it's not true. Well, there goes that, you know, and then they, they kind of check, that's like the last thing. But they're trying, I mean, they'd like, I think, and that some atheists, like, really, really offended to hear us say this, like, how dare you imply that I was just looking for a reason not to believe? I'm like, well, I'm sorry. I mean, I think very often that that's true. And I mean, with Douglas in particular, and in all fairness, I know many of the people I talk to, even some of whom at this point tell me I would really like to believe. Yes. I think we should, we should respect the fact that they're not feeling it. And yeah, yeah. I, yeah. And I want to get to that as well. And I mean, people are all different people. No two people are exactly alike, of course. But with the Rhett and Link thing, I do think also, as I got further and further into their videos, they, they kind of shifted, it became a lot of talk about the gay thing, a lot of talk about morality. They actually read my, my Pathéas article, where I, I was, I was like, well, I mean, that's kind of, yeah, that's sort of where the lines are drawn with the gay thing. And Rhett was like, okay, then, you know, so that you've begun getting into some of that with with stuff on your channel, but this idea of niceness, niceness, as opposed to to goodness. Well, the church is so mean to gay people. Okay, what do we mean by mean? It parsing all these, these different things. So I think that ends up looming maybe larger than than anything else, particularly when you get into really personal things like my best friend was gay, my brother was gay, you know, that's when it really, really start hitting at the just the bullseye of this kind of stuff. Well, and, you know, it's so interesting to me, because I, I know, there's a something has happened in the generations with respect to this question. So I know, people who are a little bit older than myself, or another generation older than myself, who were gay, had gay siblings, gay friends, etc, etc. They don't embody that same, they don't embody that same question in the way that it has. And so other things have changed. And to me, the far more interesting questions involved in, in what has changed. And, you know, to get back to the, the question of the sort of Protestantality of American culture, and the performative demand. Part of what's really come out strong in American culture is this, this performativity with, with queerness, and, and, and sort of a non binary sexuality, that there is, you know, and Charles Taylor, you know, gets at this, Julian pointed me back to Charles Taylor's chapter 13, and the secular age. And, you know, I reread that recently. And there's a, there's a funny dynamic that has happened within that sphere. And that's very potent in America. You don't see that so much in someone like, say, Douglas Murray. And, No, in fact, he's pretty brutal about performative queerness. I mean, yeah, comes down really, really hard at that. And it's, it's quite funny, but he just has no, no patience or time for that. Yeah. And so I think that gets into this, I think that's a part of the, a part of the, the performativity of deconstruction that we saw in Rhett and Link, where, you know, it is my, it is now my moral duty to come out and switch my flag. And, and you see that in the gender conversations in America too, now, it's my moral duty to make my, my sexual preferences and appetites a, a public display. And, you know, that's different from Europe, obviously. And, but, but there's, you know, there's deep connectivity in there with respect to, okay, so then what exactly are we talking about when we're talking about religion? You know, in America, religion is something that you do. And in Europe, you know, there's seem to be struggling Holland and Murray are struggling much more religious as an identity and sexuality is an activity. And, you know, the, the conversation between Peugeot and rationality rules, although he's a Brit, you know, you know, identity is identity is sexuality. And it's like, hmm, how, how hard do you really want to push that downstream from let's say second wave feminism? How, how hard do you really want to, how far do you really want to go down that road before you wind up? You wind up basically not being able to maintain any identity at all, especially in your, your, your allergy to order that you fear might become tyranny. So I probably just gave word salad there, but yeah, yeah. Well, and, and this, this, this is a point, um, this point where I disagree with Murray's whole kind of thesis, it matters to crowds because he, he's trying to make the case that the, the rights train, so to speak, the LGBT rights train was pulling nicely and calmly into the station and everything was going swimmingly. And then along came trance and it went off the rails. And now we're in postmodern lava land where we don't even have basic categories of biology anymore. I questioned that history. Um, I really do. And Glenn Scrivener actually independently made the same point in a bit of video commentary. He did, but I don't think that train had a brake system ever at all. Like I, I don't think it was ever going to pull nicely into any station. I think it going off the rails was kind of baked in from, from the beginning, so to speak. That's a, that's a, that's a, that's an interesting point. Now, and well, a lot depends on, okay, what track are they running on? You know, where, where, where does that track go? And, and really where did that track come from? And so did it, you know, did it have to, did it have to go this way? And part of my point that I've, I've tried to make, and I sort of, I haven't done another video on the same-sex stuff again, and I probably should get back to it, sort of got derailed along with a bunch of other things by George Floyd. But the, um, you know, and I, I've long asserted that the, the impetus for, the, the impetus for reconsideration of a traditional sexual ethic in, in the church has at least partly accountable to Jesus' concern for the outcast. Um, and, and that actually gets very interesting in a Peugeotian sphere, where Jonathan Peugeot, I think, nicely talks about the center and the fringe. And, and there's a degree in which you ought not try to banish the fringe, but center and fringe, of course, this grates against our performative egalitarian spirit, the center and the fringe need to be treated differently because the center is different from the fringe. And, um, and so in many ways, the, the impulse to say, hey, look at, look at how we've treated this group of people. That's a deeply Christian, that's a deeply Christian question and a deeply Christian motivation to say, look at how we've treated these people. Right. But yeah, that's your phrase, the Christian Civil War, and, and, and Holland, I mean, that's what Holland's kind of trying to do. He's trying to see if he can kind of re, like, recast or reconstruct Christianity as the, the ultimate form of, of, of, of, of, the ultimate form of humanism, you know, um, which I think that it is, although maybe not for quite all the same reasons, but sure. I mean, in Saudi Arabia, it just throw gaze off a cliff, you know, I don't care. I mean, look at, look at Russia, look at, you know, some, some, some ingenious torture methods for, for, for these people. It's so, uh, right. The whole concept of giving, of giving rights, of giving dignity and whatnot. Well, where's that all even coming from? Well, it's coming from the, the, the Christian, um, seed bed. Well, Esther, I've, I've pestered you and, um, you've been, you've been very good. So let, let's, we can, we can pivot now and, and, and okay, Esther, what's on your list? What, what's on your list of, uh, Well, well, we can, um, I mean, I can, I could try to, to not make this be like, like a, like a hard, hard, I don't think it'll be hard because, I mean, we're, we're often conversing on, on similar things. There's a fair amount of overlap. We can talk about Peterson too, because there's lots of the second wave of Jordan Peterson, will it or won't it, but wherever you want to go. Yeah. Okay. Um, well, I want to, I want to kind of use, use it, using Murray still, but kind of using it to pivot it to some of the larger commentary that you've been making, um, on the whole Peterson Harris, going back to the Peterson Harris dialogues and whatnot. Um, so you see, you were talking a lot about how Harris's idea of God, when he was bullying Peterson and then Peterson broke out his long list of definitions of, of what God is. And here's this like, stop, stop time. That's not, that's not what I'm talking about. That's not what God is or who God is. So you made it, you made a video where you were saying, well, I know why Sam Harris says that he got that idea from Christians. Um, because Christians never taught Sam how to, to look for God in nature. You got that idea watching Christians, I would probably say. Sure, sure. Or watching Christians. And so you were like, well, Sam doesn't know how to look for God or think about God properly because these Christians he's listening to don't, don't really understand that either. And so I was thinking about this when I read, I read this blog post that somebody wrote, I don't know who he is, but he's a doctor. And I think Justin has been having him write stuff on different unbelievable dialogues. So he wrote something on my dialogue with Murray. Um, and he, he got to the part where Justin popped the question, uh, what would it take? And Douglas said, I think I would need to hear a voice, which was, it kind of took us by surprise. It was really just out of left field. Um, and Douglas kind of unpacked what he meant by that. And it was, it was really interesting. And again, he was trying to be really careful not to be flippant or glib about it, which I really appreciated. Um, but then this, this blogger on Pathéas had, I think a really interesting, gracious response to that, which I think intersected with what you were saying, because this blogger was saying, well, I, I hear God's voice every day, just not the way that Douglas is referring to. Um, you know, he said, I hear, I hear the symphony in the cell, you know, the soliloquy at the sunset, the, the whisper in the wind. Um, and, and it's God, I believe God never stopped speaking to us. Um, but it's, it's like the psalmist, the heavens declare, uh, and so he, he said, I think Douglas maybe just doesn't recognize God's elocution. Um, because he's, he's, he's kind of setting this bar, um, so high. So he's kind of missing the quieter, the stiller, smaller voice, which may not, it's, it's not dramatic, like, like the way he spoke through the prophets, but that doesn't mean it's not real. Um, and I wonder if maybe that gets at kind of what you were saying. And yet, I mean, I was thinking reading that guy's blog post, it was a very evangelical blog post in many ways, the guy's clearly, you know, quite standard evangelical Protestant Christian. And so I was thinking, well, I see, I see everything in here that, that Paul was sort of grousing about that he doesn't see. So I guess I would wonder, and I know you haven't read the article yet, but like, what do you feel would still be missing in that, that you're, that you're, you're not seeing? You know, in Fiddler on the Roof, when Tevye asks his wife, do you love me? I suppose I do. And they go back and forth and, you know, I love that song. Tevye, Tevye wants to hear her say it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I think, I think it could be perhaps that now, the thing about, the thing about, um, the thing about courting or tangling or, or wrestling with the Almighty is, um, you know, he does like to play rough. And, you know, just ask Job, um, you know, come on down, I'm tired of this. Won't you come down and face me? All right, Job, I will. So, um, but I, you know, I, I, I can appreciate, there's so many layers to that. I want to hear a voice. And because I think about, one of my favorite things that Andy Crouch ever wrote was called A Testimony in Reverse. And if you Google that Andy Crouch Testimony in Reverse, it was written quite a while ago where he tells the story about how he was in love with someone and, uh, there was a question about a move and he knew that, you know, so he just was begging and pleading with God, you know, like a good evangelical, just, you know, just be clear. And for the first time in his life, he heard an audible voice and, and he decided to disobey the audio. I mean, that's how we are. And I think that both, I think both of those realities are there where on one hand it's Tevye saying, do you love me? And, you know, I just, just say it. And on the other hand, you're that, that other point is exactly right. It's, there's a, there's a story about, there's a story about Mother Teresa that is found in, I forget, it might be in Ragamuffin Gospel, where, I forget the author of that book. He's another interesting dude, but, um, where, where someone comes to Mother Teresa and, and, and says, would you pray for me? And she says, yes. And Mother Teresa herself is another very interesting person, but, um, and she says, yes. And then he says, well, what do you want me to pray for you for? I want you to pray for clarity. And Mother Teresa says, I won't pray for that. And he's like, you know, saints are supposed to be nice. It's like, you don't understand saintliness at all. Um, Mother Teresa was not nice, but she was good. No, no. And, and she was, and she, so she says to him, she says, you know, I'm not going to pray for that because that's not what you need. You need, you need, you need trust. That's what you need. Because, and, and that's exactly what we do, is we imagine that what we're really, what we're really dealing with is a matter of information. And I think the, the constant message of the Bible is that, no, it's not information. It's your heart. And, and, and I think if there's ever an example of that, it's of Jesus, because you would think, okay, Son of God, Son of Man, he would stand up, he'd have exactly the right words to say. And everyone would now start thinking correctly and the world would be fixed. And the point of the story is the Son of God, Son of Man comes and talks in a certain way that was sort of intriguing. And again, Tom Holland's line that I have used, you know, in so many sermons since I heard him say it was, you know, here's a, here's a message that has to be, has to go cross culture and through time. And it has, and this by four different authors, but the Son of Man comes and speaks and we kill him. Well, it's like going back another great Fiddler on the Roof quote, probably my favorite quote, actually. Yenta, the matchmaker is talking to Gold, and she says, Gold, I tell you, if God lived on earth, people would break his windows. It's like, well done there now. I didn't remember that one. Oh, it's fantastic. But no, you're exactly right. And of course, yeah, I completely agree with you that it's a very human, candid, and understandable thing. And this blogger, he gives, he quotes something from the writer Frederick Beekner, who kind of gives this scenario where, where God writes, I exist in the sky every night in different colors, in all different languages, so that everyone in the world could see it and read it. It's like the sort of thing that atheists will say, well, I suppose if God would write, I exist in the sky, then maybe, you know, in the genetic code, the genetic code. Yeah, I know Brett Weinstein gave that so silly. I like Brett, but Brett can be so silly sometimes. Anyway, so that Beekner describes the scenario. And then he goes, now imagine a young man watching this with his father, and the young man turns to his father and he goes, what difference does that make? You know, like, okay, God exists. What then? What now? So this is what we're longing for. We don't merely long to know, okay, there's a being out there, ising, you know, existing. I need to know that he gives a damn, you know, that he's willing to speak to me, me personally, you know. And, and Douglas, when he mentioned that, about hearing a voice, he said that he found it interesting that it's that desiring that sort of thing, giving voice to that desire is something that you could do way more comfortably in Eastern context than in Western context, where he says, you know, if I'm sitting about at Oxford with a bottle of, you know, with a Negroni or whatever, it's like, oh, come off it. Oh, how silly, you know, silliness hearing a voice. And Douglas said, and I want to say, why, why is that so silly? I mean, isn't that, isn't that something that God used to do? And he said, but you wouldn't be thought completely mad if you, if you talked about that in Africa or the Middle East, because that's, that's where there's, there's still a vibrant, natural belief in that sort of thing. And for me, I mean, part of the, ever since I got on the, ever since I got on the YouTube train, which is taking me surprising places, but even though Adam, with his conversation with Jonathan, put it as the title of the video, which I thought was, was appropriate. I mean, what we're really, what I see us really doing is wrestling with, oh, what on earth do we mean by God? Because all of the stated theology says the correct things that God is finally not contained by our categories. God is finally not exhausted by our, our theological models that attempt to bear witness to him, you know, and, and, and if you, if you read the Bible, you will discover, you know, most of the Bible is poetry. And if you throw in narrative, the vast majority of the Bible is poetry and narrative. And then we're, you know, then we want to go all kinds of, we, we want to embrace all sorts of cheats, like, well, God is impersonal. It's like, that's a, that's a dumb idea. Or, or God is a super thing in the sky. It's another dumb idea that even, even a, an honest, credible, engaging with the literature surrounding these three little letters in English is, is going to, it's going to take you in some, it's going to take you to some places you, you might not necessarily think you want to go. And so I, I have a, I have a degree of respect for those who stand at the border and hesitate. That's not, that's, you know, they're, they're, they're exhibiting, they're exhibiting something that others who don't hesitate at all going one way or the other across the border don't have an appreciation for. They're exhibiting something that others who don't hesitate at all going one way or the other across the border don't have an appreciation for. Yeah. But so then, I mean, I think my, going back to the beginning, what I was kind of wondering about is what is it when, when, when you, when you say, well, the Christians never see God in nature. Like what, what is that, what is that thing that's, that's missing, do you think? And I mean, do you think something like what that blogger was saying is closer to what, to what you're looking for or, or what, what's your beef, I guess? T.H. Lerman, who's an anthropologist from Harvard, instead of trying to desperately find some people on the planet who have not somehow been contaminated by this great imperial maw that continues to consume the planet, decided to be an anthropologist at a vineyard church and wrote a book when God talks back. And, you know, I thought the book was deeply respectful and helpful because in some ways it was an attempt for these two worlds to connect. And there, there's just so many cheap shots in, in talking about this Iron Age God and connecting it to modern American Christians, whether they be evangelical or Pentecostal or Roman Catholic or, or even Episcopalian and start talking. S. Those aren't Christians. S. But continue. But continue. Esther. And, and, you know, they're not holding slaves, are they? Why? You know, and at least, at least Brett Weinstein had an appreciation that what actually happens in the church is a moving through time. And, but, but it's easy to, it's easy to see the Christian who, you know, runs into the, runs into the gym with some grateful exasperation. I couldn't find a parking space to make it into my cycling class on time. And I said, Jesus, provide a way. And one opened up and here I am. You know, okay, Sam Harris, fair enough. We're like that sometimes, but there are layers to this that, that the, the, the quick dismissal is, is, but yet the, you know, Christian should ponder the fact that the quick, the quick dismissal was effective. But then there was that tweet that someone tweeted that I first found Sam Harris and he led me to Jordan Peterson and he led me to Vervecky and Peugeot and VanderKlay. And now I'm thinking about going to church. And so I blame Sam Harris. So that brings me back to Lewis that, and what I've seen in the last three years is, is, you know, on my channel, let's say even just with the story of Job, as, as Lewis said, an atheist can't be too careful about their reading. Oh, I gave Job some of that reading and, and he, you know, he's, he's Job is so, so honest. It's what we all love about him. But, you know, he, he's told me things he recommended that, that made me think. And, you know, it's like, no, no, one single thing was the thing, you know, but it's, it's this, it's the slow, the slow accumulation. Maybe I could use that to, maybe I could use Job to help kind of pivot to another question I had, which is, so when you're talking about, when you talk about LARPing, I'd like to, I'd like to know a little more, because I think, I feel like that can be a word or a phrase that fudges. And so, I mean, I'm sure there are a lot of things that, that you would kind of put in that category that, that I would say that, that's all great. I mean, you know, try a church, if it's, try a church, get, you know, talk to Christians, read the Bible, try, try some God, if you're out there style praying, which I, I have no contempt for at all. I think that could be a, a valuable thing. You know, Peterson's sitting on the edge of the bed, you know. I think all of that is, is, is good and, and to be recommended, but I think there's a limit to it because, you know, I, I have a very strong feeling that there are certain things that you, you really should not in good conscience be doing unless, unless you can affirm the whole schmiel, you know. So where, where do you think LARPing runs out, so to speak? And, and I think you're right. You know, Job, Job was invited to partake in communion from his pastor. That's what I'm thinking of. Yeah. And Job said, I'm not ready. You know, we're, Living Stones is, is desperately in need of flesh under 70. And so, you know, one of our- I'll come visit you sometime, Paul. I'll come sit in a pew and be, be under 70. We don't have pews. We're a California church. We have chairs. Okay. Okay. But, but, and so, you know, one of, one of our deacons was kind of leaning on Rick to become a deacon. And first of all, it's like, that's not how we make deacons. And I said, and secondly, he hasn't been baptized yet. And, and Rick has been, gosh, what Rick hasn't given to this church, but Rick is, and you'll probably embarrass him a little bit because he's a very, he's a very quiet person, but he's, you know, he's serious about, and I find this often where a sort of casual familiarity develops within, within the church or within someone who, a family that is deeply participatory within church, that many outside of the church are, have perhaps a bit more wisdom about. And are, and, and, and, and sometimes take some of these things more serious than those of us who, who are familiar and have lived with it and, you know, and, and have, and have been around it don't. So no, your, your point is, your point is, is well made. And, and I think, you know, but this gets back to the conversation that I had with this. He knows exactly who I'm talking about and he's feeling the pressure, but he's not going to bend because he wants to have another conversation where he does it right. And I thought, well, the first one was really good, but anyway, we're, we're, you know, this is, this sort of gets into my estuary word where what's happening in, I see the Jordan Peterson space, the bridges of meaning discord, the meetups, the, is that people are, they, they, they want to hear more. They want to see more. They want to be respected and they want the, their, they want their distance respected. And, and there was, you know, for all of its other issues, you know, that, that was sort of the idea behind Bill Heibel's seeker service that, you know, here's here, people are a little, people are a little skittish. So here we're going to have a place for people to be skittish. Now this stuff gets really complex because we bump into reformational issues in terms of we're going to, so when I was in Australia, I went to Warren Mills church, which is the oldest Anglican church in Melbourne. And, you know, so I partook of communion in the Anglican church and I had to kneel at a rail. And for me, it was like, Oh, here's the, here's the mythical rail that we learned in our Protestant. You're in my territory now, Paul. You're at, this is my stopping ground. Oh yeah. So, so there's, you know, for me, there's even there, there's, this is a very live conversation and we're discovering the meaning we're, we're discovering some of the meaning behind Chesterton's fences. You know, that here's a fence. Oh, well, I don't see the reason for that fence. Oh, but someone at one point saw a reason for that fence enough to put it up. Maybe you should pause and have a little bit of humility and not be so quick to chop it down. So, well, it actually, interestingly, apparently that's so Brett Weinstein, Heather Heying are working on a book that's coming out in spring at there. Like they're all Chester Tony and I'm going, really? Well, well, well, this is interesting. Okay. Exactly the same thought that you did when you, when you saw them, like quoting bong passages of Rod Dreher on their podcast. So a couple of California loop dens quoting from Rod Dreher's latest at lakes. And I mean, like they're from Oregon, they're from Portland, California, but more so. Yeah. Well, right. Right. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, like these are, these are strange times, but I, and I think about, and I think, well, I mean, these things are true. So I suppose it makes sense that if you're, you know, if you're a basically sort of decent, honest person with some modicum of, of intellectual integrity at, at social sense, you might be able to sort of look around and begin drifting towards some of the same true things. You know, well, and I, you know, to get to, let's say to come around to the IDW space, this has been the, I think the IDW space has, has been one of the more culturally interesting spaces that we've seen in terms of atheists, you know, wandering over to Christiany things, political progressives being kicked out of the blue church. I mean, it's, it's been one of the, one of the more dynamic spaces and, you know, I mean, I don't really, I don't spend any time, like, like I don't keep up with any of the apologetics spaces really much at all. I don't really tune into Christian channels, podcasts, things like that. I just, I just don't find it any of it interesting. I mean, even though I might like agree with everything that's said, but there's no, there's no change, you know? And I mean, I think that's what it attracts me to this whole corner, the IDW corners. Things are changing constantly. There's like fresh, there's like new stuff getting thrown out, although sometimes it can stagnate. Like you were pointing out, the Dark Horse podcast has gotten kind of, kind of repetitive and Eric kind of ran out of steam with the portal. And I mean, it's like, once Peterson was gone, they kind of lost their way. They all kind of, they just each had their different things and they couldn't, there's nothing, nothing like holding them together really, you know? So that brings us to the big daddy. Let's, let's talk about Jordan. Okay. Yeah, sure. So Proverbs, what do you think about that? I think it's a safe choice. Well, given what he's been through, that's probably good for him to take a safe choice. Yeah, it's fine. Like, I mean, look, the guys aren't the right to do whatever he damn well pleases. I'm not going to, I'm not going to complain at all. And this, I really, I'll be interested to see with this new book, how personal he gets, whether, whether, cause, cause like you, I found the chapter on his daughter. I mean, initially it wasn't through the book, but through a lecture he gave where he was kind of like giving an overview of the book. And then he got to that part. And that was one of the very first Jordan Peterson videos I ever saw that completely blew me away. And I just, just left me jaw on the floor. Like, Oh my gosh, this is, this guy is a revelation. I, you know, I've never seen anything like this in my life, really, a figure like this. So, so raw and vulnerable. And so I'd be, I'll be interested to see if the new book digs into that kind of thing more. Cause that would be really brave if he did, but it might be, you know, too early. Cause that book started, I mean, maybe his, his, his book to come. Do you think there's going to be another wave like before? What do you think is going to happen? I don't think he, I don't think there will ever be a wave as high as this one. I think he, he may sort of, well, and especially with, with COVID having turned everything upside down, because Peterson thrived on the speaking circuit. That was where his magic really came together. There was some discussion of this in the threads on Twitter this morning, people pointing out that, and like Tripp and Paul Ann Whitener were pointing this out, that it was, it was in his communication, his, his live in person speaking communication that the magic really happened. And now the world has turned upside down with all this. Who knows when, when that kind of a medium or channel for his ideas will really ever return. And I think also, I mean, I don't know, he caught certain political waves, political moments, cultural flashpoints. And I mean, maybe there'll be more of those later, but he always needed some kind of a thing to galvanize, to get going. And then it kept rolling on its own steam. But I don't know that there'll be anything new like that again in the future. But I think he'll just kind of gradually start writing again. And you know, he'll give a lot of zoom seminars, no doubt in future. But I think, I think people will come to see him as a has-been, like, like with other, other figures before him. And it's not going to catch lightning in a bottle again, my instinct. With the choice to do proverbs, I mean, me personally, I was actually slightly disappointed when he said that because I just, I mean, it's, it's fine. It's a fine choice. There's nothing, you know, definitely it fits with his whole oeuvre as a wisdom guy, a wisdom book guy, Ecclesiastes guy. Ecclesiastes would have been really interested, would have been more interested by that. But like, I wanted to do the gospels. I thought I wanted to do something like really dangerous, you know, something really, really meaty. But I mean, it's, it makes sense because he's, he's just now kind of recouping. I mean, I saw he had like about an hour chat with Coleman Hughes the other day. And Michaela was talking about how like, he just has no energy to set things up. And so she like kind of worked it out with Coleman and it was like, okay, dad, I'll handle it. You don't have to do anything. You can just talk. And they had a very, very nice, easygoing chat. And Coleman's a great guy to, to talk to for that kind of thing. But that kind of gave me a little window into, okay, he's, I mean, he's really not back to full capacity. This is still very much an ongoing process, you know? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think you're right. Proverbs, as a preacher, I know, I know Tim Keller would work proverbs often, but I've never attempted to do much with the book in terms of homiletics or, or even a Sunday school class, partly because the form of the book is, is deceptively complex and how to, how to engage with, you know, even, because there's a proverb, but that proverb is set amidst an entire, so I'm very curious to see where he goes with that. He can, he can tend to, he can tend to get proverbial, which means that, you know, if he just says, picks a proverb out of the book and decides that's going to be his launching place from which to, you know, ramble for an hour or two, well, it might be okay. Might not. I, you know, I don't know how many of the book tour lectures you've listened to, but again, a lot. Yeah. I, I, again, I haven't found, I didn't find them to be quite as fresh as, you know, at least what happened. And again, I think you're exactly right that it wasn't just him. It was, you know, the man and the moment sort of found each other and brought that together. But it was quite interesting though, that he, he seems to, his, his, his gift of attracting controversy seems to still be operational. Yeah. And all the, all the usual, and I saw you like retweeting, like all the usual suspects lining up to defend him. You're like, it's happening again. Oh, there it goes. Douglas Murray. Oh, there it goes. Andrew Doyle. Oh, there goes Claire lemon and all those, all those people going, this is outrageous. You're like, it's happening. So of course there, every time the guy writes a book, there'll be a little, a little spike where somebody somewhere is crying over it. So that will help, you know, of course it will, it will help sales. And I mean, I could sort of see, I could, I could picture the penguin executive meetings where they're kind of listening politely, like, and that behind closed doors, they're like, I keep going, you know, cha-ching. There goes the big black spot. No way our stockholders are going to let us pass on this book. Absolutely. No, no, no way. Do people not understand how few books sell? Yes. I know. I actually, I have a really good friend, one of my best friends, Hannah Long works at HarperCollins as an editor. And so, I mean, like she, she like interacts with, with some, some big name people, but as a behind the scenes person, and she could tell you all about this. She could tell you all about how, but will it sell, but will it sell? When somebody pitches, you know, it's like, convince me that this will sell. Yep. Yep. So Peterson is paying for all those people. And so, I mean, Peterson's been, Peterson is, it's so interesting because in some ways he's been the victim of so much tragedy, all this like deep personal misfortune. And then, but then in other ways, been remarkably fortunate. You know, the way, like he's pretty much guaranteed to always be able to, to publish and sell books, you know, and like there's, there's a crowd of loving fans waiting for him anytime he wants to go back out on a stage, you know. And yet, and yet he's, he's troubled, you know, it always, always will be the man of sorrows equated with grief. And I don't mean that blasphemously, but it's true. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's true. So, so looking forward to 2021, we're at about at the end of the year, what kinds of things are you looking for as, as Peterson or, no, just in general. Just, what kinds of things? So Douglas Murray, of course, as your interest, Tom Holland, what other things out there maybe that we haven't talked about are, are you, are you kind of looking for or thinking about, or I know you're, you know, you've got some, you've got some academic stuff that you're, you're sort of tying a, tying a ribbon on right now, but what kinds of things are you kind of anticipating for the new year? So did you want me to think about, like talk a little about my own work or wherever you ever want to go with this? Um, I'm starting to write fiction, uh, which, which has, which, which has been fun. I've, I've learned a lot. My learning curve has, has, it's been a learning curve. Um, but why, why fiction? Uh, I, I've always loved it. I mean, literature has been always my first love, um, ever since I was a little teeny tiny kid. Um, and so, I mean, you know, Lewis reached me first through his fiction, uh, with, with, with an Arnia books. And then when I got older, the space trilogy and all that stuff. Um, and at Tolkien's Lord of the Rings, I remember first reading that when I was eight and then rereading it as I get older and you see more and you burn more. It grows with you. Those great, great stories. Um, and, and I talk about this on my, my reset interview that's, that's coming out with, with Glenn Scrivener, but, um, we, so much, so much of what we learned, we've learned through story. Um, and, and it's so many things we, story helps us to make sense. It's a sense making mechanism. You know, we talked, we talked about sense making mechanisms, particularly for, for things like suffering and evil, um, you know, light versus dark, good versus evil, where you can talk in philosophical terms, abstract terms about these things. And you can write, you can publish journal articles and bioethics journals and that kind of thing. But, you know, they, in some sense, they fall short until they're connected to, to story. Um, and it's so, it's always been, I guess, a sort of a, a, a dream of mine to see if I could, if, if I could do that myself. And I still don't know if I can. I mean, it's, a lot of people go, I'm going to write a novel. It's like, well, okay, cool. Good luck with that. You know, so that's kind of, kind of what I'm telling myself. But, um, I feel like I might be able to, and I mean, like I, I'm, I'm, I'm approaching, like I'm tripping over all kinds of landmines, you know, looking like very hot, political hot button type issues. But I'm thinking about ways into it that, that, that are humane, that create characters that you can love, um, that, that are deeply, deeply flawed, maybe, and deeply screwed up. Maybe even Christian and also deeply screwed up, which is not something that, that, that we grapple with enough, I don't think. Um, but, but how, how grace can still come in, how, how light can still come in. Um, and I was thinking about this when you, you were talking with Poe recently, and the, the brothers Karamazov and, and Ivan's story of the little girl beating, uh, against the door because her parents are abusing her. And with Glenn, I mentioned how Christopher Hitchens used that story a lot, like that, that was like one of his big trump cards that he would, he would throw out there, like throw it down the gauntlet, you know. And the Christians in response to be, well, okay, here's a theodicy, you know, here's a, okay, well, arguments against the problem of evil. And they were, I mean, they were good theodicies. I mean, you can, I think, philosophically answer the problem of evil. But it's the story that sticks with you, you know, it's, and that's, that's, that was Hitch's genius, you know, is that he, he was such a masterful rhetorician. He knew how to get people in the palm of his hand. And so, you know, what can you set against that? Well, you can set good arguments, but you also have to set a better story against it. So, so I think I think about that a lot. I just think about it a lot. And it's, if someday I was able to contribute to it, that would be one of my one of my proudest achievements, I think. Big goal. It's a big goal. Yeah, it is. It is definitely. I think also, I'm not done with how and I'm not done with Murray or those guys, you know, I would, I would love to or the Weinsteins for that matter. I would like to. I mean, this goes back to when I said Tom meets a good marriage counselor. You know, I want to kind of set forth the proposition that you that one one doesn't need different different hats to navigate this this terrain. You know, what one that if one is considering Christianity, I want to propose that it's it's something that Christianity is something that you can enter into as a fully integrated individual. It's it's not going to require you to to suppress some nagging part of yourself or to pretend that certain things don't exist. This is something Brett Weinstein says, which actually, I really like this phrase. And if I talked with Brett sometime, I would remind him of this and say, I agree. Or he said, all true stories must reconcile. I think that's profoundly true, more true than Brett realizes, I think, because I think all true stories have already reconciled and do reconcile. But I recognize that that that's a process for people. And so it's it's not my attention to rush anybody with undue haste through that process. But I want to try. I want to try to make the case that it that it can be done. Because I think I think it should be done. And, you know, you'll talk about how people work and you'll be like, well, OK, that's easy for you to say. You'll sometimes say, well, you would say that, you know, because you think that way. You're thinking this kind of hyper rational way, which maybe I don't as much as as much as you think necessarily. But I don't think it's just me. I think a lot of people want to be integrated. I think Poe wants to be integrated. I think is it Ryan Bennett? Is that the name of the? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, right. Right. That'd be a protocol. Yeah, OK. He you know, he wants to be integrated. Yeah. I think that is part of how people work is wanting to bring the pieces of themselves together. Yeah. And so I mean, I don't think that you can indefinitely keep keep the different parts of yourself separated from each other. I think it's good to seek integration in a, you know, not in the Jungian way, but stealing the stealing the term from Jung. So I I think that is possible. And I don't think that I think there's been some good that's come out of the Christian apologetics movement, but also there's there's been some not so good and there have been there have been approaches trotted out and things which I mean, I've taught to Tom a little bit behind the scenes about some of these some of these fast resurrection arguments that that you touched on in a video like, OK, five minimal facts that prove that Jesus rose from the dead. And I know that Tom has seen that that kind of thing. It's not like he's he's unfamiliar with it. Didn't do it for him, you know, and I understand why, because it actually doesn't do it for me either. I think I think something better is needed, something something more robust, something for. But I think this is great news. And I want to kind of I'm trying to share. I try to kind of shout good news from the rooftops that this can be done. It's possible. You can you can do this. Not everybody will want to, though. And that, of course, that's completely out of my hands. That's in God's hands. Yeah, yeah. Well, I agree. I agree. And. You know, the the. In terms of the resurrection, we're at a point now where a lot of people are skeptical about it for, I think, some rather. Shallow reasons. But even even once. You know, so I come at this as a preacher and I regularly talk to a preacher in a fairly conservative denomination, moderately conservative domination, let's say, and and most most people. Most most people. If you'd ask them, did Jesus walk out of the tomb with their flesh? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. That's not it's not a question for them. But then I as a pastor will watch them worry. I'll watch them anxious and the resurrection and our anxieties and our worry are live in the same universe. And so it's long been a preacher thing to say, well, you don't really believe the resurrection because you worry and the people. What do you mean by that? When Jesus commands them, you know, well, well, we know that same sex sexuality is wrong because God commands it. OK, well, Jesus commands you not to worry. Well, that's that's undoable. Oh, OK. Then I'm in trouble. Yeah. And so, no, you're exactly right. And it's the it's the integration that we that we long for. And and it's the reconciliation of our stories. And and it's and it's not just the reconciliation of these things in terms of the impressive cognitive models and frameworks we're able to sort of manage in our gray matter. It's the it's the complete and I think that's you know, I've said many times my journey over these last three years with respect to YouTube has made and even given with all the different characters that I've talked to, I'm not less convinced of the necessity of the physicality of the resurrection. I'm more so. Yeah. And I'm I'm more convinced of the, you know, in my little in my little miracles conversation with Vervecky and JP Marceau. When, you know, I talked to I think I don't quite know what John thought when I told him about, you know, walking on water and, you know, he kind of I kind of had to, you know, take a step back sort of like poor Stephen Wolford when Jonathan Peugeot says, no, I do believe in God. Whoa, wait a minute. And, you know, and and actually, if you listen to the Peugeot Guy Sangstock conversation that I'm only a third of the way through, there's some moments in there too where crying game of it. Yeah, where Peugeot says some things and people are, you know, do you do you do you really think that that basically what it boils down to in Charles Taylor language, do you really believe we are that vulnerable to God and his power and his presence? And I would say, yes, I do. And and nothing I hear about in the philosophical space, nor in the on the street space makes me think less so. And what that means is that all of our all of our little, you know, when I hear when I hear Douglas Murray say, I'll need to hear a voice, I think, oh, be careful. I know that's what I wanted to say. I wanted to ask him later. I was kicking myself. I should have said, Douglas, what do you want the voice to say? Oh, be careful. Because if you if you if you demand that the Almighty knock on your door, you know, just what I've seen from people, his his knock, his knock can sometimes be that still small voice or his knock can be the whirlwind that that that destroys that collapses the home of in which Job's children lived. And and this is something that I think when it comes to modernity. And I don't mean modernity in terms of the the technical philosophical sense, but I think the the the European civilization, you know, from deism forward, when when we sort of got a little bit drunk on our capacity to do modern medicine and and, you know, build good levies, and when we began to sort of bring a little bit of our own order to the world to shape it more to our liking, we we have we have we have forgotten who we are talking about. And I think, you know, whereas, yes, there are, there's plenty of tragedy in this pandemic that, you know, I as a pastor can certainly see. But it is also a sober reminder of of exactly what and who we are. And I'm and OK, maybe we'll have a vaccine, maybe we'll have some vaccines that put an end to this. I surely hope so. I more, you know, as much as anyone else wants to be free of these cursed masks and restrictions. But we what what really offends us, I think, is is the fact that God is God and we are not. And we're we're we're simply never going to get around that. And if God is God and we are not, then how, in fact, do we contend with the fact that the Almighty will have thoughts and opinions about us and power over our destinies that that he does not simply yield to our control? Yes, exactly. That that powerlessness is something that COVID has so brought home. And I think it's so interesting to see how the same people who will very, very loudly and vocally advocate that you should you should be able to kill yourself whenever you want to. You're now suddenly like, oh, my gosh, we might die of a virus. We have to do like to do this. We have to do that. Well, what's the difference? Well, it's because the one thing is something you can control. The other thing is something you can't control. That's that's what you're putting your finger on there, I think, is the reminder that, oh, shoot, I'm actually not running this ship, am I? You know? Well, Esther, this says I knew this would be a pleasure. And I always enjoy chatting with you and swapping ideas and anything you want to promote or anything you want to. I mean, you've got that you're you're you're sort of you've been publishing in some other places lately, too. Yeah. So, I mean, I occasionally update my my pathos blog, Young Foggy. But I mean, weirdly, it's so odd 2020 of all years, but I haven't actually been writing there as much as I used to. Maybe it kind of it drove drove me into a certain state of lethargy. Also, also the fiction, I guess, working on that. But so my my Twitter, Esther of Riley, is like kind of the one stop place where any new thing that I write, I promote it or tweet it there. So most recently, I was actually writing at the Spectator about a little diner that's rebelliously staying open despite pandemic strictures. And so kind of tipping my hand a little bit where I where I sit with all that. You know, I have I have my opinions, but but we were this talk was sort of blessedly free of of covid talk. So basically, my Twitter is kind of the kind of the space to watch for for new stuff that's that's up with me. OK, well, I will I will send you this recording and then when it's ready, I'll post it. And I'm anxious to see what Sam on the Discord server said. Aren't you talking to Esther? Said, yeah, it's coming up. It's coming up. So I know some folks are are looking forward to this. So but it's oh, yeah, I wasn't sure what it would happen, but we got on the calendar. We just had to make it happen. So it's been a pleasure. Thanks so much for hosting me. Thank you, Esther.