https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=UK8vihLGRm0

 Hi, this is Paul and this is a Thief in the Night broadcast. It might be the night for those of you in the UK. It is the morning of January 3rd, 2022. As I was sitting in the little streaming room with Rick yesterday, Rick said, you should do a 2022 prediction show. I said to Rick, I got no predictions. So I actually thought I could do this on the Discord. Now usually I do these, I call these these impromptu live streams. That's the polite word. I call them in biblical language, Thief in the Night, because you never know when I'm going to do them, because I never know when I'm going to do them. Hello, Luke. Hello, Julie. I usually do them in the afternoon, sort of at the end of my workday when I've got 20 or 30 minutes or maybe an hour. And I thought I'd like to I'd like to plug into the zeitgeist. Good morning, Bryson. I feel like romper room here. And so then I just pop into the Discord. And one of the beautiful things about the Discord is there's almost always someone hanging around and looking for a good conversation. So I've been reaping and doing a little bit of looming. Good morning, Dale. Good morning, Chris. And doing some of that. So I thought, well, I can do this. And happy New Year, Michael. I can try this, see who jumps into the Discord and just see who has predictions. Those of you in the chat room, Occidental on rest. Good morning. So any of you in the chat room, I've got the chat window in front of me too. So if you have a prediction for 2022, lay it on me. I'm curious. What will I predict? What will I predict for 2022? Most reasonable predictions are obvious. There's a lot that the world just kind of keeps churning out on its own. So reasonable predictions. Well, let's see. Luke will want me to get, Luke will want to get me to say certain words. Even though Luke likes to sort of posture himself as kind of a rebel in sort of a Rob Bell sort of way, the reliability with which he wants me to articulate certain words just makes it enormously easy to troll him. So there's that, Luke. Julie, I'm hoping and praying that the Omicron brings an end to the pandemic. Me too. Me too. Dr. Campbell's one of my favorite. Peterson will talk to Scott Adams. Ah, that would be fun. That act, you know, I finished with Omicron. Yeah, you know, I listened to John Campbell and he right away said this could sort of be the end game for the pandemic and that would be cool. Paul Anleitner on Twitter said he wants to get Peterson to talk to John Walton and I don't know that John Walton would have much of an idea what to do with Jordan Peterson, much like myself and many others who are sort of in the professional Bible church business. When Peterson came on the scene, it was sort of what's that guy about? So yeah, I'm not sure John Walton would know what to do with Jordan Peterson, but Scott Adams would be much more interesting. Real life application is coming for all the higher register theories. Yes. Don't make me sign onto the Discord. Go ahead, Luke. Jump in. You know you want to. Hey, you know, I've got nobody. Nobody is joining me in the live stream room right now, Luke. Luke, this is your this is your total access uninterrupted. And I know, let's see, it's nine thirty, so it's probably about eleven thirty where you're at. So I know you're making lunch for the kiddies. Luke is a trophy husband for those of you who don't know that. So it's really dangerous when I go out on the Internet and live stream and say things that I can't really take back because they're going out here. But yeah, Peterson and Scott Adams would be an interesting pairing. I've got a I've got kind of a. I don't know if I'm looking for a Sheldrake Peterson convo. Yeah, that might be. Yeah, that would be kind of interesting. I've said all my things multiple times. Yes, you have, Luke. You you indeed. You indeed have done that. Be great if Neil Gaiman would talk to Tom Holland about myths. Oh, that's a good one. So Justin Briarley, who does unbelievable, he at the beginning of the year and he did it this year, too. I saw it on Twitter, basically puts out a call for show recommendations. And you know, Justin, because he's got a radio show and I mean, his YouTube channel has developed fairly nicely. He's got a bit of reach and he's also excellent at that, at facilitating conversations between people who might not very quickly be able to find each other. And so, you know, some of these great recommendations you can throw at him. It's tough to get Peterson just because Peterson is going to be. Oh, here comes Sam, because Peterson's busy. Grandma was just watching and doing a little bit of reaping from your talk with Sevilla. That was an excellent talk. I thought you were particularly clear. Hey, Sam, how are you? Well, he's getting things organized. I knew if I jumped into here, someone good would join me. That's the I've made it already to Justin Good. Thanks, Wesley. Wesley and Whitefield. So let's see, I'm going to follow Grim Grizz's recommendation. And when Sam gets in here, I'll just enlarge this window all the way. Part of why I really like the situation I'm in right now with respect to being able to use the Discord as an estuary is that I can, in fact, have a degree of confidence that when I jump in here, there will be conversation partners that are, we have enough in common. We've had enough reps with each other. We know each other well enough. There's a degree of trust that we can actually have a reasonable conversation. So that's predictions for what? Predictions for the year. What you'd like to see happen in the year. Oh, the Sheldrake Convo already happened. So there's a whole bunch of Peterson shows in the can, I would imagine. You've got Sam Harris, that's already in the can. And so Sheldrake's in the can. Is there a PVK Jordan Peterson conversation that's in the can? Dumb dumb dumb. Maybe there's a prediction for 2022. I don't know. If Jordan Peterson asks, I'll say yes. But he's going to have to ask. So it's fascinating how different people extract different things from you. That's very true. That's very true. Spot on, Grizz. Spot on, Grizz. Sam is, you know, Sam's a working man. He's got a family to feed. He's got a resistance movement against Nicaea to shoulder. The poor man's got a lot on his plate. And he's just taking on all these Trinitarians. So much to do. So much to do. Are you able to talk, Sam, or are you just reserving your spot? Can you hear me? I hear you fine. Yeah. I mean, I do have a lot to do. That's 1,600 years of confusion to overturn. That doesn't happen in a single year or with a YouTube channel of just 800 subscribers. That's true. That's true. You have a lot on your plate, Sam. You've got a lot on your plate. Are we on the internet? Yes, we are on the internet. So if you do not want to be on the internet, oh, there we go. Better get out of this room. Still trying to get my window correct here. I guess I could do this. Well, Sam, you got any predictions for 2022? I am generally somewhat hopeful that this Omicron thing is going to burn through really fast. It has a very, very short lifespan inside individuals. You seem to get contagious very quickly but are only contagious for a short period of time and are extremely contagious. Omicron might be one of the most contagious viruses that's ever been measured in the wild since we've been able to, but it doesn't seem too severe. There will still be people who get very sick and some people who die from it, but it could burn through the population very, very fast and then provide a certain amount of immunity. That could radically change this COVID lifestyle that we've all unfortunately had to accommodate for the last year and a half or however long. I'm pretty hopeful that this pandemic could take a very different texture even by, say, the end of the month or the end of February. Yeah, I'm hoping so too. That's my hope. I don't know if... One of the things I think about with this is we haven't had a medical experiment in real time run like this since the end of the Spanish flu. I wonder if, in fact, this is sort of normal. This is how viruses sort of burn themselves out. Yeah, and that's part of the reason why species and stuff don't tend to get wiped out by viruses. Just the natural force of viruses is to be extremely contagious, but then that selection pressure causes them to shoot themselves in their own foot. Viruses, obviously, are one of the things that's caused a huge amount of suffering and misery throughout human history. Part of the reason why I don't think it could ever end human civilization is that it's just not in the nature of the selection forces to do that sort of thing. But who knows what tricks might still be up the sleeve. I was thinking, in general, the US has not done overall a great job at preventing its population from being exposed to the virus compared to other countries. China has done an excellent job on the specific metric of preventing its own population from being exposed to the virus, as best as we can tell, but who knows that they're just completely lying. But the danger of that is that the natural immunity of their population going forward will actually be the most susceptible in the future. So who knows what actually was the right thing or the wrong thing to have done all along? Even the wisest cannot see all ends. The US at this point will have one of the highest levels of natural immunity after this has gone through, at the cost of nearly a million of our own population. But who knows what will happen regarding that? So anyway, those are my predictions regarding the virus. But hopefully, we won't need to think about the virus nearly as intensely as we have been. And that's been something that has struck me too in terms of the Spanish flu, as it was called. I think that's sort of what we're hoping for. The interesting thing, so imagine that my prediction is true, and I'm not the only one saying this, that Omicron sweeps very quickly through the US, gives a high level of natural immunity to itself and also other variants, and then case counts just crash, say in like February or March or something. What will happen to the vaccine mandates and all of these rules? How quickly will those things go away? How much will the government seem to want to hold on to some of its newfound powers? How much will some of the things that got implemented as temporary measures, whether it's the child tax credit, which I like, or some of the other things, what will be the consequences of that? How much pressure will there be on the Democrats as elections and midterms and stuff like that happen to recalibrate to more popular policies? But anyway, I don't want to make political predictions. That's my least favorite and least smallest expertise. We would need Hank to do that. Where is Hank? Where is Hank when you really want him and need him? So I, you know, just looking around what has happened sort of in the troughs between the waves in California, I mean, California tends to be a little bit more uptight and restrictive than obviously other places. Even when I was on vacation this summer, I was driving through Idaho and Wyoming and Montana and everyone there. Oh, look who joined us. Holy cow. All the way from Poland. All these other places. You know, when people sort of have a sense of masks aren't so high, and even Joe, wow, this is an epic meeting. So I think a lot of these things will sort of ebb and flow. Well, welcome. Look at this. We've got two other rando notables here. So this is our prediction 2020. Prediction 2022 program. So either of you guys have any and two other lurkers here in the room. So, you know, you can watch it on the live stream. If you're going to be in the room, you should turn on your camera and participate. Otherwise, you can always. I don't know what happened to this room. I had a limit of I guess some of you might have special powers to get into this room. But Joey, Joey will look after that. So, OK, predictions 2022. Let's have them. Anybody? I have none. You have no predictions. What is I may come up with something if I come up with something. I'm not sure. Well, well, tell me tell me what is the cutting edge of Polish railway drama today? I don't know if it's a drama drama. They're working pretty good, really. Do the trains run on time in Poland? Well, people say they know we don't. But I think we're pretty good. We used to be worse. Now we've sorted out in the last 10 years. Good. I hear the trains run on time really well in the Netherlands. And that doesn't surprise me a bit. Why not? They're a rather uptight, fastidious people because, you know, they got a small country. They got to keep their they got to keep their little country quite orderly, I think. Yeah, I mean, clearly you haven't. I have never been to your country, Job. So you'll have to tell us. When you're here, we'll travel by train and then you will be able to reevaluate your position on the tardiness of Dutch railway operations. Even Chicago's trains are actually generally pretty on time. That's that's pretty good. That's pretty good. And Joey, godfather of the discord, is here in the room. Joey, do you have any predictions for 2022? You got to give us a narrower category than that. I don't have very many predictions on the efficacy of Polish railroads. But, you know, other things that might come in time. Well, I don't I don't look to you for those kinds of answers. We have an expert on Polish railroads here. So I look to you for answers on, let's see, what would what kind of predictions would Joey give me for for 2022? Joey would much more Joey would much more major and social political predictions than Sam. OK, is Trump going to begin his? Well, he already began it in in 2020. Is Trump going to is Trump going to run for president in 2024? Yes, no. I mean, that's that's next year. You're cheating again. There's a high possibility he'll try if he's getting good health. Like what I worry most. Well, worry is not the right word. But like what I predict the most is he'll just be too darn old by the time the next election runs around. It's it's always possible. And yeah, if he runs, he probably has a good chance of at least winning. The only thing I should predict it, which is a prediction market, I think in Ireland or somebody the most likely person to win the 2024 U.S. presidential election in the betting markets is Donald Trump with a 30 percent chance. Joe Biden, 23 percent chance. Oh, Ron DeSantis, 20 percent. Kamala Harris, 11 Pete Booty Booty Booty Booty Guy. I'm 6 percent. Wow. But that's, of course, looking at it today. So fair enough. A lot for Biden. 23. I guess that's probably a prediction. I do think Biden will finish the year at least. I don't know if he'll finish next year. I think I think he'll probably finish his entire term. But I think nobody predicts the death. But by the time he's done, I feel like it'll be quite obvious that he probably shouldn't still be in office. We'll see how that goes. All right. All right. Let's see. What other what other predictions do we have? Who who will join us? Volleyball. I predict shirtless volleyball at some point. I want I want a a bomb convention of some sort that is bigger than the fishing trip. I don't know where or when, but piggybacking off of my covid prediction, I think it'll be time for more of us to meet each other in person somehow somewhere. Absolutely. I think summer mountain trip in Denver. That's easier for most people to get to and kind of centralized. That's good. That's good. I predict I predict that Job's baby will walk. My namesake. I caught the damn kid trying to open a kitchen cabinet earlier. It's getting worse. I predict Job swearing will get worse. Did I swear? I don't even know this. But yeah, and then so he tries to reach for the cabinet and then he falls over. It goes toonk on the wooden floor with his head and he looks at me to see if I'm concerned. Like, no, I laugh and oh, okay. In that case, it's fine. I'm not going to cry. Like that stuff's in there pretty pretty early. I love how you tried to eat the Oscar. It's terrible. My wife insists I tell you that she hang on, but I can show it if you get out of view because she doesn't want to be on camera. She's terrified. As well she should be. I love her dearly, but she doesn't want to be on camera. So she drew Oscar the Grouch on our trash container. I know if it's visible. Oh, that's lovely. He's usually on this rug here. There he is. There he is. There he is. Again, so much needed milk. Yeah. But he tries to get to Oscar. He absolutely adores Oscar and is always trying to reach for the trash, which he shouldn't do because it's trash. Serves you right putting attractive things on the trash can. Serves me right getting a kid. Yeah. How old is he now? Six and a half months. Six and a half months. Wow. Yeah, you know, it's mixed feelings because I can't just put him on the floor and expect him to stick around. Now he's going to try to move. So yeah, my prediction is that there's going to be a second one, but not entirely up to me. So let's see how that goes. Nice prediction. Congratulations. That's a good thing to shoot for. Well, don't congratulate me yet. I mean, who knows? Well, hey, with this generation just aspiring to have a child is something worth congratulating these days. So. We're not the generation. We're too old. Nah, you know, we're like what? Tail end of the millennials, something like that. I'm a Gen Xer. So many Gen Xers. So many wants to join the conversation but not be on camera. That's cheating. Any other predictions? Disembodied voice of Job's wife. Any predictions, hon? Nothing. Any about a marriage? No. So how about predictions from Europe? What's going to happen in Europe in 2022? Europe in general. You know, it all looks, I mean, we're in America. You make predictions about this whole mess, not just California. So. Who will Eastern Ukraine be governed by by the end of the year? Oh, boy. I don't want to think about that. You think you're worried about the guy in Poland? You've at least got Germany between you and the bear. That's right. Poor Poland's been mauled by that bear a number of times. But we have a lot of Ukrainians moving to Poland now. So Orthodox churches are opening up. By stock and Polish Orthodoxy. I suspect the long time effects of the pandemic will make things worse in international relationships and overall democratic institutions. But I don't have any real data to back that up. It's more of a God feeling. Well, these are predictions for Pete's sake. I mean, this is a time you're allowed to make stuff up. No problem. Disclaimer. Yeah. All right. All right, Ivan, you're you're in the room. You got it. You got to give us at least one prediction. Oh, I can't hear you. You're still quiet. Can you hear me now? Yes. I think that the French crown is going to recognize Peugeot as the rightful heir. Peugeot for King, because he wouldn't like president because, you know, on one of my conversations with him, he admitted he's into monarchy. So he will be the anti Napoleon finally arise. I've been reading. I've been reading a lot of French Revolution, Napoleonic stuff lately. It's really quite fascinating. So Napoleon, Napoleon was a very key figure. I don't think we pay. I don't think we pay enough attention to him. Pretty, pretty. Maybe Americans don't. I bet Europeans still kind of tend to think that he was important. Well, he's mentioned in Polish item. He's mentioned in what? In Polish. And how do you say national song? Really? National anthem. Yeah. Why would Napoleon be in the Polish national anthem? Well, this song began in the in this days in Napoleonic times. There was no Poland at that time, but there was Polish people. Yeah. It says Napoleon show us how to win. There is this word in Polish anthem. Anthem? Yeah, that's the word. So he's mentioned in our anthem. Anthem? You got it. You got it. All right. I haven't looked in the Taiwan will feel China's grip. Steve B says. Oh, it's been China. China jitters have been good for Intel and building semiconductor plants in Arizona. There's a. So there's my take. I think the US is leaving Taiwan slightly under defended as a taunt to China. Like I dare you like a like a kind of like a Pearl Harbor. I dare you. That didn't work so well for Pearl Harbor. Well, it didn't work for Pearl Harbor very well, but it didn't work for Japan in the long run very well either. So. Wow. Job's baby is much better looking than Job. Imagine that. I bet that Jordan Peterson will make some attempts to go to church in 2022. I'm not saying that he will be like I have officially been chrismated or rebaptized or whatever, but jiggered in any particular church. But I think he will have his butt in a pew at least a few times. I won't claim I won't predict which denomination or whatever. But I think that Paul that you're right that Jordan Peterson says, you know, follow your own advice, clean your own room. Don't give anyone else advice before you're following your own. Oh, also church is extremely important for all of these sorts of reasons. And I think that that cognitive dissonance will get his butt in a pew at least a few times before the end of the year. Sam, do you think. What church? Sorry. I was going to say, do you think he'll only go to one church or do you think he'll go to multiple churches of different kinds? I think maybe he'll experiment a little bit. But I bet that the kind that he likes, I do not claim to predict because there was that weird time where he like went to Liberty University and was like completely moved to tears by what I would have thought was a completely vanilla middle of the row, evangelical worship experience. Although, you know, I'm sure that they can put on a pretty big show. But it's like. Was Liberty middle of his wife's illness or no? That might have had something to do with it, too. But yeah, I did 50-50 on Jordan Peterson handling snakes this year. Maybe so. How many how many tour stops does he have in West Virginia? Probably zero. It's not even coming to Sacramento. So yeah, yeah, I think you're right, Sam. I think he will do a little church shopping. A lot will depend on, you know, what his wife does. But he's going down to Nashville to visit his daughter. And, you know, she seems to be, I mean, she's in Nashville. She's probably, you know, hanging out with evangelicals. So yeah, I think I think I think Jordan Peterson will get more church curious this year, whether he'll settle down. I'd love to know whether or not he was baptized as an infant. I'd love to know that. I bet the odds are very high. Yes, I think so, too. So, you know, if he wants to become more, I don't think he'll become orthodox. I think despite the hopes and dreams of all of the online ortho community, I don't think that that's likely for him. I think it would either be a kind of Protestantism or Catholicism. Yeah, it couldn't be mainline Protestantism either. I mean, Canada, here's a question. Will Jordan Peterson move to the United States? That's a good question. I mean, he'll practically be living here on his tour. I don't know if he needs to move. I also feel like giving up his citizenship in, like, Canada would be kind of off-brand for him because he's stubborn. Canadians who move to America don't give up their citizenship. I know a lot of Canadians that live in America, they do not give up their citizenship. They continue to maintain themselves as Canadians, even though they're never leaving. Well, but I think on that vein, I don't think he would make make the jump to update his primary citizenship to the United States. I think it's way more likely that he buys a house in the U.S. than becomes a U.S. citizen. He might already own one. Probably. I mean, he might, you know, and I would imagine Nashville. Well, he owns an RV, so, you know, drive that around. Does he own that or did he rent that? I mean, because we did, in fact, see Jordan Peterson in his RV in Sacramento. It wasn't as nice as an RV as I thought it would have been. No, it was rather underwhelmed by the state of the RV, frankly. And I saw Dave Rubin pacing out in front of the theater with no one to talk to. I bet that Jordan Peterson will talk to Elon Musk as his most viewed episode of 2022. Do you think Musk will say yes, because he asked him on Twitter and there were crickets. I mean, Musk talked to the Babylon Beaver of everything, you know, like, and actually there were some parts at the end that you should comment on, Paul. When they asked him, because they said something like, because we're an evangelical publication, we have to ask you, will you accept Jesus as your personal Lord and Savior? Which was hilarious because they're both joking and not, and like, in a way that only the Babylon Beaver actually can pull off. And he actually gave a surprisingly interesting answer to that question at the end. So if you haven't watched that, Paul, I think it was the last question on the Babylon Bee interview. I would, a lot of the middle of the Babylon Bee interview was kind of mad. I gave up. Talking about exercising stock options, which isn't as interesting as other topics. But the last question, if you can go and find it, where they ask him to accept Jesus as his personal Lord and Savior. That would be fun. It is worth watching. So, separate topic that's been on my mind, or you got more on that, Job? No, no, I predict I'm going to head out. Separate topic that's been on my mind. So Northern California is about to shut down. I think it's the Diablo Valley nuclear power plant. And Germany's slated to retire three nuclear power plants. Do we think that 2022 is the year where we finally start to get new nuclear power projects? Don't they take like five or ten years to even get one up and running? But maybe, I guess you just mean shovel breaking ground, I guess. Yeah, or money approved, project approved, that kind of thing. I don't know. Ask Joe Manchin, right? He seems to control our entire budget at the moment. And he comes from a coal state which is, would view nuclear power as its chief competitor. So, I will bet no, although I would be happy with some funds thrown in our existing nuclear power plants because a lot of Illinoisers are in a state of needing repair very soon. And actually, what people don't know, Illinois is the most nuclear state in the Union, and also the location of the first human controlled nuclear reaction in history. Fun facts, Illinois, nuclear. Three cheers to Illinois nuclear. I think that's a really interesting topic, Joey, because you hear again and again that nuclear is really a solution to climate change, but nobody wants to go there. Hey, look, speaking of nuclear, here is the guy. Hey, Julian, how are you? Good. Is it as cold in California as it is here? No. Well, it depends where in California. It's a lot warmer today. It's only minus 20 Celsius. The last week it was 30, 35. That's incredible. That is in Fahrenheit, but it's pretty off. That is minus four degrees Fahrenheit. Minus 20 Celsius is negative four Fahrenheit. And it's about, it was nine degrees this morning in Chicago, so also pretty cold. Yeah. Yeah, we had a little frost on the rooftops this morning, but in Sacramento, but that's about it. You guys get frost? We get frost on rooftops. My wife calls it Sacramento snow. You look across the street and you see a little frost on the neighbor's rooftop. So, um, how's, Hey, Julian, I loved that video of all of the songs and, uh, that, that was just, and you were in it. That was just wonderful. I really enjoyed that. Yeah, it, it was quite, it was, it was kind of fun making it. Like, um, I was sort of the guy who, who was rounding up all of those Hutterite cats to get them to videotape themselves singing. Um, it's just really tricky to, to coordinate a thing like that over WhatsApp. Um, with, with sort of all kinds of different mics and cameras and all the colonies and yeah, but I'm, I'm bad at it kind of turned out in the end. We'll hopefully have a bit of a better set up next year. Wow. I thought it was terrific. It was a great idea. My son came out in a plaid shirt yesterday and he kind of was joking about it. And I said, you know, if you add some suspenders to that, you could, that would, that would really go in certain communities. We wouldn't know the difference. Well, well, okay, Julian, you got any Hutterite predictions for 2022? Is this of the, is this the year of the Hutterite break? Um, um, is it, is it, I actually do wonder if, if, if the Hutterites are going to have their day in the next few years, um, with, with everything that's going on, it seems like people are more and more interested in, uh, it just finding like this little commune to join and just escape from all the craziness or whatever. Um, yeah, I don't know, probably not, but I think it's going to be a great year. I think it's going to be a great year. Um, yeah, I don't know, probably not, but it's, it's an interesting idea. Well, I, that's right. You guys have been doing the Benedict. I mean, I think, I think you need, I think you need some better marketing. That's what I think you need. We do. Although the plaid and the suspenders and those children singing that, that, wait, I was, I was like, wow, you know, if this Dutch Calvinist thing doesn't pan out, maybe, maybe how to rights. I mean, the non-violence stuff, the community stuff, you know, I'm sure they'd take care of me in my old age, you know, sounds like a winning combination. You could be a viral YouTuber. No, I wouldn't want to take your slot, Julian. You are, you are the how to write viral YouTuber. Yeah. And Teddy, Teddy, I don't think I've ever met you. Have you been around the discord a while or you just jump in? I joined the discord a few, a few weeks ago, but I was following your channel since a Vanda plays a and Jordan Peterson conversation. Oh, okay. All the way back to April, 2018. Yeah. I wanted somebody to explain me what the hell happened there. Good luck. How much do you want? Well, it was, it was empty. It was a lot. And thank you for that. Oh, you're welcome. Paul has thousands and thousands and thousands of hours of explanation. Right. Yeah. That's where I hide my heresy. If someone really wants to come after me, you might get me, but you're going to have to work hard. Paul, are you planning to continue with the analysis of the conversation with the two theologians? I hadn't, I hadn't yet. I dramatically under plan everything I do. Is there, you have a recommendation of the port of a portion of that conversation that you'd like to hear me talk about? And yes, I, I today I was listening to it again. And specifically what interests me was the, if a tree falls in the forest and nobody there to hear it. And is it still fell? And this, this idea of time beginning at, at the moment of, of cognition of not condition, but yeah, perception was a very interesting way. And I don't think the two theologian was able to, to get Jordan's point in that. And I studied a little bit of, of philosophy and most of the philosophers really wave their hand with Berkeley. And Jordan was the first person who said like, maybe Barclays point of the only real thing that exists is the perception way of, of looking the world is very interesting to me. And I think there's something more in that. I was going to do that section of the video and then it began with Jordan Peterson once again, which he has harped on quite a bit lately, talking about how much, how much, you know, why doesn't the Roman Catholic church stand up and be the center of society? Like it should be. And I, once he said that, I, I went off. So that's, that's what derailed that video, but I'll, I'll consider that because I agree with you. That was a very interesting portion of the conversation. And I also agree with you that I don't think the, those two Catholic theologians sufficiently thought about it. And I think that's true because we, the modernity and the perspective that it affords has simply been so overwhelmingly dominant. So, but I, but that's, that certainly is a section that is worthy of, of more exploration. So I don't get how he gets to, to the sort of critiques of, well, the church should be doing more of this or that. I mean, he doesn't really know what the church is doing. I mean, how would he know? Like listening to what the Pope says, I mean, I don't think he listens to what the Pope says. So is it just the sort of general cultural sense that he's going off of or? Um, I don't know. I don't know where that, where that critique, what that critique is grounded in. Well, it's just to say we're above critique or anything. But, but that's, but what's been fascinating is how often that has been coming up because James Linsley devoted an hour and a half ranting about the need for a theology and a theological framework and an underpinning for society. And then sort of, you know, thought, well, maybe we can do something without all the supernaturalism, yada, yada, yada. And it's like, have you, have you paid no attention to cultural history for the last 200 years that in some ways this has been the project and every time someone tries to make a new religion that's going to fill in the gap, it fails. I mean, just look at the French revolution. So, and these are very well-educated, articulate, smart individuals, but you're, you're exactly right. That's why I got so exasperated in that video of Peterson talking about it. So you don't even know, you don't even go to church, which means you've got this first personal perspective, but you're not first personal in anything in this space. And so in some ways, get your butt in church, any church. I mean, most people don't have any idea what the theologians are talking about. So it's like, how can you, I mean, you don't know anything about the field of theology. So why are you, I mean, I don't know. I think we probably make those kinds of critiques all the time, but I just, I just wonder what he's like, what actually this is talking about. When he says a thing like that. Yep. So Teddy, where do you live? I'm from Israel. Oh, interesting. Yeah. And as, as I'm the first person who put myself on the map of all the people from Discord from Israel. So, yeah, but I was born in Russia and as all of the immigrants from, from Russia came here. And, and I, what very interests me is something like around like 10 million, 30 million of Russians went away from Russia to other countries and very representative in other countries. And they broke their tradition with them. Yeah. And even though there, there wasn't a religious tradition in Soviet Russia, they still have the, like the existential Russian literature tradition. And they brought it with them to different countries. And it will influence the world in the next, I don't know, 20, 30 years, because people as myself trying to re, trying to bring back the tradition that they grew up on. And, but without the feeling that religion is nasty as the Soviet saw it. So it will bring, bring a very interesting way, way of Russian influence into the West. And like Israel is, is like million people out of 9 million is Russians. And most. You can live in Israel without knowing Hebrew or English, just with Russian, especially in few cities in, in Israel. And it's very interesting because in my idea, like I, I'm not a Jewish. My mother is Jewish from her grandfather part from her father's part. So I'm, I'm, I'm quarter Jewish and by Jewish law, especially the like from the, from the alaha is you can see the Jewish only if your mother is Jewish. But the state of Israel except Jews, according to the Nazis, definition of Jews, which is your quarter. So you cannot get married in Israel if you're not a Jew, but, but the alaha. But you can still immigrate. So you have a conflict, a really big conflict, a conflict that the Jewish state don't know how to accept people from other traditions. And that's what Tom Holland mentioned. That what he mentioned that Judaism is really bad with immigrants. But, and that's what Paul did. He brought Judaism to, to other nations and said, if you accept Christ, you can join in. And Israel have a big problem with that. And I don't know how it will play out, but I have some ideas and maybe I need to get talk with you and have an hour conversation about that because there's very interesting elements in that. But I think something will happen with, with, with the, with the faith, with the Jewish faith, especially because there's a lot of Russians here now and especially that Russians are rediscovering their orthodoxy. Wow. Where I'm surprised Jacob hasn't bolted into this room and you've met Jacob on the discord server. Haven't you? Not a lot. I spoke with Adam from, from Ireland a bit, but in few of other guys, but it was the holiday seasons and a lot of you want here. And Jacob will be seeking you out. Trust me after what you said now, he will be seeking you out. I'm here to talk. And like, I'm happy to talk about it. That is fascinating. So you have predictions for the state of Israel in 2022? Sure. I think the, the relationships with the other countries that was signed with the Arab Abrahamic agreements will flourish. My parents just returned from Morocco and they said that they are going to be able to they said that Moroccan people are really, really friendly to Israelis. A lot of people going there and they really accept them tourism there of Israel. And I still think there will be conflict with some kind of conflict with Turkey because Turkey don't like the fact that we have natural gas and we have agreements with Saudi Arabia to pass the gas, our gas to Greece and not through Turkey. So it's interesting. And the other thing, which my dad told me a few years ago, a few days ago, he, he heard on some Russian channels that why Russia is in Syria. And he, he said that it's Russians have their own company, Gas Bomb, I think that they're sending a lot, a lot of gas to Germany. And they're in Syria because they try to make the areas warlike so they don't build a pipe that will have a competition with their own gas pipe in the North. So I'll still think Syria is not in a good place. And for Israel, it's, it's a good opportunity to put them down. And I don't know what the most interesting thing in the region is Lebanon. And who knows what's going to happen with that? Because this country is not in a good state right now. Wow. So maybe we'll see another conflict like in 2006. Wow. Who knows? Hope not. Wow. Thank you. Thank you for that. You're welcome. And Dominus in the, has a super chat. Look at that. We have a super chat. We've really arrived. I'm not alone in this prediction. I predict in 2022, Putin will sound more Christian than leaders of the West. Fascinating how, I mean, when I was growing up during the cold war, I mean, the Russians were the reliable baddies. I mean, they, I mean, just look at Star Trek, you know, it's the Klingons, the Russians. I mean, it was just, and now it's been fascinating watching this transformation happen. And there's a lot of, you know, in Sacramento, tremendous immigration from Ukraine, Russia. When my son, when my, my second oldest son went to high school in a local high school, he had, he has dark hair and he was known as white, not Russian. You know, they had to, they had to distinguish him because well, white, not Russian, as opposed to, of course, all the other mixes that are here in Sacramento. Very, very interesting. Well, what, what, what, what do the polls think of Russia? I mean, what's, I mean, all of the history between, I mean, what's going on there? Well, traditionally we have two enemies, Germany and Russia. So that's, there are some animosities. And we all slavs, I guess. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. All right. The polls were like, they were seen as more sophisticated as the Russians in the times of Dostoyevsky. And in that time, Russia looked to France for guidance and cultural ideas. And there was this tension between like the enlightened French speaking aristocrats and the, and the Russians speaking like lower classes. And that's like, I think a battle in the Russian soul for, for going back to like a, like a promised past to a pan-Slavic kingdom. That's fascinating. We always had, we've been on the border always. It was like in the medieval times we had like Western nights. You know, we were like last country to have Western nights. Yeah. But we had like light cavalry as well. We're always on the border. Somewhat Eastern, but somewhat Western as well. Well, you were the defender of Europe against the Mongols. That's a really, really big role. Yeah. It's, it's fascinating as an American, Americans are probably the most historically illiterate or one of the most historically illiterate developed nations on the planet. Americans don't pay any attention to history, partly perhaps because we have so little. And so it's, it's always, I love history. And so I love, you know, listening to you guys riff about, about, you know, the, basically the peoples and their histories and how these histories constitute peoples. So you know, battle of Vienna, there was I heard that 9-11 was in the same date like battle of Vienna. Really? I didn't know that. I didn't know that either. I know it from, yeah, I knew what I know it from Tom Holland. And they checked the dates. And it's 9-11 in English Wikipedia. It's 9-11 this battle of Vienna. Well, those, those terrorists had very much had a sense of history and symbolism in terms of where they attacked and who they attacked. And I'm sure including the date that they attacked. So it's not accidental. It's not arbitrary. I'm surprised. I didn't know that because in Poland, nobody, nobody knows because in Polish Wikipedia, it's 12th of September. It's something with dates, you know, in our, in our history, it's 12th, this battle is 12th of, of September. Yeah. And in the West, in English Wikipedia, it says 11. I don't know. Yeah. They went by Western dates. It's a conspiracy. No, I think there is something with calendar in these times. Yeah. Well, we should, we should, we should welcome Manuel, Mr. Ironroot himself. Welcome to the conversation. Hello. Do you, do you have any predictions for 2022? I have, I have some personal predictions, but I haven't delineated. So let's hear them. Oh, well, my personal predictions is my life is going to change a lot. I'm still a little bit worried how I've been, I've been contemplating this, this idea of being recruited in Jesus's army. What life would look like if you took that seriously. Does it involve plaid and suspenders? Christian's a fail for that one. So step it up people. Get out of your caves and start going into the market and start doing some good, please. But yeah, like, I don't, I don't know if I want to be part of that because that sounds really harsh on me. Although Sam, Sam, who was in here a little bit ago, leveled the prediction that in 2022, 2022, Jordan Peterson starts getting involved more in church than he has before. And so it could be that in 2022, we do see a wave of people who for the last three or four years have been sort of Christianity curious, now starting to get a little bit more serious about actually cleaning their room and doing something instead of talking about it. Yeah, you too. You know, there were a lot of the years, there's a lot of the comment section about why doesn't this guy go back to church? So yeah, maybe that will be 2022, the year of the year of church shopping. Third wave. For Peterson? Well, we'll have to see. You know, I'm always a little nervous when he decides to go to a hundred countries. That's a lot. Yeah. Like I said, I'm always a little nervous when he goes on a book tour. I'm not sure. The last one didn't end well. So yeah, like I do think we need to get more signals into the public, but it needs to be right like the self-sacrificial food for the greater good. Right. Like, and have people attend to that. Right. And because, yeah, like people need to lift it out of whatever they're in. And yeah, the discussion of beauty is there right now, nowadays a lot. But yeah, I think we need to set examples. I don't think beauty is going to cut it. Well, you know, Jay Enns says, and I think this is, you know, he says, I'd be a lot happier to go to church if they didn't participate in the whole mask, vax, mandate nonsense. Well, of course you can find churches all across the spectrum. With all of that, you can find anti-vax church and anti-mask church, et cetera, et cetera. But if in fact, Omicron is, will be the time that COVID begins to recede from our consciousness and from our practice. And then in fact, once churches, because COVID has, at least in the United States and talking to my colleagues, COVID has sort of taken about 30% people out of church participation entirely. And so there will be a lot of empty seats. That's actually one interesting sort of how to write a piece when it comes to the COVID stuff. Obviously we have the same internal spectrum and debate with people on both sides of the issue to varying degrees of sort of anger and whatever, you know, we have everyone. But one interesting thing has been that what the sort of how that response has turned into is just to treat each community as a kind of self-isolated bubble. So you can actually have within the community life going on pretty much as normal. And yeah, it's something that I've really come to appreciate, especially the Christmas season, where people are saying things like, well, they can't travel, they can't be friends and family. But for us, it was just sort of a completely normal Christmas season. And most of the sort of, you know, mandates and kind of stuff hasn't really affected us at all like most people. So I think that's something we can be grateful for. But yeah, I think, yeah, that's one advantage of having a sort of very insular community, I guess. Where are you? Where are you from? Manitoba, Canada. That's got to be at least as cold as Poland. Not now. It's like five Celsius degrees on plus. Yeah, we had 30 the other day. Yeah, it was. Yeah, we had some snow a week ago. Not yet. February will be colder. Well, we had a little scare in that. I mentioned it in the Sunday service we had. So during COVID, one of our church plants, one of our daughter churches sort of moved back home with us, which wasn't unusual because my children moved back home with me during part of COVID, at least. And so one of the daughter churches moved back in with us because she lost one of her rented facilities and we had extra facilities. So they were just two miles up the road. So we said, you know, come on back and we'll figure things out. But then the pastor of that church that met at nine o'clock, he contracted COVID a couple of days before the New Year's Eve service and so didn't know he had it at that point. And then he had the Sunday service also in our sanctuary and then usually between services visiting with some of our older folks. And then we had a couple of people in our church get sick. Testing has been hard to come by. So people sort of wave things off until someone in their 70s or 80s gets the virus and then they get a little sober when a good friend is sick. Rick had a motorcycle buddy, somebody in their 40s, just flat out die of the Delta variant. It was a healthy person and just bang, took him. So, you know, there's a lot of drama around it, but COVID isn't fictitious. Yeah, the Delta variant is really awful for communities. Like totally. Yeah, I mean, it was pretty ugly for a month there. Yeah, I had a friend who had both of her parents end up in the hospital and weren't sure if they were going to make it. But they kind of both ended up pulling through. But now they're just, I mean, recovering from something like that from spending, recovering that isn't a joke. So, yeah. Another friend of mine who's a pastor in Roseville, not too far from here, you know, has long COVID. And so he's, you know, he had it over a year ago, but he continues to have fatigue, other lingering symptoms. And so, you know, it's no joke. And if you're a pastor, if you're responsible for people and you have a fair number of seniors like I do, you walk a line. On one hand, I hate masks. I think masks are horrible for community. And so I don't want to wear, I want to, I don't want these kind of things to dominate us. But at the same time, we do have to figure out how to care for each other. So it's a line that you walk. All right. Any other? Go ahead. May I ask, because we are regarding a prediction toward the future. So I want to ask maybe a long term personal question for you. You always saying that your church is the boomer generation, quite old generation, and they won't be with us in 10 years, but you will Lord willing. Yeah. You have at least like 30 years. Easy. My father died when he was 77. I'm 58. So, we'll see if I have 20 or 30 probably. You seem like energetic. I still have your vigor. And maybe, do you have thoughts about the period after maybe retiring early or I don't know, doing something else? Do you have a thought about it? I think about it. There's a, John Van Donk wants me to pastor his church. He's been trying to recruit me for a long time. I had a, there was a church in Canada. It was hilarious. There was a church in Toronto actually, that sent me their profile and said, you know, would you consider having a conversation with us? It's a conversation. So I said, I talked to all kinds of people. I'll have a conversation with you. But then I sent them, I sent them the links to my channel and to the church channel. I said, you watch some of these videos and decide if you still want to talk to me. And they're like, no, you're probably not what we're looking for. I thought, okay. I, you know, I, I want to keep, I found these conversations and videos to be very productive. So I'd like to continue to work on, on Estuary. And I, at some point I'd like to do some writing because writing is different than video making, but I, that, that has to, writing takes a lot more intensive time. I mean, I could just sit down here and rip off a video and no time. So we'll see. I'm not anxious about what will come. I'd like to, I'd like to do a little bit of traveling. I'd like to visit, you know, some of the meetups in different places. I'd love to visit a bunch of the people that I talked to. I want to get out to the Netherlands. I'd love to go to Israel at some point. So there's a lot of things I'd like to do. So I'm, I'm not worried. I think it'll, I think it'll come. I just have to, I have to figure out how to con my wife into doing some of these things. That's, that's the, that's the harder part. She likes to travel. We need bigger community in Poland. What's that? I, we need bigger community in Poland. You need a bigger community in Poland. I mean, the world is an amazing place and I love history. And so I, there's almost no place I don't want to visit. My wife also likes travel. So at some point we'd like to travel, but I'm going to have to figure out how to afford that because, you know, pension of a Christian for a minister, not exactly fat. So I'll just stop that on and you'll become a rich person in a month. Well, we'll, we will, we will see, we will see, but I'm, you know, living stones. I want to, you know, the, the people here have been very good to me and they're, a lot of what they want is, you know, they want to die in their church and they want their pastor to do their funeral. And I don't think that's a lot to ask. And so I'd like to keep this going as long as I can. And, you know, a lot of people have, because they watch my channel, they've given financial support to the church. And I don't know that we would have made it through COVID without that financial support to the church. You know, we had some of our members when COVID hit, that was sort of an easy time where they could say they were already driving a distance into church, maybe they're widows and say, well, I'm, you know, that's, I'm going to look for a church closer to home, which is absolutely fine. But we're, we'll, you know, what will happen with living stones? I don't know. So our daughter church is with us. Maybe at some point there'll be more collaboration with our daughter church, although she's, she's struggling too. So a lot of little struggling churches, but my kids are almost through college. And then, you know, how much do I really need to live? Once, once my kids are through college, it's like, okay, that's a major financial burden. Now, if I got to keep a roof over my head and food on the table, you know, my, that's not hard to do. So I'll keep, I'll probably keep doing this. I mean, I usually do what I do. What's meaningful and doing this has been meaningful. So as long as it's meaningful, I'll probably keep doing it. Thank you. That's nicely said. All right. Any more, any more predictions for 2022? Well, Andrea says, anyone would be foolish enough to try to make a prediction about Well, assuming that COVID, I think we're going to see some revivification of a lot of things with people having completely new perspectives. So I think it's a year of potential. And yeah, like, let's see what happens. All right. Andrea says she'd contribute to the PVK traveling church fund. Andrea, I thought you were going to move to Sacramento and go to my church. Huh? That's what I, that's what I, that's what she said. She wanted to move to Sacramento, go to my, a lot of people say, if I, if I lived in Sacramento, I'd go to your church. And I think, I bet you wouldn't. I bet you wouldn't. All right. Well, have we, have we, have we milked this cow sufficiently? I'm just trying to harvest any predictions from the comment section here. Mudhat says maybe they are a natural conclusion of mass psychosis. Oh, I forgot what they are. I thought that was maybe a Emily, you've talked to her. Remember? Yeah. Yeah, I know. I know who she is. I just, I just missed the record. I know who she is. I just, I just missed the reference there. Anselman has his wrench and he's making sure that everyone is, is well-behaved. Rick has a day job now, so he can't be omnipresent when I do this kind of stuff. Oh, Mudhat does have a prediction. The counterculture art scene gets more organized and shows up in the game, shows up to the game. Well, all we've had in America has been counterculture since the sixties. I mean, how, I mean, that gets to part of David Fuller's point about Ben Sixsmith's article about the left just keeps acting like there's some huge, you know, there's this huge hegemonic culture that it's fighting against when, at least in popular culture on the American scene, the counterculture runs the show already. So, so maybe, maybe the traditionalists are now the counterculture. I don't know. This is an ongoing conversation we've had in Sherry's Art Group. I'm from Sherry's Art Group. You're from where? Like from Sherry's Art Group. Oh, from Sherry's Art Group. Oh, okay. Yep. And, and this is something we talk about constantly, how, how to engage the culture, how to, you know, how to set us straight. And like, it's been a wild ride, at least for me, this was one of the most productive years, like engaging with them and learning from them. And like, I don't know, it's been awesome supporting each other. Well, I've, if there's, you know, you asked me about what I do after, you know, Living Stones, one of the things that I am most pleased about are the development of these other groups, like, like Sherry's Art Group, and they've been all these other little things that have started. And that to me is just, there's just so much productivity and potential in small groups that I'm, I'm, I couldn't be more pleased to, to hear from these groups and what they've done. And, you know, when I, you know, when I first said the word estuary and people are like, well, we're, I'm going to start centralized estuary. I said, no, because that would be a tremendous bottleneck. You know, Sherry just grabs a rando slot, comes in the channel and says, I want to start an art group. And so, okay, anybody wants to start an art group, email her and hear this group starts. And I listened to her conversation with Karen Wong, giving a little update on the group. So I'm, I'm super thrilled about that. Can anybody throw a link in the comments? Please. If you look for Sherry Harkin, you can look for her conversation with me or on Karen's channel. Karen has fewer conversations, but yeah, someone should, someone should be able to get you a link, especially on the discord. There's, there's a whole bunch of folks running around. Chris Pacow has been involved with the art group. Chris, Chris wants to do a conversation with a couple other people with me in the art group and hopefully we can find a slot at some point. Yeah. And I think it's important to recognize that you should not identify against things. You should identify for something. Yeah. Keep that in mind. Yep. Yep. That's true. That's true. A Bazzini predicts that Grim Grid has a Patreon. Yes, he already does. 2022 is the year of real punk rock, counterculture, going to church, getting married and having children. So, Paul, here's a question for you. What do you think are some of the both the sort of big themes, questions you find yourself wrestling with right now? And what do you think will be these themes moving forward? Sort of moving into 2022. What do you think will continue to preoccupy? Because part of the reason I'm asking is I've been, I've been quite disengaged from this little circle, so I am not completely tuned in. But I sometimes wonder if just me kind of pursuing my own interests, if as I'm doing that, I'm kind of engaging the kinds of questions that this little corner of internet is asking, though without sort of directly asking those questions. It's sort of the same themes keep popping up. I think it relates to the counterculture question in that for Protestants, when and how does the protest end? I'm not ready to become Roman Catholic. Catholics aren't ready to become Orthodox. But at this point, I think culturally, we're seeing that there's a hole in the middle of the culture where the church used to be. And there's a, there's a just the range of experiences with that. So just even in this little screen here, you've got the Netherlands that had a, you know, reformed state church. You've got Russia that had the Orthodox Church, but the Russians are, you know, migrating all around the world. You've got, if there's a culture that has the church at the center of it, I mean, look at Poland, or even Ireland, or French, you know, French Quebec, those have sort of collapsed. And we see now that you cannot live on a counterculture. You need something solid, stable that stands on its own. It's not reactive. And I think for at least in this space, we agree that, you know, it's going to be some, it's going to be some expression of Christianity. But what does that look like? So the Hutterites, you know, with a tremendous amount of commitment, determination, seriousness. I mean, you all have created a culture that I don't think is fundamentally reactive, although even in, you know, in any Protestantism, including Anabaptism, there's a certain degree of reactivity. And this, this gets into, I mean, your question, which was what you didn't like that. The revolution. Can I tack on something? Yeah, go ahead. I mean, that's tack on. I mean, it's interesting you hearing you say that. As I'm, as I'm just sort of scanning through some of the sermons you're preaching, it does seem like you're sort of driving home the revolution point in a way, like sort of pointing out how Christianity does have this revolutionary aspect. So is that, you think your sermon, sermons are in tension with the, the sort of cultural critique you're making or, or, or do you think they, they're of a piece? I think they're of a piece. You know, when I responded to your critique of Peugeot, I think Christianity is fundamentally counter-revolutionary in that Jesus is the King addressing the rebels. I mean, fallen humanity is the rebellion and Jesus calls. Now the problem is that we all live in a world that is rebellion. And so we, we are bearing witness to the, to the true King of the world. That's the, I think that's the major narrative. And so you've got Peugeot, who was saying Christianity isn't revolutionary. It's, it's fundamentally the structure and Protestants sort of naturally come in and say, yes, but in a way within the age of decay, we continue to live within a revolution. And so if you revolt against the revolution or you are revolutionary, I mean, there's a little chasing, I got in trouble saying chasing tail. There's a little, you know, tail, tail chasing going on with that, but I think that's the point. And now with let's say the recession of modernity, you know, what secularism sort of allowed within modernity was a framework that in some ways allowed a truce amidst warring confessional Christian factions. That's basically what secularity in Europe was. Okay. We've got every reason to be anxious about what happens when the truce comes to an end. Because we, well, secularity, modernity has so much Christianity built into it. You know, forget, you know, what people like Pinker say there's so much Christianity built into it that secularity basically said, let's take a broad Christian ethic of humanism and the way that we're going to let's take a broad Christian ethic of humanism and let's, let's withdraw some of our, our sectarian demands and afford a rather vanilla humanistic space, which allows Hutter rights to have their community and Dutch Calvinists to have their institutions and the, the, the Roman Catholics to build their institutions. Let's allow these communities to sort of do these things within a general Christian frame, but we're going to just kind of shut up about its Christian nature. And we're going to play that game. And we've been playing that game for quite a while, but it's with globalization, it's becoming increasingly apparent that people are opting out of the game. We saw that with resurgent Islam, you see that with Modi in India, and there's, it's been exposed now that this secularism that in the wake of colonialism, people broadly bought into was kind of a Christian Trojan horse. And so India is like, we're going to go back to being authentically Indian. I don't think that project is going to be as easy as they imagine it might be, or that the propaganda of it pretends that it is. And I think resurgent Islamism is a part of that. I think, you know, Zionism has exactly the same issues. And so then the question is, if we, what does post secular look like? Is it a return to sectarian violence because we can't agree on a dominant frame? I mean, these are the really big, I think, anxious questions. And they scale all the way down. So, you know, here I've got the little Christian Reformed Church in North America, which is basically being tugged apart by larger forces such as the mainline church and American fundamentalism. And that's what's happening to the Christian Reformed Church is it's being assimilated into larger forces. But that's just a tiny little thing. I mean, the Hutterites, you all have strong walls made of plaid and suspenders. And, you know, those are your walls. They really are. But they work because you have containment and you have identity and you know who you are. But there's also a sense in which you're, you know, we wear suspenders, not belts. And in the Christian Reformed Church, we took down those walls. And that's where you have the Benedict option. So I think those are the big issues. And we have a new face in here. Father Steve. I can't hear you. Introduce yourself. Dominic VanderKlay. Yes, we've never spoken. So tell us a little bit about yourself. I'm Father Stephen DeYoung. Oh, yeah. We've talked on email. Oh, now we're really into it. Former CRC turned Orthodox priest. This is what many people are praying for for my future. Well, yeah, the pathway is open. I mean, I mean, the African Anglicans made me a sweet proposal about a month ago. I turned them down. Yeah, we don't make offers. We're not going to come and like, give you a package or something. Oh, they didn't offer any money. Trust me. They didn't have any of that. Well, Steve, it's nice to talk to you a little bit. At least for those who don't know who you are. I probably a lot more do know who you are. So say a little bit about yourself. Yeah. So I'm Father Stephen DeYoung. I'm the pastor of. Everything just froze up. Did I freeze up? You're back. You're back. OK. I'm the pastor of Archangel Gabriel Orthodox Church here in Lafayette, Louisiana. And I've written a couple of books. The first was Religion of the Apostles. Second one is God is a Man of War, which is a second one is about violence in the Old Testament. The second one is sort of or the first one is sort of an Orthodox biblical theology. I've got the whole Council of God blog, the whole Council of God podcast and I co host the Lord of Spirits podcast. All right. Those are the main things. Welcome to the Discord. I have a question. I knew you would. Yeah. One thing I've often wondered about the Lord of Spirits podcast is this whole talk of, you know, of powers and principalities, spirits, that is some pretty weird stuff. And to what degree do you think sort of in modernity, it's not a very good thing. Do you think sort of in modernity, yeah, do we sort of have to buy the whole package or do you think there's some things that need to be left in the past? I don't know. That's a bit of a crude way of asking the question. But do you think all of this sort of weird stuff can be completely easily brought into the modern world, which yeah, that sounds like a very modernist way of asking the question. But that's one thing I've often wondered about about that kind of project. It seems so weird, I guess. I hope we didn't lose them. Did you see, well, you're not on social media, Julian. Tom Holland recommends that we make that we keep Christianity weird. And I actually, you're muted. I actually think that a big part of part of why I got into this was it's abundantly clear right now that we don't have a sufficient translation of what we mean by spirit for people today. So, oh, he's back. I am back. And I did hear the question. So hopefully my browser will do a little better this time. Yeah, so I think to some extent, we kind of have to go whole package, although there's a qualifier to that too, right? So the problem with having brackets, which is what sort of modern Christianity has taught us to do, which is where you say, okay, well, there's a certain number of supernatural things. But these are the minimal ones for Christianity, like Christ's resurrection, and the virgin birth, those kinds of things. We'll accept those and then, but just those minimal ones, or depending on sort of how conservative your denomination is, that may expand out a little bit to be like, well, you have to accept all the ones that are actually in the Bible, but you don't have to accept any of the ones that are outside of the Bible. Wherever we put those brackets, the problem is that no matter how narrow or wide those brackets are, you have a basic inconsistency in terms of how you look at the world and how you understand reality, where you're applying one kind of epistemology and one kind of hermeneutic, and one sense of interpreting and understanding the world within the brackets, and then a different one outside of it. And those two aren't consistent with each other. And that inconsistency is eventually going to fray those brackets. And so once you've said in motion that if I find something hard to believe, I'm not going to believe it, even if you create an exception for certain things, eventually that bracket breaks down and you start doubting some of those things that you previously thought were required. And so I think that's why we've seen in sort of mainstream modern Christianity, those brackets shrink and shrink and shrink and shrink and shrink you know over the years, because once you start saying right now within that though, right, we're not trying to say on Lord of Spirits, and I'm not trying to say ever that we need to try to set the way back machine and forget science, forget cultural developments, forget, you know, we did all go back to speaking paleo-Hebrew and believing the earth is flat and covered by a dome, because we can't do that. That's not possible, right? So the way we understand these things as modern people who have absorbed that other knowledge is not going to be identical to the way it was understood in the ancient world, right? So the content is the same, but new understanding emerges, right? Like the whole language and understanding of the philosophy of mind and consciousness, it's so important to a lot of what we talk about on Lord of Spirits and stuff. That's not terminology or anything that anyone in the ancient world was familiar with, right? But we can use that new knowledge as a tool to understand the old truths rather than pitting the new knowledge against the ancient truths. Yeah, I've also found it really, really helpful to, you know, that sort of Polly language of the principalities and powers, you know, through people like Walter Wink has often been seen also sort of through kind of cultural or economic or political forces. And you can kind of hold that alongside the more supernatural aspect of it. So I think that's one way I've been able to think about these kinds of things. But I think what you just described, I find very helpful, because I think this is a point Paul has made too. It's when the sort of Eastern Orthodox conversations come up in these circles, it's often presented as like, well, we're just going back to the tradition, going back to the sort of past. But I think the move you describe where you're bringing the tradition forward alongside the history we've all gone through, the sort of evolution of consciousness, and it's not a simple return back, but it's a kind of bringing with the developments of modernity and so on. And I think that has to be the only way forward. I don't think you can do it as kind of straight out, let's just go back. I think we do want to maintain continuity with tradition without sort of disregarding all of the history that's gone on since then. So yeah, that's helpful. Thanks. Yeah. And that's one of the internal problems within especially the American Orthodox Church is that there's a tendency, and this is a danger of just conservativism in a broad sense, right? And a lot of people who are conservative in a broad sense are drawn to orthodoxy because of the sense of tradition and the ancient truth, right? But the danger there is that you take some particular point in the church's history and absolutize that, make that the perfect, right? This is the golden age of all time, right? So they think that our job is now to recreate 19th century Russia or the 13th century Byzantine Empire or the 5th century of the councils and the church fathers, right? We just recreate that today in the United States somehow and act like we're not all cosplaying and larping, you know? And then we have brought the ancient truth, right, to contemporary America. And that's not the case, right? If you look at orthodoxy in Russia and orthodoxy in Greece at the same time, right, at any given point in history, they don't look identical, right? We would say it's the same faith, it's the same ancient truth, right? It's the same tradition. But the way that works itself out practically and culturally and linguistically and all of those things changes from place to place and time to time. So what American orthodoxy should America exist long enough for that to form, right? What that will look like, we're going to find out a couple centuries from now, right? We're in the process of finding that ourselves. And it's not going to be identical to Greek orthodoxy or Russian orthodoxy or Ethiopian orthodoxy or Serbian orthodoxy or what have you. But it's going to be the same tradition and the same truth, the same faith, the same Christ, but in, you know, at that point, probably a 23rd century American context, what it really comes fully into being. And yes, Sam, I will come on your show. Sam Roberts Yes, thank you. Thank you. All right. You answered my only question. So I had a question to Julian because I wanted to flesh it out a little bit more. So what's one of the modern insights that you think is in conflict? Oh, I mean, I don't think there's any need to get all specific, but I just think what he just described as a sort of when you just try to go back to the 18th century or whatever, and it ends up being a kind of inauthentic larping. And I think part of how can you be a I think part of the language of being authentic, if that is the word that that's that's become too cheap. But I think that that's kind of important is how can you be really embody your Christian faith in the world you find yourself in and make it yeah, sort of have it find find its roots there and be intelligible people. I think I think that's important. And yeah, then you then you would have to take into account things like the developments of science, you know, and so on. And I think the danger there is to try to build your faith on the sort of shift in the sense of, you know, modern civilization, or I mean, that's just a foolish prospect. Ultimately, your faith has to be built on on Jesus Christ, and so on. So yeah, but but I do think it sort of incarnates itself in the time in which we find ourselves. I think we expressed it really well. Yeah, so. So when I hear authenticity, I connect authenticity with with a level of integration, right? Like you have a familiarity with the thing that you're expressing, right? So so when when you were talking about authentically living out your faith, what you are talking about is how do you integrate the faith into your person so that you can act as a person in the world? And the world is irrelevant in some sense to that process, because like, if you're an integrated person, you're going to act that out, no matter the situation that you're in. And I think I think that's the most important part of what religion gives you, it gives you a universal way of relating to to the specifics in materiality. And so that's why I'm a little bit skeptical about the modernity changing that game, right? Like, like, I do get that when when you're caught in the modern game, then, like the getting that out of your system is is a different question. And maybe that's the thing that you're trying to focus on. But like, like, I think, ideally, and like, I have a lot of objections about the church not doing that well. But ideally, you get get a pre package worldview implemented into you by the church and that affords you to resist whatever the world brings to you. Father Stephen, would you like to take that? One quick response would be for me, it would also be connected to the idea of evangelization of bringing the faith to the world, to different cultures, to different people. And so the process of translation and incarnating in different cultures has to be part of that. But yeah. I think there's a we need to clarify what we mean by modernity there, too. Right. So there's there's modernity, qua modernism, right? Qua worldview, sort of the ideology, the ideological level. And then there's the level of contemporary reality. Right. So, yes, it's absolutely true that if you become fully integrated as an Orthodox Christian, you're going to know how to operate within the different circumstances presented by contemporary reality. So that's true. But some of those situations are different. Right. Like 19th century Russians did not go to work in a cubicle writing code for a living to take over paycheck. Right. So they're like economic realities and social realities. You know, they didn't they didn't have to develop a relationship with social media of one kind or another. You know, so there are these differences, right, that are responsible for the differences between the different eras and the different places. Right. Because it's the same truth coming into contact with an altered, you know, sort of social and cultural and material reality. But there's also that constancy. So, yes, what it means for a person to be an Orthodox Christian in the United States today is not different from what it meant to be an Orthodox Christian in the fifth century in Egypt. Right. But the way that plays out, the way that expresses itself, you know, is going to be different because we're just living in a different situation than that person was. Right. So the things we deal with, if they don't deal with the things they dealt with, I mean, that person in Egypt might have been a slave. You know, so there are things that they dealt with that we don't deal with. You know, and so modernity and the way that modernity has shaped the world we encounter, right, is going to is going to account for those differences. But yes, I'm not saying that we should find elements of modernism ideology wise and try to incorporate those. Right. Those are two different things. But what about things like, oh, I'll ask a question. To what extent, Father Dionne, do you think that Protestants can, I don't know, maybe for lack of a better word, appropriate some of the insights and stuff that you talk about in your book or on Lord of Spirits? To what extent can they bring that into their tradition? Or maybe what do you view as the limits of Protestantism and what can learn from what you're saying? Yeah. So, I mean, part of this is a different, a difference in approach. I mean, the modern Protestant approach has become sort of very eclectic, right. So a modern Protestant could say, well, I like this element from, you know, I like Presbyterian church government and I'm a three point Calvinist, but, you know, I don't like infant baptism, maybe. And I'm kind of convinced about this in terms of eschatology and this on that issue that and that's okay. Right. That's totally okay. You know, for a modern American product. Well, that's Protestantism's strength and weaknesses, right, is that it can recombine and mutate that really fast to use a modern analogy. Yeah. Yeah. That makes it adaptable, but that also makes it highly changeable. Yeah. And orthodoxy, of course, is seen very differently, right. It's about, you know, preserving intact and recovering if somewhere along the timeline, we missed out on something, right, recovering it, you know, from the past. So, I mean, on one hand, I could answer that and say, well, nothing, because I think it's totally integrated. And so if you accept one point, eventually, if you reason through it, you're going to end up accepting the whole thing. Infer Pound. Right. I would say that because I'm an orthodox priest, right. But on the other hand, I know for a fact that there are people who read books I've written or blog posts I've written and approach it in that Protestant way of saying, this is something that I think is useful and good and true. And so I'm going to incorporate that, but I'm not sold on these other elements. Right. Or at least I'm not sold yet. I think personal opinion that resistance is futile and eventually you'll be assimilated if you start taking on some of these things, the dominoes will start to fall. But I mean, I certainly don't want process to not read it. And if someone tells me I'm still a Protestant of whatever stripe or I Roman Catholics, frankly, get in touch with this too and say, I'm Roman Catholic, but I like this. There's a fascinating review of religion of the apostles where this guy's saying all these great things. And he's saying, except for all that stuff about the Orthodox church, I love this book. Right. So I know there are people doing that. Right. And what's important to me, the reason there aren't pictures of me on my books and stuff, and I don't want to market myself per se, is that for me, it's about getting the content and the information and the ideas out there. And then once they're out there, I really started believing in the death of the author once I published a book, right. People will come to me and be like, I loved your book. Here's what I got out of it. And I'm like, what? You know, like, but if it's doing something in their life, it's totally valid. Right. Who am I to say? No, that's not valid. So I'm perfectly happy for that to happen too. And however people appropriate it is great. I think it all hangs together, but I could be wrong also. You know, I, in fact, I am, I stole a line from NT Wright that I use a lot when I'm teaching and stuff that he said, when he first started teaching, he would start every class by saying 10% of what I'm about to teach you is wrong. I don't know which 10% or I correct it. He said after 20 years of teaching, he started saying 20% of what I'm about to teach you is wrong. So I try to keep that in mind myself. So I may be wrong. There may be big holes in it, right. It may not all fit together as well as I think it does. Right. I could be wrong on lots of different points. But that's my perspective on it is that I think it hangs together. But I see sort of in, in Lord of Spirits fandom and in Jonathan Peugeot watchers, there's a lot of kind of bridges between charismatic American Christianity and kind of ortho curiosity that it seems to be especially the charismatics that are quickest to understand some of the stuff that you're saying. They're like, well, we believe in angels and demons this whole time. You're helping us clarify some of our thoughts on the subject. And like, you know, the channel like remnant radio and stuff like that, they're seemingly the closest bridge amazingly kind of weirdly, seemingly between American evangelical Protestant land and ortho land is charismatic Christianity. And I wonder, I certainly know a lot of people who you know, crossed and become orthodox, but I also know a lot of people who are seemingly content where they're at. And I'm curious how these ingredients are going to get mixed together. And it's not entirely clear to me who's being more influenced by whom, and what's going to come out of this mix. And part of me could really easily imagine a slightly more theologically robust charismaticism because theological robustness isn't always charismaticism, strong suit getting to kind of being, I don't know, not, I don't want to say winners or losers, but sort of the most vital thing that comes out of this weird mixing of ingredients. And that's sort of why I'm talking about about Protestants trying to appropriate some of your stuff. Yeah, I think that's a kind of natural thing. Because so much of American Christianity, virtually all of it is descended from Puritanism. And they're those English reforms, so I can badmouth them on your channel, I guess. But it will have his say in the comments. Don't worry, keep going. Yeah, the Dutch, we have our pietism, so we have our own issues. But that Puritan tradition, historically became very anti supernatural, and very materialist, especially in the US, and especially once the conflict with modernism in the early 20th century had the worst possible results in that rather than questioning modernism, modernists came along and said, well, no, now we can scientifically reconstruct the real history behind these biblical things and the real history behind this. And rather than attacking the method of modernism, a lot of American Christianity adopted that same method and just tried to argue for the opposite conclusion. Right? You don't know the Old Testament is exactly what scientifically happened. And so because that so characterizes American Christianity, outside of Pentecostalism, you don't have much of a sense of the supernatural, especially in the day to day. Mormonism's got it. Yeah, Mormonism does too. And actually, I've had some interesting conversations with Mormons. That doesn't surprise me. Yeah. Yeah. But you know, your typical Baptist, your typical Presbyterian, they don't have a lot of their day to day life, even in their worship, not a huge sense of the supernatural, much more focused on the moral than on the supernatural. And so that to me is, I think why the groups that still have that sense of the supernatural sort of gravitate. Or enchantment. I think it's not, quote, the supernatural. It's this idea that the world is not enchanted anymore. And we don't have that depth of reality of connection, that intimacy with the world that we had when the world was enchanted. You're still there. You're still there. He's having trouble with his connection. Sorry for dropping out of the conversation. I'm trying to get my daughter's car fixed. So that's what, and apparently a woman has moved into one of our sheds on the ground. So I have to deal with that too. What I get for cleaning it out. I'm hearing everything. I'm just having to refresh the video. Okay. So I'm going to go ahead and do that. I'm going to go ahead and do that. I'm just having to refresh the video. So go ahead, Mark. Yeah. I think Manuel and I did a video on my channel about enchantment, obviously, Paul, as you well know, because I mentioned it. And you've yet to set up your Patreon. No, no, I have a subscribed star. Yeah. I'm not grizzed though. I'm not pushing everything. But yeah, I mean, because I think that's what people are hungry for. Right. So when you say, Paul, the end of modernity, I hear, you know, they run at the end of the ability to be intimate because the world's not enchanted. It's not deep enough for them to make connections in the world. And it's like, okay, so really it's the end of modernity and the lack of enchantment are somehow the same thing. Right. And then that's what you're talking about when you're talking about say supernatural or extranatural or something beyond, we'll say near nature as conceived of by science, which is a very small box. It's a very small box. And we're not making that connection. And then, and then you well and I do a clubhouse room on Mondays, meaning Mondays at noon, Eastern. And we were talking about this, this talk on, on, you know, when you make a material connection, it's a very shallow connection. It's not intimate. It's not deep. It doesn't have that depth of feeling because, you know, how connected are you to your iPad? How connected are you to your computer? You know, as opposed to how well can you connect to a person? And this goes back to your talk with John Vervecky about, you know, Vervecky saying, look, you just use the Bible. You don't need the Jesus. And it's like, are you sure you can have the same connection with a book that you can have with a person? Because I'm sure you can't. And the worst part about that whole thing was Vervecky in his own lecture says, well, if you treat things with a copy, they become people. Well, if you were to treat the Bible the way you treated Jesus, it would become a person. And then you'd have the Jesus problem all over again. If Jesus is a problem, according to John, I guess, I guess that's the problem is the personification. But to me, it's like, no, and it's interesting because he's actually honing in on the same thing to some extent, although I would argue he's coming at it from a different, from a different angle and doesn't quite, we'll say, get the idea of the depth of the connection. That's what's important. That's what's missing. That's why people are looking for, you know, the things in Lord of Spirits. And I know, you know, Manuel and I have been, we've been running something on the Awakening from the Meaning of Christ Discord server listening to this Lord of Spirits podcast going like, this is amazing. Like, holy mackerel, this is like so cool. The way that you approach the biblical stories and the depth you add, especially like the baptism is your initiation into the army of God thing. I was just like, like, my brain is still reeling from that. I know we're not all caught up. So we're a little behind, but it's like, wow, you know, the richness in having that additional perspective, which is something that for Viggy does talk about, you know, you get in communitized, you get additional perspective, right? All the things that are there that you can't know well enough by yourself. And that's what's re-enchanting the world, right? It's allowing you more access to the world. It's allowing you more connection to the things that are already there. And this is in the Buddhists, right? Like, oh, go out and look. And it's in the, it's in Epicureanism, right? It's in ancient Greek Epicureanism, the original, the original form, right? Go out and savor. Savoring is just connecting with the world with things that are already there. And it is the loss, the deep connection that modernism sort of creates and enforces. And this collapse back into your own single perspective. And then you're re-enchanting the world by giving it more perspectives and adding people to feeling the elephant and going, no, no, I feel this part of the elephant. What part of the elephant do you feel? Then you get a sense that the elephant isn't what you feel. The elephant is so much bigger. And that just gives you that wonder and that revivification and that whole sense where now there's something to cultivate in the world. Because with modernism, there's nothing to cultivate. There's no reason to cultivate anything. The determinism is sort of baked into the whole idea of modernism to some extent. I don't think you can get out of determinism with the modern frame because you're looking for certainty. And if you're looking for certainty, you'll create it. But that's not the world we live in. We live in a world of wonder and magic and enchantment. I think that modernity will sneak through the avenue of psychedelics, this supernatural. I think it's a way of not accepting all those religious stuff, but try to do it with psychedelics. And I don't think it's amped, but it's a way that it tried to solve this problem. Well, I think you're right. I think that's part of the attraction to psychedelics. You can have your chemicalism and take it too. And they lean on the thing that we still can't explain scientifically, the consciousness. So psychedelics bring some things to consciousness. And because science still cannot understand and explain consciousness, it's an easy avenue to explain the supernatural. It's more heavy weight than UFOs. It's a chemical god of the gap. Oh, yeah. That's a good way to put it. It's interesting too. I was just watching my friend's house still, obviously. I go back to South Carolina tomorrow. And he's got Ancient Aliens on. I did a video on Ancient Aliens on my channel because I really like the show. And I have watched it a while. And I went downstairs and I saw what they were saying. And it was something like Helen of Troy was done in an embryo bath. And I was just like, the problem with the show is that if you don't keep up with it, now I feel like my crazy conspiracy theories are like a step down and I got to up my game. But the interesting thing was they were talking about alien abduction. And they actually mentioned, they stopped talking about alien abduction and said, oh, no, no, no, look, this is just like medieval incubi and succubi. And I went, oh, yes, isn't it exactly that? It's exactly the same. People are having these experiences, Paul. You talk about this a lot, right? People have experiences that they can't explain. And then they put them in the framework of the day. And the framework of the day in medieval times is demons and incubi and succubi and attacking you at night and standing on top of you and stealing your breath and all of this. And then you look at the images, just the images that they use in the show to describe alien abduction. And there's this beam coming down from above. Could be breath. Could be. I don't know. It looks like a breath. It looks like the medieval paintings, actually. It's just instead of this slightly horned or disfigured lumpy thing, it's a gray. It's a gray alien with big eyes. But he's got a beam just like the demon. And it's the same thing. They're describing the same experiences. They're just using a different framework to describe them, which the show actually said that effectively. And I was like, this is crazy. This is great. So Father Steve, we're supposed to be doing predictions for 2022. What's coming down the pike for the Orthodox Church in America? So you said you're in Louisiana? Yeah, Lafayette, Louisiana. OK, so deep in the heart of Roman Catholic country and the Bible Belt, both. Yeah, we're more on the on the Catholic side, but it shifts halfway through Louisiana. When you're in southern Louisiana, like Lafayette, New Orleans, we're like 70% Roman Catholic. But you get much above much north of us. And you're well into the immediately into the Bible Belt before you get to Shreveport. So it's kind of a border. There's a joke down here. They say everybody, everybody north of Alexandria is a Yankee, even if Louisiana. It's like in Florida, the further you go north, the more you go south. So yeah, the see, this is Orthodox Church. Is it really a good a good place to do yearly predictions? Because it takes us at least a decade or three to do anything. So I'm learning that. So I mean, I think right now, at least in the United States, we're in a growth phase. And there's there's really the American Orthodoxy is kind of in its in its early teenage years. In the sense that, for example, a lot of us think we want to be independent of our parents, and our parents all know we're absolutely not ready to be independent of our parents. And that just makes us want to be independent more. And so there's there's this constant pushing to sort of what we need to be from one side, we need to be more American. And then that has two different valences, one of those more on the right and one more on the left, in terms of which elements of Americanism they want to lean into. And then there's another side that says, you know, no, we need to be less American. And unfortunately, in a lot of cases, that takes the form of what I was talking about earlier of I'm going to pick what I think was the golden age of perfect orthodoxy and try to recreate that here. That's why I say it's going to take a couple centuries for there to be an authentic sort of American orthodoxy. And you see this in lots of places, like most of the people who want to be independent. There are two things they mentioned right away. The first one is, why are we sending money and stuff to these foreign church bodies? And I'm like, well, that sounds like the American Revolution, right? Okay, so that's very American of you. Not necessarily in a good way. And then the second one is, we need to do everything in English. Because of course, being monolingual is the best part of American culture. So you can see there that like, yeah, we're not really able to stand apart enough from our American culture to ascertain where's the gold and where's the dross, you know, and what do we need to the informant. So I think this year, American Orthodox churches are pretty much done with COVID. It sort of doesn't matter what comes down the pike. I don't think any of us are going to be doing much of anything. And so and we seem to be especially in the south, one of the big things that's happening in American Orthodoxy is that the locus is shifting. It was very much in the past in the northeast, particularly Pennsylvania, New York State, where there were large immigrant communities. But that was very much where everything was focused. And now it's very much moved to the south. Because Orthodoxy, the south has been growing by leaps and bounds. One of the biggest earmarks of that is that St. Vladimir Seminary, which is probably the most well known, there's only a couple of them, but probably the most well known Orthodox Seminary, US that's been in Yonkers, New York, for decades and decades, announced that they're moving. They haven't said where yet, but everybody the scuttlebutt is it's Dallas. Wow. Wow. Yeah, that's sort of a big emblematic of how that's shifting. So and that's actually, it's actually having a different effect than people thought it would. A lot of people thought that that kind of move would kind of Americanize Orthodoxy in all those not necessarily great ways. But what's actually happened is that a lot of the immigrants who brought the Orthodox faith to this country, very much as immigrants wanted to be American, wanted to blend in. The oldest the oldest Orthodox church buildings in this country are the ones that look least like Orthodox churches. Because they were built by immigrants who wanted their church to look like the other churches in town. Because we're not trying to negative attention to ourselves. Yeah, yeah, we're not outsiders. Especially people coming from, with the Cold War, people coming from Russian and Eastern European backgrounds, were very motivated to sort of blend in. And so people coming to Orthodoxy now in the US actually tend to want more of that. They want their church building to look more like a historic church building in Greece or Syria or Russia. The they the differences appeal more to them. And where sometimes some of those folks who are now third or fourth generation immigrants want to start playing with some of the cultural stuff. Like there was a there was a big at a clergy gathering, I won't give details, but at a clergy gathering, there was somebody who suggested they wanted to put up, they wanted to find a locale in the name of the church to put up screens where they could have the lyrics to the hymns every week. And the first people to jump, I mean, the bishops all said no, but the first people to jump up and say no, were people who had entered the Orthodox Church or outside said no, I've been down that road. Don't don't don't even. Yeah, don't even think about it. Yeah. You know, so there's Yeah, so that that's sort of the dynamic that's at play right now. I don't know that many huge events are going to unfold from that other than if St. Blad's announces where they're moving to. And it is Dallas that's going to happen in the next 12 months. But that's that those are the dynamics at play right now. But that's that all sounds quite. Understandable, the, you know, what we started out to Sam, I thought the best prediction of the show so far was Sam's that Jordan Peterson starts getting a little bit more serious about church shopping in 2022. And I think that's right. And, you know, part of what I try to remind people on the Internet is that I am not your pastor and my channel is not your church because I cannot be your pastor and my channel cannot be your church because none of this is any of that. And what you know, a church is a church and it's a community of people and it's in real space and in real life. And we have these other manifestations that are on these black mirrors and these screens in our lives. And we are only beginning to try to understand how they function and what they mean and what they are for. But yeah, so I'm I'm very it's it fascinates me. And yet once you say it, it's completely believable that it's in the south that that your movement is getting traction or your church is getting traction. You look at you look at someone like Rod Rear, who has been probably one of the more visible examples of the embrace of orthodoxy in the American south. And and there are reasons why this makes sense. The tensions, I think, you know, will continue to be between, let's say immigrant communities. And unlike the Christian Reformed Church that had a specific group that sort of migrated and others sort of clumped in in terms of immigrants in America, whereas, you know, you've got all these orthodox communities in the east and then orthodoxy in America and then former Pentecostals and Baptists and atheists. You guys are going to have a really live. You guys are going to have really lively conversations as as this thing forms. Yeah, I think I don't want to go too inside baseball with you on Dutch stuff. You know, there's other people who might not be interested, but no one's interested. The baseball gets will listen. This is the bridges of meaning discord. There's nothing they love better than inside. Oh, yeah. Yeah. But I think that's actually right. Comparing potentially, I think that's a positive because as I look at what happened with the CRC, right over the course of my life. So my my grandparents went to an RCA church in Kalamazoo, Michigan, because it was an ethnic enclave. That was a place where they could go once a week where people spoke Dutch. Yeah. Right. And none of my family were religious at all in the Netherlands. They started going to church when they came here. Yep. Because that's where they were Dutch people. Yep. And my grandfather was a deacon and then an elder in that church. And then my dad in the late 70s, when he was a deacon and got involved in all of the stuff going on in the RCA Senate in Southern California, is where I grew up. Wow. So in the shadow of Shuler. Right. Yeah. And all those wars that were happening in the 70s. Is that the cathedral stuff? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There was at that point in the RCA, there was the Pope of the West, which was Shuler and the Pope of the East, which was Norman Vincent Peale. Yeah. And so he moved from the RCA. My grandparents went to the RCA the rest of their lives, but my dad moved our family to the CRC in town. We were in a little Dutch town that had the Holland Festival every year. The whole shebang. First CRC was on Church Street. Christian school right next door. The whole shebang. The PRs set up a church across the street when they split off. Yep. And then he watched the whole thing happen again. Just, maybe 25, 30 years back. Yep. Right. All the same shifts and changes. Right. And then accelerating. And so then I ended up briefly being a pastor at the CRC. And it was after 1995. Wow. Yeah. So I did all this. And I had people, I went to Westminster West. So I mean, I knew Mike Horton and Kim Riddellbarger and those guys. They talked me into going to URC. And I'm going, why so that I can watch this movie before? Yeah. Watch the whole thing repeat over the next 30 years. But there you had a bilateral thing. It was Dutch culture. And then changing American culture. Yep. And finding the interface. Right. Yep. And I think the fact that in the Orthodox Church, we have this huge diversity. Right. We're sort of only united by one thing. Right. And that's that we've decided to be part of the Orthodox faith and the Orthodox Church. I think that gives the possibility that as American Orthodoxy emerges, it could end up being a more cosmopolitan thing. It's not tied to just one ethnicity. It's got a multiplicity of ethnicities that are informing it. And then sort of the, I guess you could say, non-immigrant identity based Americans coming into it now. Right. And with their own identity, former identities and cultural identity, all of that sort of merging together. Right. And so that when we come together with our commonality, that commonality becomes expressed in this more clear way. Right. That we can more see it as this is what we have in common and this is why we're here. So I'm hopeful, at least, that that will help us move in that positive direction. Maybe the fact that it's not just two directions pulling back and forth, but sort of a circle connected at the center. Right. That as a hub to kind of hold us together. That'll be interesting. Yeah. I really sorry I missed the interaction between you and Julian. Fortunately, it's recorded so I can go back and watch it. But these questions, Julian, right before you jumped on, asked me, whatever I've been talking about lately, because Julian's been, nobody should spend too much time listening to me. I talked to him about the fact that very long arcs here, we've got questions now about, okay, Protestantism is a pushing against. You can only push against so far when you finally have to ask yourself, okay, what is exactly, what is the thing itself? What fits in the hole that's in the middle of our culture? And so I think this is part of the reason that orthodoxy, Catholicism, the more sacramental, the more historic churches are in some ways now increasingly the center of attention because they're not a reactive movement per se as the Christian Reformed Church, a reactive movement, of course, right out. I mean, we got our start reacting against the Reformed Church, the state church in the Netherlands, and then come to America and we're reacting against the Americans and the RCA and we just keep reacting against them. At some point you realize, oh, whatever I'm reacting against is what is setting the agenda for my life. Something needs to be foundational. And the end of modernity basically means that the attempt of finding the foundation and materiality is what is receding. That we now understand that spirit is primary and matter reacts to spirit, not the other way around. And that's the whole fight that's going on at the center of the IDW culture. So if spirit is foundational and matter is reactive, then what is the center of the spiritual world? And most of now, obviously, you're back into very ancient conversations and then very quickly you're going to be... So Paul, I have a question. So what does take your average middle of the road evangelical middle church, I don't get much sort of reactivity out of them anymore. This is one of those things where I sometimes like you magisterial Protestants are still looking at Rome over your shoulder and any minute now you're going to get turned into a pillar of salt. Like us radical reformation types, we didn't feel any need to look back. We weren't reacting against anything. We were doing our own thing. And evangelicalism is a little bit in between those two things, but I don't get much reactivity in an evangelical church except perhaps against sort of liberal American culture or politics or something like that. No, I think what the Protestants tried to do then was refoundationalize on different things. And so the magisterial reformation refoundationalized on the text of scripture. And the radical reformation, you know, refoundationalized on the early church, basically. Well, yeah, they're all trying to get back to the early church, but the magisterial Protestants try to get back to the early church via the text of scripture. And the, you know, the Anabaptists are trying to get back to the early church by the practices that they read in the text of scripture. And, you know, Rome says- Not that they're dealing with the spiritual experience that they see in the early church. Exactly. So they're, you know, the church in Bethel, Reading, just two hours north of me, they are the New Testament church. And the validation of that are the miracles being done in their community. And so you have the, obviously the Roman, the Roman church saying, No, we are the heirs of Peter and the Orthodox. No, we are the heirs of all of the historical churches and continue to embody in our liturgy, the practice of the ancient church. I mean, these are all the appeals that each group comes to, you know, what Manuel pushed back on earlier in terms of authenticity. This is the way we can authenticate the, that we have, you know, in modernity, we have the truth or we have the beauty or we have the right. So, I mean, that's, that's what I see modern humanity looking back over the wreckage of the past and saying, how can we sweep it away and rediscover and refoundationalize and reconstruct? So do you have the truth or are you the truth? Well, now you've got having versus being mode and fancy vervekey words. And so, but, but that's all, that's all, that all gets incorporated into the game as well. And, and you know, we are the true church. I mean, and you know, part of what, part of what deconstructed the Christian reform church after all of its, so after all of its young leaders got drafted into the army in the second world war. And they came back that when they came back to North America and they'd say, no, we are the true church. You know, you can sort of read that in, you know, my church, here, this book by and here this book by Fiavon Halsama and Richard DeRider very much show you how, well, here we have the creeds, here you have the old Testament and here you have the new Testament and whoop, there you have the reformation and here we are right here. And after, after world war two, and these, these new leaders of the sixties and seventies in the Christian reform church said, it's a little silly for us to keep doing this. But once this got deconstructed, then the larger poles in the culture, you know, so is it the, is it the evangelical or the Christian from church part of the evangelical world? Then you've got this little group. No, we really want to be part of the mainline world because, you know, they're, they're, they've got all the best degrees and they've got all the best words and, but the evangelicals had all the best feels and let me tell you, feels win over words usually. And that's, there's the Christian form church in the last 50 years in a nutshell. And so I can, and many other of these little sub traditions too. And so the, what orthodoxy offers, I can very much understand that people look at that and say, well, let's, let's clear off all of this and worship the way the apostles worshiped. That's, that's the, that's the, you know, that's the tagline, right? We're the true church. That's the larger trend. I think, you know, overall is, you know, we're returning, trying to find authenticity, deep authenticity in historicity in an age where technology has compressed time. So most technology is just time compression at the end of the day. That's all it's doing, you know, airplanes, cars, just time compression, other things too, but primarily time compression. And then you don't have an appreciation for history anymore, but you need that to validate because that evolutionarily speaking survivability is the thing. And we know that deeply. And that's why we need the re-enchantment to re-engage with the history. It's why you see the rewriting of history and the destruction of statues and all of that. You can, you can get cynical about all of this stuff and you will have yourself a really nice meaning crisis. And it's at that stage that a lot of people are at. And so when someone comes with a, with a beard and a, you know, and a black, you know, black vestments, whereas 30 years ago people would have laughed at them today. They're like, no, they're not laughing anymore. And that's where we're at. Yeah. And I think, I think, you know, for future predictions, I think the, the, the, you know, we've gotten the, the, the science of meaning from Brevegi and we've seen the end of that in some sense. And you can see how he's pulling back like that. The whole meaning crisis thing goes all the way back to ancient Greece to make its case, right? This is making this case or something that happened relatively recently by invoking Socrates basically. And I think you're okay. So back into neoplatonism and I think, you know, I, I don't know, I can't speak for John, but I wouldn't be in any way surprised if at the end of the search for a religion that's not a religion, he winds up with religion and it looks like where neoplatonism wound up, it landed someplace for a reason. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, it looks very much to me like neoplatonism is an anachronistic term for a bunch of people who had something in common, but all the groups were doing totally different things. And that's why they got run over by Christianity, roughly speaking, is because they weren't coherent. And in many ways, that's what's, that's what's happening. And you can't, John keeps saying you can't return. And then he goes back to neoplatonism. It's like, well, if you don't think we can return, why are you, you know, but, but everybody knows we need to return to something. It's just, they're not sure what, but I think the meaning, the whole meaning conversation is actually hit its, its end in some sense. And now we need to shift to, well, what is wisdom and what is that meaning context and what is intimacy and what is enchantment? Because you need enchantment to understand intimacy and you need intimacy to understand the meaning crisis. And wisdom is the thing, in my opinion, that gives you the ability to navigate those landscapes and, and the navigation of those landscapes allows you to co-create the meaning. And so I think coming up this year, that's what the topics are going to shift. They're going to stay solidly around quote meaning, but they're going to shift into intimacy and into wisdom and into enchantment because you can see the enchantment and the way it plays out in the church, you laid out beautifully, but the way it plays out in secularism is all different because it's drugs or it's, we need conversation. We need to get together in communities. Like somehow these are the secularist solutions, right? But all they're doing is creating churches. They just don't realize that, right? Because for me, religion is inevitable. So what you see is, is, you know, this rewriting of history and know the history is really this, and that's why you need to join my church. Oh no, history is this. That's why you need to join my church. So Mark, is 2022 going to be the year that you start dabbling in church again? Good question. What do you mean again? I've never, I've never dabbled in church. I've been a few times, but I don't know. When are you taking your own advice, Mark? I think, oh, that's not, my advice has nothing to do with that. I don't tell anybody to go to church. I've never told anybody to go to church. I mean, it happens occasionally like, oh, you might want to try church if you've done it before. Like, that's the, I didn't grow up in any of that. So to me, it's like church, what do you need that for? I still like that. Now, now I have some pulls locally to me, people that I made local to me somehow through magic, roughly speaking, who are going to the Orthodox church. And I was just, I was just talking to that person the other day saying, have you been to the pretty Greek church that's right downtown in Columbia, South Carolina? And no, I haven't done that one yet. I'm like, I didn't know about these other ones. Went all the way down to Charleston to talk to one of the guys that Peugeot talked to, apparently, because this person's into Peugeot, but who recommended some church in West Columbia, which isn't too far from my house, but not the pretty Greek church that I'm like, ooh, because I have some Greek heritage. So that that more appeals to me as the, as the Greek Orthodox. So I may go in and visit just because I'm really intrigued by some of these stories and, and enchantment is the thing I think. And so to understand enchantment, the same way I had to go to the Billy Graham Library, which is your fault, Paul, your fault. My trauma is on you. I may have to risk some trauma and hit up the Greek Orthodox church and check out the enchantment and all of the exemplification of the icons there. All right. So I want to add a little bit about this intimacy thing. Like I think people are using structures now to, to provide intimacy or to cover up the lack of intimacy. And for Vicky talks about this when he says like, Oh, when people go into circling, they're like, really enchanted by the intimacy in the circling. But, but the problem is, right, it's, it's not true intimacy, right? Because it's, it's not lasting, the skills aren't lasting. So there, there is this, there's this thing that in modernity, we're trying to construct the intimacy instead of live it and, and undergo the transformation required to be intimate with people. And I think that should be also more on the table, like, whenever people are like, like, Oh, yeah, like, we're taking drugs, and then we're fixing the setting, right? It's like, well, like, how intimate are you with that setting? Right? Like that's someone else providing that setting for you. What's your relationship to that setting? So this is, there's a whole dimension of, of impersonal connection that people don't realize. And it's like, well, if I make it beautiful, like, then people will connect to the beauty. Like, no, they don't have the tools to make that connection. And that's, that's the thing that we are going to talk about as well. I think. All right. I want to give warning that I am going to, I'm going to close this up at the top of the hour because there's, there's, there's real things out around my office here that need to be taken care of. But father, thank you so much for joining us. Oh, happy to, I just saw it. I thought I barged in on your channel. I like that related to where we were just talking. Has anybody ever quoted Jacques Derrida on your channel positively before? A couple of people, but go ahead. Okay. Okay. So I won't be alone here. So Jacques Derrida at one point said that nothing exists outside of the text. And what he was talking about was outside of the text, outside of story, outside of narrative, right? There's no meaning. And if there's no meaning, then things don't exist. Cause to exist, things have to be in a web of relationships with each other. So beyond even just technology, right? And collapsing a time of the disconnect from history, it represents a disconnection from reality, right? Cause we have a flood of data, but data by itself doesn't mean anything. And so it isn't real, right? Well, so let me suggest this though, following up on that, the place where story meets material reality is ritual in general and the sacraments in particular. Because if you visit that Orthodox church, right? For a liturgy, the divine liturgy is a re-presenting of the life of Christ, the life, death and resurrection of Christ, right? And it is that story being enacted and made present so that people living today in the United States could participate in it, right? Or wherever you are, right? So you could be an active participant in that story. And that culminates in the transformation of matter in that that matter now becomes something which it wasn't before. It enters, re-enters this web of relationships in a completely different way, right? And that then is so, so all of the rituals of the church and particularly the sacraments, the mysteries as we call them in these, are that place where story meets reality, right? Where meaning meets reality and shapes it and makes it real. So I don't know a way back into real life or enchantment or whatever terminology we want to use other than some kind of sacramental worldview. You can concoct what I think are all sacraments, right? There's a book, McCarrick's book, The Enchantments of Mammoth, which is one of the most interesting books in terms of a critique of modern capitalism you'll ever read, because he doesn't oppose capitalism and socialism. He opposes capitalism and a romantic idea, like the British arts and crafts movement, right? And a sacramental worldview to capitalism. But he doesn't argue that capitalism and the world of money and business and finance has disenchanted the world, but that it has its own sort of false enchantments. And he has these stories from these books of the 19th century where some down on his luck kid as an angel appeared to him and inspire him to become an entrepreneur. It's truly bizarre stuff, like from the time, you know, how this stuff got welded together. But so, yeah, I mean, we could talk about worldviews and talk about shaping our consciousness and how we look at things, but I think the only practical down-to-earth way to do it is not just to become a part of a community, but to become a part of a community that is ritually active and celebrating the sacraments in a way that actively reconnects you to reality. Wow, I like that. Yeah, that's been the problem with community, right? People think you can just say community three times and Beetlejuice. And like, Vervecky does that a lot, but Peterson does that a lot. These guys, you know, oh, I have fans, fans, fans, therefore I have a community. It's like, no, that's not how that works. And I think what you're pointing to is ritual is cultivation and the process of cultivation is also the process of revivification. And you need to revivify the Christian story over and over again in order to see how it relates to your life, because you're not acting it out. You're not making those enchanting connections, not getting that intimacy with the scripture that you need to bring back into your everyday existence. And I recently got a book of devotionals. So every day I've been reading the book because it's from my crazy aunt, Paul. So, you know, I have to read the book because she sent me a book. So I have to read the damn book. So every day I read the book and it's Sarah Young does it. I guess that's the name of the author. And yeah, it's a nice daily read. And she's got all the references there at the bottom of that book. I haven't read yet, you know, with all the different chapters, chapters and verses. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That one, I forget what it's called. You probably know it, though. So yeah, it's interesting, though. It's that idea we were talking about that earlier, about cultivation and the ability to revivify. And that's what you need to do. And you need that enchantment. Enchantment is the space, right? And intimacy is the connections that you make within that space, roughly speaking. And I think that's where the discussion is going to shift here in the coming year. At least I hope so. And that's going to point us towards wisdom, maybe, which is, say, the emergent type of knowing. When you get done knowing things through proposition, mere proposition, you get done knowing things through mere participation, right? Because I think the church people will know things through participation, but not proposition and vice versa. The secularist know things through proposition, but not through participation. But you need that third emergent type of way of really knowing things, which is wisdom. And I think that emerges that way. And we'll see more talk about that coming up. All right. Final words from Manuel, Sam, and Teddy. Any order you want? Happy New Year, everybody. How about you, Sam? I'm going to hold you to that, Father DeYoung. I am excited to talk to you more sometime. I will. All right. Thank you for the predictions for the coming year. What would you say, Teddy? I'm saying thank you for the predictions for the coming year. Well, thank you for hopping in and sharing this with me. And thank you all for watching and for chatting and for participating. And yeah, I'll have to, I haven't really, I've got a lot of podcasts that I listen to, so I'll have to check out more Lord of the Spirits. Father Steve and I had talked about a conversation. We never landed the plane on anything, but maybe this is an icebreaker. So we'll have to do that. All right, everyone. Or you'll now commit to never having that conversation. What are the two? I'm not that easily scared, frightened away. Trust me. I say a lot stranger cats than you, my friend. Yeah. Saint Manuel, who puts Saint on his thing. All right, everyone. Good talking to you. Take care.