https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vvcs8k0vUBQ

 Hi, this is Paul. This word sense-making has been making the rounds. I've been noticing it more. Eric Weinstein talks about it. Brett Weinstein talks about it. The conversations in the intellectual dark web have been talking about alternative sense-making. Rebel Wisdom, which is a channel I follow, also talks about it and it showed up a lot in their videos. A recent video, Sense-Making, the coronavirus from Rebel Wisdom. So I've been mulling that word over. John Ravagy talks about it in his videos. So of course, you know, go to Google, put it in there and look, it's a word that Google knows and scrapes from from something. The action and process of making sense or giving meaning to something, especially new developments and experiences. And so a little trip over to Wikipedia highlighted the fact that this, along with many other things, comes out of business talk. Sense-making or sense-making with or without the hyphen is a process by which people give meaning to their collective experiences. And so there's a collective aspect to it. It has been defined as the ongoing retrospective development of plausible images that rationalize what people are doing. That's a pretty good definition. The concept was introduced to organizational studies by Carl Week in the 1970s and has affected both theory and practice. Week or Weick intended to encourage a shift away from the traditional focus of organizational theorists on decision making towards the process that constitutes the meaning of the decisions that are enacted in behavior. So it's pretty easy to see why it fits in with everything that I've been doing in the Jordan Peterson stuff and the Vervecki stuff and the Rebel Wisdom stuff. And then I guess that's one way to describe probably all the videos that I've been making is that this has been an allowed collective combination of sense-making, often through the questions of Christianity. Of course, I'm a Christian minister and how it strikes me that sense-making is something that we're always doing in the world. The world we perceive innocently, we don't appreciate the sense-making that we're always doing. The sense-making that collectively and communally we have been heirs to has been constructed, formed, and processed by, you know, I love how Brett Weinstein in his conversation with Alistair McGrath talks about the fact that every human being has two tracks. We have the biological track and the culture track. And in many ways we become humans and we're taught to be humans by our parents. We're inculturated and these things penetrate deeply into us in terms of what we see, what we notice. Again, all the Jordan Peterson stuff, the Verbecky stuff, all the stuff that I've been talking about for a couple of years now. When that world that we inherited is disrupted, things no longer, as we say, make sense. And what we mean by that is that our old filters, our old patterns of behaving, our old patterns of responding, no longer achieve the expected outcomes that we intended or desired or tried to avoid. And so what we have to do is take a step back, look at the world in a different way. Now, in the last video I talked about the fact that in some ways this pandemic is, as a shamanic impact on us, that it is disrupting our sense-making capacities. And this is extremely difficult for people. Again, as a pastor I work with people and I have a chance to observe people over the long haul. And we all navigate this business of mapped territory, unmapped territory, again, the in McGilchrist stuff. And people want change, they like change, they need change, but you get too much change, people don't like that. And they respond in hostile ways, they respond in reactive ways, they don't often respond productively, they respond counter-productively often. And so this question of sense-making is a really important one and it's extremely timely one as we're navigating this pandemic because all sorts of things are happening that we did not plan on and these things are happening that we have had no say in. I think back to that woman who made the speech at the Golden Globe bragging about how, you know, for her an abortion was a way of basically operating in terms of agency, I would say, over her story. Well, we're all having a massive experience of involuntary intrusion by a virus that we can't see and that the vast majority of us can't test or somehow find in a lab or adequately scientifically describe or anything like this, but it's having a massive social impact on us. So this is not just individual, it's also communal, it's both and and it's of course deeply tied to meaning because we will, this will disrupt our meaning-making capacities and hence again the sense-making language. Now, I listen to, I more listen to because it was mostly audio like many of the videos I make and listen to sense-making, the coronavirus by Rebel Wisdom and they had a number, David had a number of people on in the little clip video, they put this one together fairly quickly, it's got a fair amount of traffic so far for their channel, but it made me just reflect on how massive dislocations in our world happen in slow motion and therefore just sort of slowly recalibrate our sense-making over time in a way that we don't notice. I've seen this often in conservative religious traditions where, you know, conservatives tend to be the ones who are generally speaking anti-change and so they are resisting change often in their institutions such as the church and for years I've noticed that conservatives change a lot more than they think they change and that's pretty common and to be fair to the other side, progressives change a lot less than they think they change and so we're very poor observers of ourselves and very poor observers of what's going on around us and again this is all created in us by these built-in filterings that we do. We're not terribly good relevance realizers. We don't have a good grasp of what's actually going on around us and just think of some of the major disruptions that have been happening over the last 50 years and I'm gonna list a few and there are many many many of them. The erosion of Cold War Christendom. The Cold War in the United States was an interesting fusion of Christianity, often Protestant Christianity, WASP Christianity and politics that was seriously undermined and threatened by the counterculture. In my conversation with Tom Holland that I recorded that you can find on my channel I'm very excited about the fact that one of his long-term goal, book goal projects is to do a serious dive into the counterculture and Ross Duthat, I keep trying to get his name right, Duthat has been working on this as well. Tickle in my throat making me cough, making me think. So the erosion of Cold War Christendom. Remember church attendance in the United States reached its peak during the Cold War. Not in the colonial period, not in the 19th century, not during World War II, not before World War II, during the Cold War and so that's been a major disruption in our culture. The rise of moral objections to Christendom, the sort of peaked at 9-11, the rise of the new atheist whereas before during the Cold War Christians were seen as maybe a little bit priggish or prudish or hyper about their morality but American morality and Christian morality and the morality of the Bible as perceived were all in alignment and what has happened since 9-11 is that increasingly people have seen the Bible as a threat to morality and anti-moral. Just that rise in our culture has been seriously disruptive for churches and many many people. The erosion of mass culture, we, you know, this if you're watching the, if you're watching how we're trying to get news and do sense-making now, notice the difference between the speed of YouTube and the speed of let's say the major networks or even the 24-hour news services in America. Increasingly, mass culture is too much of a blunt instrument. The authority is gone. Walter Cronkite is dead and so now people are finding authorities like, I look at myself, I look at John Campbell on YouTube and I watch him every day and I tend to trust him. Well, why should I trust this random YouTuber? I know how little it takes to have a YouTube channel and how sketchy YouTubers can be, myself being one. Look at, look at the rise of Jordan Peterson and everything that happened. The end of mass culture and the arise and the arise of microcultures. Trump as a disruptor, however you feel about Trump for or against, the Trump presidency has been a massive disruptor and he's intentionally been a someone who has introduced chaos and now with the pandemic, far more chaos than he ever could or would want to generate is now in the system and in many ways he doesn't seem to quite know what role to play. He has used to, he was used to being the center of the story for the last four or so years ever since he really entered the Republican race and became president of the United States. He has dominated the news cycle but now there's something way bigger than him that is dominating the news cycle and it's unclear if he actually sort of knows what role he should play because now he has to play the person that brings order and not chaos and well there's not a lot of order to be had right now and of course the the worldwide pandemic. Now one of the things that you very quickly learn as a pastor who talks for a living, you stand up there and do sermons, talk talk talk talk talk, you announce programs, you tell people what they should do, on and on and on and on and on. One thing you learn very quickly is that people don't pay attention until you do something and again this is another takeaway from the Jordan Peterson experience. This is a huge takeaway from this from this pandemic. You will see news reports of people going up. I just saw one of a woman going up to the Social Security office and she's like this is closed. Oh this virus must be a really big deal. I hear that very very often from people. Those of us who are news junkies or information junkies we're always paying attention to this and we're sort of the chattering class but the vast majority of people are going about their business busy with their jobs and their lives, raising children, going to the doctor, having babies, feeding babies, doing their jobs, just minding the the regular ordinary stuff of life and when those things get disrupted suddenly they pay attention and all this talk on the news, you know, it's it's nothing and now suddenly stores are closing. No more business as usual. Death anxiety is going to be in the rise. I've been having conversations today about over the next few months there are going to be massive needs in our culture for what I describe as pastoral care. People are going to need to process their stories aloud. They're going to need to have people to talk to and they are now as isolated as they have ever been and I praise God for the fact that we have telephones and messaging services and internet connections and all of this because and social media because social media will need to play a role in people's lives now. What role will that play? We will see. We will see how fragile our little plans and expectations are. Suddenly you look at your calendar and you realize that in many ways almost every physical meeting and for me as a pastor everything is simply wiped off the calendar to be determined for now on. The governor of California basically says to people, yeah you're not going back to school probably for the rest of the 2019-2020 school year. It's done. My daughter will not walk graduation from from her college. My son's girlfriend will not walk graduation from law school. On and on and on and on. People have weddings, funerals are going to be a massive issue because people are going to start dying and all of our grieving practices which revolve around being together are going to be disrupted for an amount of time that we have no idea how much. There is going to be a lot of pain in the system and people are going to be isolated and people are going to be self-medicating with alcohol, with pot, with porn, with anger, with people are going to be... People talk about the fact that they get stuck with their relatives in for Thanksgiving. Now they are going to be in for months and if you have any idea of the number of unhappy marriages out there and the amount of pain that there is within households and the amount of unfinished crap that goes on between people, all of this stuff is going to be in a pressure cooker. Not only are people going to die, right now people have the adrenaline rush and the meaning rush of the new imminent threat and the change but people are going to die. People are going to kill each other in their homes and the guns that people are using for self-protection will in some cases be used to murder spouses and loved ones in the pressure cooker that this thing will bring to people. Right now everybody is full of adrenaline and has all of the best interests at heart but I know people and this is how we are and we're going to see the best and the worst in people for a while now and we should be thinking about and if you're a person of prayer praying for those people out there, first responders, law enforcement, all of this because they are going to be facing this. I've already noted the governor of California had lovely things to say about what we're going to do for the homeless population and attempts to clear out encampments in Sacramento have at least been temporarily abandoned because of just exactly what it will take and until we have enough people in our culture who have already had the virus and can be tested as having had the virus and has having antibodies for the virus and therefore as we hope immune to the virus, all of those people on the front line of they're not going to be able quite rightly or reasonably to do the kind of law enforcement that some of these issues will require. It is not going to be pretty. When will normal life begin again? Life, yes and no. We are not as aware of the impacts as this will have on us as we think we are. I introduced this in my last video. I think these are cyclical states. These are the four states of sense making and I think it happens cyclically. It's iteratively. We go around. The first one is skepticism, which is a very healthy state. When we hear something and we encounter something new that is novel, we're not ready to take it in. We push back on it. We test it. The book of first John says test the spirits. We test it. We evaluate it and we do some evaluating of it before we're ready to take it in. The second state is alarm. An alarm is an important state. Now we always say don't panic, don't panic because panic is too much alarm, but alarm is getting people ready to make uncomfortable changes. Again, by temperament some of us like change better than other people, but changes will come. The first state is skepticism. I'm not sure. The second state is alarm. I got to pay attention. I got to pay attention. I got to pay attention. That's alarm. Hopefully not too much alarm, but enough to get us ready and mobilized to make uncomfortable changes. Now these states happen inside of us and these states happen communally and in many ways right now, at least in California, this goes on at different speeds in different places, right now in California in terms of the church world we're still very much in the alarm phase. We're paying attention. You've got my attention. Again, so in massive ways we go through these slowly, but we also go through them rapidly individually and with every little change we go through them rapidly and individually. Then in some ways they're successive, but they're also parallel. Okay, and so then we very quickly get into adjustment phase. We'll figure out the changes. What changes do I need to make in my routine? What changes do I need to make in my lifestyle? And then we get into sustainability. Okay, I've made this change and now I'm trying to sustain this change, but again things are going to come back at us and this is very much sense making. Now I think in some ways this crisis is going to give people a sense of alleviation from the meaning crisis because when we're going through these states, there's a lot of meaning happening in us. We feel the meaning. We feel the challenge. We feel the goal and so a lot of people are going to have some relief from the meaning crisis and some people will never feel so alive as what they're feeling right now as they're working through these things, as they're bordering on scare or panic and trying to do these things. So there's a lot of healthy stuff that goes on and this is I think in some ways, you know, I'm reading the Ross Duthat book on decadence. This is in many ways addressing the decadence that we are having. We're very non-decadent now. Now we're taking action and we're forced into this by this pandemic and because of the changes that are happening. Now the decadence that has been expressed in chronological snobbery is something that's probably going to have to go because when we go into new territory, we have to look at the patterns that have been in similar territories and history is going to be important. I remember reading in Homo Deus and Harari's book how well we've got pandemics behind us. Well I guess not and so we're going to discover things that we can find from the past that are helpful for us. We think we will not suffer what our ancestors did. History doesn't change but as someone said it certainly does rhyme and now that the now we have these new powers we're going to note new vulnerabilities as well. G.K. Chesterton quote here, tradition may be defined as an extension of the franchise. This tradition means giving votes to the most obscure of all classes, our ancestors. It is the democracy of the dead. Tradition refuses to submit to the small arrogant oligarchy of those who merely happen to be walking around and at this point sheltering in place, which is the California term. All Democrats object to men being disqualified by accidents of birth. Tradition objects to being disqualified by the accident of death. And so a lot of the meaning making, a lot of the sense making, I think should include the votes of the dead. The votes of the dead who have been who have themselves passed through, passed through pandemics, passed through death. If you're living in North America or any of the developed most of the places that my listeners listen from, we have been living in a bubble and it's been a wonderful bubble and as a Christian I thank God for the bubble we've been living in. It's been a terrific bubble but in some ways parts of this bubble are bursting and I fear we are still in some ways better postured than much of the developing world is going to have in this pandemic because I hope it doesn't hit them like it hits us. We're particularly well connected so it hit us first but our bubble has been highly unusual. Most people in human history have not lived with the power, the security, the affluence, the luxury, the capability that we have. Well we're going to see the limits of this now and that's going to test us in ways that we haven't been tested. We need to get out more and what I mean by that is not to break our little quarantines and isolations but we need to read more history. We need to learn. We need to give our dead ancestors a seat at the table and listen to them. Fortunately our ancestors, many of the wisest of them have left us a lot to read and some of us will have a lot of extra time to read now and so we should read and listen and ponder and talk. We need to keep processing and that's why many of the people in my church, you know people sometimes ask about how my videos affect my church. Well they don't do much because most of the people in my church are not on YouTube and they're not going to be on YouTube and they're not going to watch a lot of YouTube. Some of them will but most of them aren't. Well you have a telephone. Pick it up. Call your friends regularly. Make a list of people you should be calling and checking in on them and if they get sick let their pastor know so the pastor can kind of keep tabs. I was having a conversation with some other people about this. We need to maintain and we need to use our relational networks right now more than ever. We need to be talking to one another. Right now in a lot of North America there's no charge for your local or even long-distance phone calls. Call people. Develop groups on your message chat. Do all of this but give our dead ancestors a voice. Help listen to what they had to say. Learn from their wisdom. Where just you know my wife was talking to my my mother and talking about how my grandmother would always open up the doors in the windows every day in the house to get fresh air in that house even in winter. These are these are these are old practices some of them probably from the pandemic of 1920 that we're probably going to revise. Now again skepticism, alarm, adjustment, sustainability. The four stages of sense making in a time of disruption. Maybe I'll make a short video about this. I don't know because my videos are long and most people don't want to watch a long video. You are and you live in a story. Notice how when the story changed people's actions changed. There was no shortage of food or toilet paper but shortages were created because the story changed and people acted reactively. The story changed and we all changed with it. A lot of people calling me now most of them probably telemarketers. You've been invited to a cruise. Oh yeah, a cruise sounds real nice right now. Sense making is a process of stewarding our stories. Stewarding our stories and what that means is well what story are you living in? This is again I believe a religious project. What story are you living? What are the big narratives that you're living in? What story are you feeding? Are you feeding your pre-conscious story calibration faculties? Part of the reason we're fascinated by stories is because we're naturally always recalibrating our stories where we're often deconstructing and reconstructing and so every time we watch a Netflix, every time we read a novel, we're always constantly trying to recalibrate our story to see the world better, to optimize our worlds. That's what we're doing all the time. It's why we love stories because story is how we interact with this world. We live within stories. We are stories so do some stewardship. Again, you've got the rider and the elephant. The way you change the elephant is not by the rider beating him with a stick. At some point the elephant will just get annoyed with the rider and you know shut him up. It's by changing the path or changing your herd or watching what you're doing as a herd. What peoples and stories around you are doing to your story. They're feeding you. Now again, this pandemic means a grand change in our story. Now a lot of our assumptions are no longer valid and so we're doing massive sense making. Well part of the way you do that sense making, watch how many people are watching containment or outbreak on Netflix right now. Why are they doing that? They're trying to recalibrate their stories. Now remember skepticism, I gotta get these down in my head, skepticism, alarm, adjustment, sustainability. These are the four stages of how we're processing this sense making. Now yesterday in the video I talked about the narrative data dynamic. This is constantly going on right now. These stories, these narratives go back and forth with data and that's exactly how it should be. Oh someone died, oh someone's sick. So the big story here is that a church right down the road has a cluster of outbreaks. One of the first people that died in Sacramento is a 70 year old woman who was a substitute teacher who was a member of that church. Four other members of that church have tested positive and more members of that church are symptomatic. That's a big deal because it's right in my neighborhood and geography matters in something like this. I've been going to the same stores doing the same things as many of the people in that church. Now I pray for the pastor and the leadership of that church because that is a nightmare scenario because their church not only their church became a place where quite likely probably not just exclusively in the church but quite likely the virus had been passed around not to anybody's fault because nobody was doing it and that's the nature of this thing. So that's data. So now suddenly I use that data in the narrative with the people of my church because again now it has attention because now it is close and many of the seniors in my church had their own routines and breaking them of their routines has been difficult. One of the things I noted to a friend of mine was though that one of the things that people in church have is as part of our stories we are accustomed to apocalypse and apocalyptic thinking and we're accustomed to thinking about the fact that well at any time Jesus could come, yeah I touched my face again I know, at any time Jesus could come, at any time our story could be disrupted, at any time Jesus says I'll come like a thief in the night, well Satan revolves like a roaring lion. Part of what the ancients because of how they lived in their world conditioned them to is the fact that life is short, life is precious, that gets built into your stories and your routines. Well now suddenly we have this example of this getting infused into our stories so we're always recalibrating with the data and now this pandemic is a huge data point and we have new data points flowing and so we're now we're doing this hard work of sense making. Skepticism, alarm, see I'm not even I gotta go back to my I gotta go back to my slide and oh no I lost it hang on hang on where where did it go? Skepticism, alarm, adjustment, sustainability, can't go too fast I don't have a lot of slides with this. Now why do we do this sense making? Because we're in our in our story work, in our dynamic between narrative and data, we are trying to improve ourselves as agents. Now if you go back a few videos where I did that long video where where I took a fair amount from uh Vervecky's awakening from the meaning crisis episode 13 where he talks about addiction, understanding addiction as a loss and a diminishment of agency, reciprocal narrowing, while sense making is an opportunity for reciprocal broadening of your agency and this is why we do it. We don't want to be merely reactive, we want to be responsive and again Vervecky's definition of rationality comes in there. We don't want to be passive but rather sensitive and and this again involves now when I look at pictures like this about wow we were all together, we shook hands, we embraced, we ate together, we didn't worry about this, yeah but it was there in the air, it was, this was just a couple of weeks ago, we don't know what we passed around at this table, that's the thing. So okay agency, so we are informed always and we're self-forming and we and and by this sense making, by this conversation, by doing all of this stuff, we're hopefully not reciprocal narrowing but reciprocal broadening where we are increasing our agency and again if you go back to that video I'll have to try to remember to put it in here. You know if if and again at the end of Vervecky's 13 he says if addiction looks like reciprocal narrowing what happens when we go the other way and I think about Jordan Peterson's question about the resurrection. What are the limits of going the other way? What are the limits of our agency in this story verse and I think for many of us who are Christians who are finding our ideal self in the image of Jesus Christ, that's a real question and and that's why he's given as a model and and this gets into you know I had a I had a couple of emails from one from one viewer listener slash however you're in taking in these things who talked about the self. I've talked before about the secret sacred self that I think is problematic in terms of how a lot of people are imagining themselves. It's it's sort of a return to a sort of Gnosticism. There's the there's people will talk about the true self or a better self or the next self and in many ways again in Christianity Jesus the Christ is the self we grow up into but now obviously that doesn't mean we want to be a first century Jewish carpenter. Those aren't the aspects and so that's where there's some relevance realization and we're trying to find the aspects of trying to trying to find what is relevance in terms of our evolution of self. Okay I'll use those words and I'm making these words up as I'm making this video up. Many people are trying to not lose their self and I think in many ways the meaning crisis was a loss of self, a loss of agency and again as I said in a previous video I think when that one person at the local meetup here said Jordan Peterson gave people ego, ego probably wasn't exactly the right word, Jordan people gave people agency. He was a prophet of agency. He encouraged people to have a goal. Now with this crisis massive numbers of people are going to at least initially find themselves with more agency but again that's going to be an initial stage and I'm concerned because once the immediate crisis is over, once they get out of the action stage and in the adjustment stage, the sustainability stage I think is going to be the difficult one for them. Now Jesus said some strange things about this, one of his most famous things, if you want to save yourself you'll lose it but those who lose their self for my sake will find it. Well what do you mean for my sake? What do you mean? I should probably think about that more because obviously I've preached on that before but Jesus you know in Christianity you talk about mortification and sanctification which means mortification it's burning off of that dead wood, getting rid of this old self, sanctification, becoming sanctified, becoming that becoming more like Christ in Christian terms, becoming that next self, that better self. Now true is a funny word in that and there's a lot in that and by the recommendation of this person I'm thinking about ways that I can talk more about this in my videos but obviously now that we're in the we're in the alarm phase of this crisis you know there'll be a lot of alarm videos but we're going to have to move into the adjustment phase and into the sustainability phase and I think the struggle as almost is always the case because everything mobilizes for the action phase and for the adjustment phase but the sustainability phase is where we'll see if our new habits have come into play and if we can in fact maintain the kind of healthy relational interchange even while we're isolated, while we're going forward through this. For Christians of course we are in Lent and Lent is a season of fasting, it's a season of repentance and well a pandemic is well timed in that sense because there's going to be a lot of Lent and things going on for a lot of people. The season is supposed to disrupt your normal sense making because when our normal sense making is disrupted we can see new things, we can see true things. Apocalypse in Greek is the same word as revelation in English and that's why the last book of the Bible is the Apocalypse of Saint John or the Revelation of Jesus Christ as Eugene Peterson called it. Apocalypse is revelation, our sense making is disrupted and we see new things and as again as I said in my last video don't waste that opportunity to see new things. Now none of us may be in church on Easter and I know for a lot of Christians that's going to be a difficult thing but we anticipate Easter which is the resurrection of our new self. The resurrected self of Christ was difficult for people to recognize, there was disruption in there if you read the resurrection accounts of the New Testament and the connection between the crucified Christ and the resurrected Christ is interesting because the scars remained but this new Christ could come in and out of locked rooms not because he was less substantive than the walls but because he was more substantive than the walls, he was more real than a locked door okay. So this is what Christians anticipate in the new self that comes about. Now again I talked a little bit about resurrection in the last video but these things scale and tie together symbolically metaphorically and I believe also physically because again I'm a conservative Christian so I believe in the bodily resurrection of Jesus Christ and I believe with the Apostles Creed in the second coming of Jesus Christ and the renovation of heaven and earth. I believe in these things. Now might I be wrong? Sure I might but this is my filter, this is what I believe and I believe my beliefs at this point, I find my beliefs, I'm thankful for my beliefs, I'm happy with my beliefs. The apocalyptic disruption of our sense making currently, I find because of all of the infusion of the dead in my life, I find not unfamiliar because this is the language that we have been keeping alive in churches for 2,000 years. When events come back into the come back into the fore, it doesn't feel completely unfamiliar. I'm still doing the sense making and the adjustment of skepticism, alarm, adaptation, sustainability. I'm still working through that cycle but I have resources because I've been embedded in these resources. Now again I appreciate the fact that not everyone has these resources so I will try to lend what I can to you but and I'm sharing with you the resources because they're not unavailable. They're available on YouTube and Kindle and all around you and well you might not be able to go church shopping for a while but you will find Christians bearing witness out there and as in probably every circumstance churches are going to disappoint, pastors are going to disappoint, pastors are going to fail their master, churches are going to fail their master and others will bear witness and witness is the same word again as martyr and these things will likely come and it will likely only be after the dust has settled and we're into some new new normal that some of these stories begin to emerge but they're happening right now. So again the four stages, not states, cyclical stages, should have been stages, all these typos, stages, skepticism, alarm, adjustment, sustainability, skepticism, alarm, adjustment, sustainability and then readjusting your sense making, growing into your new and better and again in Christianity Easter and Lent work. Lent is about mortification, burning off the dead wood, taking out the pieces of your sense making, of your narrative that now the new data has disrupted and needs to be if not discarded at least set aside for now but then Easter which is the new resurrection, the dawning of the new self. This pandemic is something that's going to be hard but it is an opportunity for many of us to do some work on our stories, to do some work towards a better self, a newer self, a resurrected self. So there are some thoughts for today.