https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A3PQXiOmJa8

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm recording this on Friday, September 10, and this morning, upper left-hand corner, Google algorithm feeds me up this video from a channel I'd never even heard of. Everyone's losing their minds. And so I listened to a little bit of it. What does she mean, everyone's losing their minds? Well, it's a good thing to think about because it means is that multiple people are in some ways not on the same page in terms of what they think and feel and know to be true and right. Now, this very much aligns with what rebel wisdom and John Verbeke call collective cognition. But notice we call it thinking, but it's a lot deeper than thinking because thinking is sort of this thing that we do when we process. It's a lot more like we're all seeing the world, but we're seeing different worlds. And we've grown accustomed to this now politically. And all the fights over vaccines and COVID and vaccine passports and political disputes, people seem to be seeing different worlds. Now, we're kind of used to that when it comes to people of radically different cultures or languages. We're not used to seeing that, let's say, in our own countries, within our own political parties or our own political structures. And that has caused a great deal of anxiety. And again, we're really talking something a lot more, we're talking about seeing more than thinking. So the strange thing about us is that even though we're individuals and even though we have a consciousness and I have sort of this internal monologue and in this internal story that I call me and I have this body and I'm all wrapped up in skin and all of this stuff, we never mind alone. We always mind together. And that's something deeply human about us. But we're not really quite sure exactly how this works. Now anger is often a tell and Jordan Peterson, I think is one of the best lines about this about people don't like getting poked in their axioms. And there's a lot of that going on in this. Now, I was originally going to entitle this video justice and other spirits of desire in my long video about marriage equality. I talked about the book. I keep forgetting the title of this book. I keep having another title, which I know is not the title of this book that I think of. But it's basically high on God. It's the title of the book. Justice is a spirit. Now we often use justice as if it's the self evident thing out there. But if that were the case, wouldn't we all have the same assumptions about what justice curtailed and what justice means? Now, because tomorrow is 9 11, and it's 20 years since the attacks of 9 11, the media is full of retrospectives on the event. And of course, one of my favorite ones is done by Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook on their little podcast, The Rest is History. And part of what I really enjoy their podcast is because they're not Americans. And what they afford me often the names that they drop and the references they and even some of the times their language goes right over my head. What are they saying? You know, America and England is two countries separated by a common language. But one of the things I appreciate about them is that they they give me a perspective that is different from my own. And so especially with something like 9 11, it was really fun listening to what they had to say. And I was watching Netflix has a 9 11 series and just about everybody seems to have one now. And I was watching the Netflix one with my wife and just the film of those planes going into the towers and, and the wreckage at the Pentagon and the story of the airliner that the passengers brought down. Boy, it's it's all the feels. It's it's, you know, 20 years ago. So now I'm in my late 50s. 20 years ago is not that long ago for me. And I just like the generation before me, now I was born the year that Kennedy was assassinated, but the generation before me, and some of them are still in my church could tell, could say exactly where they were and what they felt when Kennedy was assassinated. I know I was in my living room, we and by 2000, by 2001, we had five small children. And so mornings were busy getting them up, getting them dressed, giving getting breakfast in them. That day, I had to go drive to the Bay Area with a group of other people from my denomination for a, a some classical business. And we're at home and we never watch TV in the morning, we're too busy getting five kids ready for the day and homeschooling and all of those kinds of things. And a member of the church called me up and said, Are you watching TV? And we said, No, why would we turn on the TV? And I turned on the TV. And I had grown up in Patterson, just 16 miles to the west of New York City and had visited New York City very often. It's a very short distance. In fact, 16 miles in Sacramento is nothing. It seems like a world in the highly compressed New York metropolitan area. But then I saw the headlines World Trade Center towers collapsed. Of course, there's a three hour time difference between there and here. So a lot had gone on on the East Coast while I was sleeping or just getting up and getting kids ready. And I just looked at the TV and I just, I just couldn't believe my eyes. Seeing mind. And so now watching the 20 year retrospectives, all the fields are back and anger and vengeance. And it's a spirit of desire for justice that takes over. And my wife, my wife, she was feeling the same thing and saying similar things. And she said, you know, it's just so ironic that ironic that the United States now pulls off out of Afghanistan just before the 20th, when just in our minds, quick a minute, it's like, we want to bomb them all over again. But who's them? So the rest is history noted that right from the start, the Bush administration decided this was going to be an act of war and not a police terrorism response. The Godfather, the original movie begins with this amazing scene of a father whose daughter has been abused by a young man. And this is the wedding day of the Godfather and the tradition holds that the Godfather cannot deny a request made on his daughter's wedding day. And so the undertaker goes to the Godfather and says, and says, this man abused my daughter and I want him dead. I want justice. And the Godfather, who is no paragon of morality, obviously says, well, has a number of things to say to him about the instrumental nature of their relationship. And he also points out that was your daughter killed? Well, no. Well, you're not asking for justice. You want revenge. And then, of course, he weaves the web. Well, if you were to be my friend, then your enemies would fear you because they fear me. These are powerful spirits. You might say, no, justice is, justice is, well, did you ever stop and ask yourself, what is justice? It's not an easy thing to define. And so often we are filled with, well, spirit is about the only word we have, and desire. One of the things that the podcast really brought out well is in some ways how George W. Bush was transformed. George W. Bush came into office and he was, you know, he was not going to follow in Bill Clinton's footsteps of nation building and American adventurism. And he was not going to do that. But the attacks of 9-11 completely changed him in a way in terms of his response. And, you know, I think quite rightly Dominic and Tom Holland asked, could it have been any other way? And I was listening to this while I was driving, my picking up my daughter from work. And I thought, no, no, the nation, George, I told my daughter, George, I told my daughter, I said, if George W. Bush hadn't acted the way that the nation felt, the entire nation was possessed, most of the nation possessed by a spirit. He would have been impeached. There was no question. The superpower was going to flex its muscles and have the world cower. And he gets on the phone and he basically says, are you with us or against us? The rest of the world, with, with, with, not against. Because there was some bombing we were going to do. And of course, later on, the passion subside and well, 20 years now, we're sort of making assessments. After the death of George Floyd, after he was killed by a police officer, a religious spirit of justice seized many in the nation. And we all noted the very particular religious language, religious liturgies, and liturgies include religious liturgies and liturgies include how we, what we did with our bodies, when, where, and how. Public confessions of white privilege, the movement of spirits totally took over atheist communities. Oh, no, we're all rationality and materialism. Now then, why do you act this way? Any ancient person would say, you're possessed of a spirit. Falling in love is being possessed of a spirit. We're possessed of spirits all the time. Well, what, what are these spirits? Well, I've talked a lot about school spirit, which I think is, is one of the sort of legacy usages of the word that, that we can still connect to. Because if a, if a school has good school spirit, it sweeps along the students into flourishing. And if the school has a very negative school spirit, it's very hard to get an education. Yeah. What is this spirit? Well, we've made it, we've built it into the architecture. It's, it's, it's a manifestation of the leadership of the school, of the student body of the school. Everyone wants to have a productive school spirit, but nobody quite knows how to make the school spirit. You know, my conversation with Vervecky and JP Marceau, towards the end of it, this, this idea of sort of these levels of seeing came to my mind. The cornfield, what does the cornfield know of the, of the farmer who plants it? Now, if you look at things that talk about the secret life of plants, plants are really very sophisticated. They know a lot of things, but they know almost nothing of the farmer. They know very little of the farmer's dog. Yeah. The dog knows something of the corn and the dog knows something of the farmer. But if you've ever had a dog and you think for a while about what exactly you look like to the dog and you try to resist a lot of projection, um, upon the dog, well, it's a very strange image of what the dog knows of you. But the Iowa farmer knows the cornfield and the Iowa farmer knows the dog at levels that the dog and the cornfield cannot know. And in fact, the Iowa farmer is managing the dog and the cornfield at levels that even the dog and the cornfield in their management have no idea of. And so when you see these things happen around us, towers go down and a spirit grips us. Well, they're our towers and we have layer upon layer upon layer upon layer of formation and grooming and cultivation and identity and history. And it's, it's, it's school spirit is just a small tiny little illustration of everything that suddenly the spirit that inhabits and possesses us and changes history. Um, Peter Boghossian wrote an open letter of resignation to his college and Barry Weiss posted it on her sub stack and I'll leave a link for it below. It's a very interesting letter. It's a very moving letter where he basically tells the story of his dismissal. He says in this letter, I continued to believe perhaps naively that I, if I expose the flawed thinking on which Portland State's new values were based, I would shake the university from its madness. This is a fundamental misunderstanding about the nature of reality, which he has had a very brutal lesson. It's, it's a, it's a remarkable letter. I very much recommend you read it. Reason? No, no. We are not reasonable creatures. We are moved by the spirits, the spirits that are around us, among us. And it's a terrifying thought because sort of like Neo and the Matrix, we don't like to think we're not in charge of our own destiny. This doesn't mean that human beings aren't employing reason in terms of their argument. An ancient person would say this is war in the heavenlies. The rationalistic spirit that Peter Boghossian had, like school spirit, contributed to and developed and worked on with his friends and tried to illustrate and all of this pouring his life and books and all of this into a particular spirit, the spirit lost. The spirits were in conflict. Another spirit is possessing the community that he loves. That spirit abused him, that spirit abused him through the people, mistreated him and spewed him out. And he basically says, I thought we were about a different spirit. I was not in line with the spirit. I didn't walk with the spirit. Again, if you haven't watched my rough draft for Sunday, I'm working with a lot of this stuff with Paul. And when I say war in the heavenlies, what do you mean in the heavenlies and the heavenly realms? Well, what do I mean by that? Just like the farmer is above the dog is above the corn. These spirits are out there now, where they come from, how they have power, we certainly are a part of it. Absolutely. I'm not in any way denying any of that. These spirits go through and flow through history. But some of them are so enduring that like the spirit of, of, of the desire for justice, they're built into our DNA of Ken Peterson and cognitive scientists work on that. And this is what we're talking about. Reason is certainly being used as persuasion and weapons in this spiritual warfare, but something more powerful than reason is clearly possessing them because Peter Boghossian's attempts at arguing them out of them and James and Helen Pluckrose, too, the hoaxsters to no avail. Why not? Because human beings are spiritual creatures. We are creatures of desire. Now, you can obviously see the conditioning when I mean, George Bush, I'm sure his approval ratings were at their peak when he was, what was he? He was the decider, certainly, but he played this role. He's there with the firefighters. Your leader is here. Your leader will make sure that justice is done. And listen to his speech there at ground zero. The world will hear us. Oh, and they did the 9 11 wars as the rest of history guys called them. But of course, these other individuals, now we call them all sorts of names, but they were certainly moved by a spirit. They were moved by a spirit committed enough to have their own lives taken by it and to say spiritual things as they drove planes into buildings. And as I mentioned, one of the one of the real insights of the rest of history on 9 11 was the observation that Tom Holland made that well, many of these individuals saw the idea of Western law. You know, the United Nations code of human rights. Well, that's just all sneaky Christianity that you're imposing upon us. It's an alien spirit to our spirit. And so if we can get the Americans to torture us and break their own break down their own international law and all of that scheme, we win. Wow. And at the end of the video, they noted they note that well, America's reputation took a real beating in the pictures of Abu Ghraib in Iraq, in Guantanamo among its reputation. But so did Islam. Islam is now associated with individuals like they these guys become the face of Islam. But everybody's seeing the world differently. They have different minds, they have different spirits, different things are moving them through the world. Now, what do we do in church? Again, high on God, I'm not going to read any more of it today, but I'm going to get into more of it next week, I think we groom develop assess refine these sensitivities with intentionality. We create spirit, and we mold it, and we take spirits and we, we let them inside of us and have spirits mold us and shape us. We rehearse, participate, enjoy the fields. That's one of the the power of the mega church. You know, just looking at those videos from 9 11 and seeing everyone didn't matter their skin color didn't matter their ethnic background, all those New Yorkers, we're one and I died, you know, right there, I'm feeling the feels with them, I surely am and thinking, it's such a gratifying thing to be part of a group, we feel strong, we feel powerful. And when we've been wronged, we feel right. And we believe that whatever we lay our hands to will be justice. Those spirits recede and conversation start and, and it's a good thing because if you just respond, well, you can see my sermon about acts of the flesh. Wellman talks about emotional energy, but that just language just seems so weak. We evaluate, we check, we consider, we debate. You can see this from below as real spiritual work. And again, see, I'm, I'm not sanitizing my language. What secularity basically is, is a giant sanitation program where we sanitize language to take certain key words out and then we all feel better that this is all accessible to us and we're in charge. We're not in charge. Spirits are grabbing us. We're not. That should be no surprise to us. Our desires, spirits, they're all around us. Now, this is obvious. Lee before and beyond church, I picked up some Sue, the art of war. Some Sue said in the practice and the practical art of war, the best thing of all is to take the enemy's country whole and intact to shatter and destroy it is no good. So too, it is better to recapture an army entire than to destroy it, to capture a regiment, a detachment or a company entire than to destroy it. We colonize. That's the best of all possible things. And America is this amazing empire because we don't have to fire a shot. We have art and we have movies and we have ideas. And again, one of the amazing things and in this retrospective and the rest of history is that Satan in Islam is a little different from Satan in Christianity. He's a tempter more than sort of a paragon of evil. And so the US is the great Satan because we're just tempting them all and luring them all into our ideas. They're not so impressed by our reason. They love our movies and our music and our songs. And it's the height of irony that Al Qaeda was for the most part made up of middle class and wealthy individuals who in their off times, they're just taking in Western movies. Strange, aren't we? This is how we conquer. We conquer because you want to see our art. Even if it's populist. This is how we work. This is how we rule the world through culture. Now, as the critical drinker and others know it, I read an article in, I don't remember where I read it, but part of why China's doing so good in Africa is they're kind of tired of the Western scolding. The critical drinker and his art about moviemaking, well, that's, he's looking for the old movies, the movies that had all the feels that inspired us, the movies that through which spirit comes. Good video by Luke Burgess that someone pointed me to on YouTube. It's on Chris Williamson's channel Why do we want what we want? And this is sort of a secularist view of René Girard's work. It's memetic desire. And now what's been so interesting as I think about religion and I watch more of the secularized versions of self-improvement and working on very similar things to what I work on, just I haven't sanitized it with getting rid of all of the what secularist view as religious language. Why are we interested in figuring out where we get our desires? Now again, sort of this Cartesian dualism, we think, well, we get our desires. Well, you're talking spirits. Spirits are these, oh yeah, just try and not use that word for a week. It's hard. Why do we want to know where our desires come from? Well, we want to know where our desires come from so we can pick which desires we want and avoid which desires we don't want to get the outcomes that we desire. Well, there's something a little circular about this. Well, I want the good things. Well, why do you think that those things are good? Well, because everybody else is wanting them and suddenly we get a sense of, well, why the world is going crazy because we're wanting different things. Some of the things we want in common and some of the things we want because we think they will achieve the ends that we want and you know, we're the dead reckoning for goodness is not completely off, but we want to understand memetic desire in a very secularized way so we can somehow figure out how to manipulate other people's desires because and in one place in the conversation it was really quite fascinating because well maybe I should cue it up. There has to be equivalents of like a first mover, right? As you said with the kids, you've got the kids in the play play area and let's say that they're all doing nothing then one does something. Now that something can have been iterated on a memetic desire that they saw yesterday or that they saw two weeks ago or that they watched mum do in the car on the way here or something, but there does have to be a first mover so there has to be gradations of- And is he right there? So where is the first moving coming from? I mean we're almost in Aristotle land. How memetic certain desires are that we have. There are certain people who step further outside of the overton window of what is normal acceptable behavior with regards to their desires and there are others that are slap bang in the middle of the normal distribution. Yes, I think thinking of it as a gradation or as a spectrum of mimesis is exactly the right way to think about it. So let's take the little girl in the room who picks up a bright red fire truck. She may pick up that fire truck because her dad is a firefighter and that's the reason why she was the first mover. So it's nothing to do with the other kids in the room. It has to do with some external factor or something, you know- Or it has to do with another layer of memetic desire that is going. The first mover, that's exactly the right terminology. So you're just bringing another first mover from one room into another. She saw on TV the day before, but it could have nothing to do with that. It could just be because the color red is just this bright red color and all of the other toys have dull colors. Or why does she like red? Well, that's memetically sourced as well. Because everybody around her liked red. And some kind of instinctual response where the red was attractive. I mean, we know this in animals with birds and flowers. So perhaps there is an instinctual basis for people moving towards things and desiring it. And we're sort of back to C.S. Lewis's abolition of man where instinct? Instinct doesn't really answer this because there are so many instincts. And then the mimesis maybe follows that. So I think there's all kinds of reasons why somebody could be a first mover. Different gradations. And the trick is kind of like getting to the source, right? Getting to the bottom of it. Now, the trick is, well, what do you mean the trick? Well, what do we want? Well, we want to be the source. Well, we want to be the source. Why? So we can get what we want. But where does our want come from? You see, there's a circularity that goes in here. And this whole conversation was really an excellent conversation. So I'll just, I just wanted to play a little bit of it and give you a sense of it. But I really thought it was good. You know, what we want is to wield this power. And why do we want to wield the power? Where does this come from? Well, of course, being a minister, I'd say Genesis three, but even and that that that even doesn't come from us there. It comes from comes from the serpent. Where did the serpent get its from? And, you know, ancient, ancient arguments and ideas just come flooding in. The communal pursuit of ideals and well, Jesus and God, Jesus is God. Part of what's beautiful about the Peugeot Peterson conversation is, well, we have these ideals, we have these ideals, and we desire these ideals, and we desire these ideals mimetically. And we compete for these ideals. And if, if things are lined up in a certain way, we're completing productively for these ideals, and we're creating communities that strive after and achieve these ideals. And we reinforce these ideals. And this again is why I say church isn't going away. It takes lots of different forms, people are doing lots of different things, but hierarchies are going to develop and we're going to be pursuing them. And the game isn't over. And you just you just at some point have to ask older and deeper questions about well, how can we pursue the good? How can we know the good? How can we refine our knowledge of the good? But what is what is better? In terms of our priorities and, and the time and money and energy that we spend on this or that, or this or that, to what degree can we once we recognize memetic desire, once you have that idea, that there's a degree, it affords you a degree of self-transcendence, and you watch people arise and well, there's there's there's memetic going there's memetic desire going here. And I can anticipate where that is going. Because I've seen all of these patterns in the past, and, and, and, and, and, and. And then if I respond in these different ways, people are going to respond, but the way I want them to respond, and, and, and, and, and, if I poke them in their axioms, they'll just get defensive. So we are spiritual seekers, we want to be the first cause. And we recognize that even in our own little sandboxes and playrooms, you can be the first cause in the playroom. You go to that, you go and you look for that red fire truck. You know, the, the, the deconstruction, well, we're, we're spiritual multi-factor authenticating. We're saying, well, okay, well, we've got this, this book here, and we've got this reason here, and we've got this idea here. But that memetic desire is very much playing on, well, how do I be high status? Because I want status. And again, back to Peterson and his lobsters, gaining status makes me feel like Top Lobster. Losing the status fight sends me to the bottom. Oh, but now I self-transcend and see the status fight. And so we must do this together. Participation. That's how we're built. We desire the archetypal and the communal. This is why we are incurably religious. Even if as in secularity, we try to sanitize all the words again. There's a lot of good stuff in this week's Q and A. So if you haven't listened to it, I know the Q and A's aren't your cup of tea. I, someone always, and you'll see him because I always pin his comment, always then after the Q and A puts all the timestamps in and I copy that up to the text too. And I, I really appreciate when he does that. This is the most meaningful thing we can do. And, and doing it together makes it even more meaningful than doing it alone and, and doing it as communities. And so, and so when the towers come down, we all stand together and what we do in church, especially is, is we all practice this and, and we experience the feels and the meaning. And this is part of the reason why there's, there's, you know, all kinds of hand wringing in churches over things, but these, these things aren't going away. They just take different forms and being out there on your own, well now via the internet we're going to commune together and subscribe to channels and, and use certain buzzwords as their holy words and on and on and on and on. We're seeking spirits because we love to be, we love for these spirits to come upon us and part of what high on God talks about. You can go visit it, is go into a room with, you know, thousands of people and singing anthems together and being one with the community and having this. And again, there's, there's just myriad of complexities all the way on down the line. That's how we're built. And it is of course, class of, class of civilizations. 9-11 was not an incidental date chosen for the attack. And part of, again, you know, with these, I really did think that their retrospection was a cut above and they're humble and they're just doing a podcast. They don't have all the pretty pictures and, and films that the major networks will have, but their, their platforms and they're, they're both subject to mimetic desire and trying to be first movers in mimetic desire and trying to grab our attention. And this, the, the book has a great, the book has a great idea. Symbolic language and the development of stories, beliefs and doctrines extend across human history from early cave covered, covered in handprints to red splotch screens in one megachurch symbolizing sinful human blood that could only be cleansed by the innocent blood of Jesus. These collections of images and heritage of symbols reified in megachurches are part of our study. Indeed, our work on megachurches, we see a similar enumeration of symbols and ritual actions that collect over time. And of course, this is true of lots of churches, of every church and, and of cultures and nations, flags. And I mean, all of these are, all of these are, they're all of those spiritual and spiritual actions, flags. And I mean, all of that's all of those spirits inhabited us in those, in those, in those moments, which accompany the manifestation of ritual forms. Our megachurches did not arise in a vacuum. As we will show, there's a collection of symbols and ideologies that are at play in the 12 megachurches we studied contributed to and helped shape their aesthetics, doctrines and theologies. They are a culmination of multiple American lineages, the musical choices, the aesthetics of the building, which feel like malls, schools or theaters, but noticeably not cathedrals. And the conservative political undercurrent that remains despite cultural changes based on local and national shifts across time. In short, there's a heritage of symbols that guides and helps renew the emotional energy in these services of worship. Beliefs do remain an important part of the ritual process and the emotional energy it creates in megachurches. We however refrain, we however reframe how to talk about beliefs. We use Antonio Damasio's somatic marker hypothesis to contextualize belief into a ritual system, because it is through interaction rituals, we argue that belief gains their force and resilience. We've done a lot of talking on this channel about propositional beliefs, but, and we've always maintained that they are integral in four Ps. You're not, you're going to lose something if you drop any one of those four Ps, but, but beliefs are, are part of the equation and they go back in and, in and forth. And the book talks about that, but I want to get at this other idea. The somatic marker hypothesis proposes that prior experiences and behaviors have varying degrees of effective valiance and salience. Now there's some word salad for you. And a lot of you are saying that sentence means nothing to me. This idea that they're calling a somatic marker hypothesis, which is a horrible name, proposes that prior experiences, where you were raised, who you lived with, the positive and the negative experiences that you had. I've been watching Hitman Heart, Life in the Shadows, fascinating documentary. It's the one that Jordan Peterson keeps recommending. It's on YouTube. It's worth watching. Have varying degrees. It's pretty obvious of effective. That's the, our affect sort of like emotions and read Jonathan Edwards, valiance values are emotional values and salience, salience hierarchy, what appears to us, what we see. And basically what he's saying is if you were raised in a family that it was a healthy family and everybody loved their country and saluted the flag and those values came through, those are deep inside of you. They got there first in some ways or very early, but they of course go way, way back. These spirits go through the ages continually. These qualities become attached to experiences and the symbols, flags, songs, you know, Congress on the steps after 9-11 singing God bless America. God bless America. Let's all pray this stuff is deep. Symbols, beliefs and behaviors associated with them creating a physiological signal. We feel it inside of us. A somatic marker. It's a marker, okay. A body marker, soma of the original feeling that was experienced. Of the original feeling that was experienced. Oh, and that's what happens when I watch the 9-11 retrospectives. I feel it again, but now it's, it's different. You can see that from inside out, that little Pixar movie. There's all other colors in that little ball of that memory now. As Damasio argues somatic markers are a special instance of feeling that have been connected by learning to predicted future outcomes and certain scenarios. Eschatology comes into this. What is eschatology? It's the future. Thus when making decisions, materiality of the body remembers the feelings attached to the prior experiences through these somatic markers, thereby helping people to make decisions regarding what types of behavior to engage in. Suddenly everybody's on their knees because George Floyd is dead. And they're all confessing and they're waving and no, you're not watching Jesus camp. You're watching woke atheists out in the middle earnestly in their church. And they've got all the same things. And, and what we're doing with our bodies again, watch Peugeot and Peterson. These aren't arbitrary. They're certainly historical, but they're not arbitrary. Now again, when we hear this, we're like, well, maybe we can, maybe we can hack these. Maybe we can do something with these and it'll make us rich. Uh, but isn't all that part of the mimetic desire too? We argue that it is in and through ritual experiences that somatic markers, again, the language becomes attached to beliefs and symbols. It's, it's through our lives that these first drafts that I talk about, they're all inside of us. These first draft maps, in addition, literature and the cognitive science of religion suggests that some beliefs, those characterized by, and this is key, minimally counterintuitive ideas. You go back and watch this thing about fashion in the video, minimally counterintuitive ideas are remembered, shared and spread through space and time more readily than other beliefs. Why? They've got to be different enough to grab our salience, but not too different for us to not be able to relate to it. Bin Laden and Bush had enough in commonality in terms of what Tom Holland calls universal ideas, but enough difference, Christianity and Islam that they can be different. We argue that this is at least partly because such minimally counterintuitive ideas, I should put that one in blue so I can find it again, resonate with our affective systems, our emotional systems, our affect more readily than other ideas and are thus more likely to be associated with strong somatic markers. Minimally counterintuitive beliefs are those that are counterintuitive enough to grab your attention, like time travel or an omniscient spirit, but not so counterintuitive that they become confusing or disorienting, like the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics, space-time continuum, Christian apophatic and mystical theology. Luke, Nate, it's why you lose your audience. Minimally counterintuitive, minimally counterintuitive, counterintuitive enough, minimal enough. Presenting God as Father who is like an unconditionally loving parent, except that he is omniscient and can hear your thoughts and shift reality in your favor is a quintessential example of a minimally counterintuitive idea. Okay, back to the beautiful beginning of McGillchrist's little essay upon which the big book is. Oh, but now I explain it so now I can see that that's just BS. Really? Really? Is it BS or is it built into you? Because one of the big impacts of Peterson and Peugeot has been kind of the exorcism of the arbitrary. Said, no, these things aren't arbitrary, because otherwise we wouldn't see the patterns. Oh, but just maybe they're old. Yeah, they're old. But you value old. Arche tipos. In addition, we regularly witnessed throughout our interviews, the megachurch members and during participant observation, how compelling the belief that only the innocent blood of Jesus can overcome sin and the stain of our guilty blood for attendees. The notion that blood must be shed in the wake of wrongdoings. We want to kill those people that took down our buildings and shed the blood of our, our you didn't know those people know, but they're Americans. All the symbols connect us. If not intuitive or instinctual moral impulse, however, Jesus presence in the story is notably counterintuitive that God would send God's own son to be an innocent, sinless, sacrificial lamb. Not only that, but his blood, Jesus blood from above, embodies counterintuitive strength and not only pays for sin, but it creates a capital that miraculously overcomes and pays the price of all human sin until the end of time. This idea sustains the premise that not only one sin, but all human sin can be innocent of one's human blood, of one human's blood because Jesus is God human sin can be atoned for. Jesus is called our substitute. Jesus pays our penalty. Just read the Heideberg catechism. It's all right here. Jesus achieves victory over death. Jesus has merit to overcome our human death. Jesus is the example of our example for his followers and anyone who comes after him should sacrifice themselves for him and others. These minimally counterintuitive combinations serve as powerful invitations. Tim Cynova, minimally counterintuitive fashion. Yeah, it's interesting, especially on social media, because you have people that get to the top, right? So they have a power law advantage because more people proportionally, far more people see their content. And then they look at it and they think, oh, well, Luke's got good reach with that tweet. So I'll add that into the library of potential mimesis strategies. And then Luke's done it again. He's done it again with that same sort of tweet. And you see this, right? You see this with different structures, whether it's putting clap emojis in between each word or whether it's using a particular hashtag. What is a hashtag? It's other people saying, this is a trend. This is something else that I agree with. And a lot of what people are trying to do there is achieve success through the adoption of that trend. Here's something that's worked well. That's a signal of high value, high status, intellect, humor, whatever. Therefore, I'm going to adopt it. I'm going to absorb it into myself. Yeah, you see it all the time on social media. Like when one person develops a certain tactic, all of a sudden you start seeing it everywhere. It's imitated everywhere. And maybe the origin of that was some program of how to get more engagement in 30 days or something like that. So people start doing all kinds of funny things like asking these questions. You can almost sniff it out as soon as you see it. But imitating, there's a lot of cargo cult stuff happening, not only on social media, but in the startup world, for instance. And it's like imitating the external things will magically bring about some kind of result. So you see entrepreneurs imitating all kinds of surface level things, like ways of dressing, ways of working, the ways even that we communicate in our email exchanges. There was this hypermimetic trend while I was living in California where all of a sudden it seemed like overnight, nobody wanted to use capital letters in emails anymore. And it was like, it's not cool. It means you're not busy. It was kind of a bad idea. I remember that because it's like, you know, capital's actually, they're a technology that actually has a meaning and a purpose. So they abandoned it. They got abandoned pretty quick. Now if you have to capitalize the first word of your sentences and use punctuation. And it's like in the course of a year, man, I'm not kidding. That just happened. So there's this imitation of all these funny external things that have very, very little to bear on the success of the company or on the valuation, right? And the value creation. So what we're imitating is very important. Is it like the superficial external things? Like are we doing that with some like auto magical expectation that if I put these three emojis after all of my tweets, suddenly I will have the following that Elon Musk has? No, it doesn't work like that. If I wear the black turtleneck, then I get all of the insights from creativity and marketing that Steve Jobs had. This is what we saw with Elizabeth Holmes, right? From Theranos, a woman who was a complete shyster and a total con artist, very successfully. And she wore a turtleneck the same way that Steve Jobs did. There's actually clips on YouTube, if you look hard enough of her real voice. Changing her voice. Yeah. So she lowered her voice to imitate the men that were in the industry because she thought that having a lower voice would signal that she was more masculine, more disagreeable, more conscientious, more industrious, harder working. But the product that they created, what was it called? The Winston or something? What was the thing that they made? I forget the name of the actual product. Some famous scientist from the 1900s, they named this thing Edison. That was it. But that was shit. Total shit. Didn't do what it was supposed to do at all. But she'd got all the surface area stuff. She'd got all of the easy to achieve things. Here's another thing, man, that I think about a lot. Scott Alexander put this on his blog a little while ago, talking about how fashions work two rungs apart in terms of class or group hierarchy. So if you're upper class, Kim Kardashian, let's say, you can wear heels with a pair of popper sided jogger tracksuit bottoms to an award ceremony. And people are going to think, oh yeah, that's so cool. It's like the clothes of the underclass. It's the clothes of sort of the street chav, but worn by someone who's really, really classy. But if you're only one rung above them, if you're perhaps lower middle class, you can't get away with that because you're so close that you could be confused. The signal that you're giving off in the mimesis isn't a signal of, I'm so cool that I can wear something that's two rungs below me, or I am so rich, even though I might be in a sort of lower middle class or an underclass position, that I can wear what the people above me are. I just look this way and I'm above my station basically. So you need to have these gaps. So the way that people model stuff and who they choose is also a signal in itself, right? Okay, what is this going to adopt within me? What am I trying to say with this? Is there any confusion that this might actually be me slipping down a peg as opposed to moving up a peg? Just got to have that gap just right. It's brilliant. And that has everything to do with what we talked about earlier, that Kim Kardashian can do that because she lives in a different world. It's not confusing. She's going far enough away into an external world for her, right? External mediators of desire and internal mediators. So she's going far enough away so it's not confusing, where if she sort of stayed in the world of celebrity and did something, it could create a lot of conflict. So that has to do with the distinction of what world do the models occupy? And we see that in all kinds of different domains. The interesting thing with Elizabeth Holmes, though, I have to add, is that what she did, like we can say that it's silly, we can joke about the black turtlenecks, but to some extent it worked in the sense that she created an aura around her. Alchemy, man. Alchemy. It was total alchemy that got people, presumably very smart people. I mean, it's embarrassing if you watch the documentary, the amount of people, right, on there touting her. So in a sense, mimetic desire models like literally distort reality. You know, we project all kinds of things onto models, like metaphysical things that they don't even possess. So there's a kind of a game that's being played. It's like who can make themselves out to be the right kind of a model. And if you can do that, you can raise, you know, I forget some ridiculous amount of money that Elizabeth Holmes was able to raise. And then it's a self-fulfilling prophecy. Like the more money you're able to raise, the more people that you get, like, you know, former heads of state, the more people don't even question. They just, they now have models of desire to follow. And it makes the seventh and eighth and the ninth one extremely easy. What goes on? This stuff is happening all over the place. They, this world is a story of what we would call spiritual warfare. Now, again, part of what I'm trying to do is help us understand that when we're talking spirit, it's not something of a different substance that somehow, although again, we don't know, again, we don't know what does the, what does the cornfield know of the farmer religions are the oldest and highest level of analysis. It's not, it's not when Peterson again says when he, it, he has to default to religious language because it's the only language that works. It's not arbitrary. Secularity is sort of a stealth mode and it conquered the world for a time, but it's leaving. Another thing from Sun Tzu, appear weak when you are strong and strong when you are weak. And you find this with religions all the time, trying to look strong. Well, that's because they're weak and secularity is in a sense, really trying to not appear at all when in fact you're completely controlling with, well, this interesting version of Christianity, the second sister of the church. So just a few ideas. I didn't plan on reading that or playing that video, but they seem to fit. And again, part of what, okay, I'll pull that up too. It's a road that nobody's ever went down, trying to be a good guy everywhere else and a bad guy here. I think the logic for me is, is to try to make the American wrestling fans get to be the bad guys. Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome Brett the Hitman Hart. Thank you for letting me still be your hero. Thank you for believing in me. A few weeks ago, I was told America, love it or leave it. I've been all over the United States of America. And the one thing that I've in particular looked forward to is loving, leaving it. And again, watch the whole video. It's a very, very, very beautiful documentary. And again, watch the whole video. It is, is this religious? Oh yeah. Completely. Canada is a country where we still take care of the sick and the old, where we still have health care. And what's beautiful about the documentary is he knows exactly what he's doing. He's playing a part. He's a great actor and, and you know, he does his own stunts. We got gun control. We don't shoot each other and kill each other on every street corner. Canada isn't riddled with racial prejudice and hatred. Across Canada, we all care for each other. And I am proud to be Canadian and I am proud to be your hero. And then of course he goes to the U S and he's got to play the role. Sort of, he's got to play that role. This is a big transition. He talks about it in the documentary. What are they doing? It's just minimally counterintuitive. It's just, it's, it's, they're playing it out in front of the people. And now there's, there's a degree to which many people know, you know, Hart talks about the fact that if they're doing it right at the end of the night, nobody's hurt. They're tired, but there's no bruises. There's no broken bones. There's nothing like that. They're doing their own stunts. They're playing a role there. They're, but of course you've got all of the symbols here at play. And I love that that dude was wearing a Burger King crown. Last week, I said the United States of America was one big giant toilet bowl. If you were going to give the United States, why are they there? They're there to play out the part, to be the faithful American against the ugly Canadian and to love their country and to feel it and to be full of it and to be, have the spirit occupy them all the way down to their socks. States of America and enema, you'd stick the holes right. If you were going to give the United States of America and enema, you'd stick the holes right here in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. That wasn't my idea to say that I'm urged, I'm not forced, but I'm urged to say this. So really get them going. And then Vince McMahon, who's running the show. And I mean, it's, Peterson's right. This is a sensational documentary. It's right there on YouTube. Just, just watch it. Retrospect now, looking back, I think it was a mistake to say that it's, that's not me. I wouldn't have said that. And I don't personally think that if I was going to stick the holes in the United States, I certainly wouldn't look at Pittsburgh. Maybe Washington. One thing I've learned is that Americans will do absolutely anything to screw you. Now, again, he was the good guy. He was a popular guy. You know, Peterson said for a while, the most famous Canadian in the world. It is Canada's second. Because they said we sucked. They started this door. The great Canadian American rivalry. You, you're an American. Yes. Carrying Canadian flag. That's right. And then always the outlier too. Why? Because the American fans are way over. They're just too patriotic. I, I wear this shirt. I took this flag out there. I got called an idiot, a moron. They don't even know me. You know, I don't know. So he's playing a different part. I haven't come out here to say the United States sucks or anything like that. I mean, maybe, maybe Canada does suck or, you know, it's just, it's not right, you know, to say stuff like that. If Bret Hart's come to this country and he's wrestled in front of all of these fans and given them years and years of service and won titles and he's done it all. And the personal level. And now just because he's, he's taking the Canadian flag and he's taking his family around him. They've just turned against him. He never, they never, he never turned against his fans. They turned against him. Yeah. This woman's story is interesting. And what's fascinating is that what she says of Hitman Hart, how many have said of Jordan Peterson? She must've read the biography. He told her to clean her room, do something with her life. Oh, well, to Brett, because four years ago I wouldn't be going to school and now I'm going to graduate because I just didn't believe in anything else. When I started liking Brett, everything changed. Anyway, the whole, the whole documentary is sensational. It's war in the heavenlies, spirits in conflict. We participate, but we're not, we're not passive participants. We're small. Again, school spirit. Can you change school spirit? Maybe. How? What can you do? Will you reason your school into school spirit? What are the tools? How does it work? How do you participate? Is it all from the outside where we say, Oh, here's all this memetic desire, or do you actually have to go inside the story and work on it from within?