https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lzj7iSLPp_w

 Oh, now I can't hear you again. I don't know what happened. Oh, now I hear you. Maybe we have a bad connection, maybe? No, if it's a bad connection, it shows up in other ways. I don't know why that glitched. Okay, well good. Well, we're working now. We're working. And I'm recording it. So I just saw you've got a YouTube channel. So cool, cool. So the first thing I wanted to talk about, and you might not feel the same, a half an hour with me might be more than enough. I feel like I could talk to you forever because I got to tell you, I got to tell you the first thing I want to tell you is that your video on your definition of meek, and you go into detail about meekness and what meekness is, has stuck with me. And I've watched that video probably four times all the way through. It's very meaningful to me. And when you, the thing you talk about, and as a martial artist and someone who loves martial arts, and when you talk about meekness and when you do the whole thing where you say, I think the exact quote that you said is, is when Saul was quaking in his tents, who was the one that came forward? And I just went, wow, yeah, that's it. You got it. So, but anyway, so you were talking, it was a video about you exploring narcissism and you were talking about potential and what the resurrection means. And you've done a lot of talking recently about Sam Harris. And I guess my input is this. So there's a guy that's, his name is Father Teilhard Chardin. He was a defrocked priest. He was a Jesuit priest and they subsequently got rid of him because he talked about evolution and he was an evolutionary biologist. And he didn't see any conflict because in his mind, in his mind, it didn't matter who did it. Jesus has no hands. God and the angels have no hands. The universe has to be created. And it's created by mankind and by the animals and by all the creatures who are living in concert with God's vision. And so it didn't make any difference to him who created the or who gave birth to it because it was all us. And of course, this ran afoul of the Catholic Church and that caused a lot of problems. And I think that's the way to bridge the gap between Sam Harris, Jordan Peterson, and really Christians because we see, or at least I see, that it doesn't really matter. We're supposed to participate. We're supposed to join in and align ourselves with God's vision and make it happen. And when Sam Harris talks about potential, he likes to talk about, well, one day we'll have computers that are sentient and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Well, he's more willing to admit the power of a computer than he is to admit the power of the human spirit and our potential and what's achievable. You know, that's free will. If we all choose good, what if every human being chose good? And then what if we could shepherd all creatures into sentience? And then what would be possible? This is what Father Chardin was discussing. This is what Ray Kurzweil describes, who's another atheist, when he talks about the singularity. You know, some day, technology, and there's this graph, right, where it's just infinite potential. Well, that's all Christianity is. So when I recite the Apostles Creed, what does that mean? I don't know what that means. What is immortality? Does it make a difference if man engineers it? I mean, aren't we, if we live in concert with God's desires and we create immortality or something approaching it, isn't that God's will? I mean, isn't that God? To me, I don't see the conflict that they see. And I agree with you when you talk about Sam Harris, when he says, oh, that's just, he just throws up his hands. No, it can't be God. It can't be God. It can't be God. Well, it's God. If it comes to fruition, if we're immortal in the flesh, you know, and then, then I don't know what that means. So it's like Jonathan Pigeot says, you know, Christ hides in his own crucifixion. We don't know what the crucifixion was. And we don't know what immortality will be. Does that make sense? Yeah. Well, I think we, I think you're right in that we, you know, the apostle Paul says, you know, no eye has seen nor no ear has heard. You know, we have, we don't even given the frame of reference we have now, there, we cannot use language to fully exhaust, to fully exhaust that which we are made for. I would say it that way. I think the struggle, you know, when I, you know, I'm continuing to mull over the Sam Harris, I mean, the Sam Harris Jordan Peterson conversation isn't, I mean, my interest in it is not so much just the talk. It's the way, the points that they touch on lead into other conversations. And the one I see beneath, beneath the Harris Peterson conversation is the question, how do we know the good? So if all people would do good, well, many people, many, I think many people say, you know, their intentions are the best. They want to do good. But very quickly you see that these people are lined up on different sides. And you know, wars are fought between both sides doing God's will. And we've seen this, you know, we've seen this forever in the world. And so then the question, the question digs down deeper. OK, how do you know what is good? And the funny thing about Sam Harris is that his definition of good is not that different from Jordan Peterson or Brett Weinstein's definition of good, because they have all been formed in this very large movement. But Peterson is the one of the three who is most unpacked where this has come from. So to me, when it comes to the resurrection, I have, you'll hear all three of them draw a very hard line between natural and supernatural. And in many ways, once we introduce that line and make it very firm, the enlightenment is all around us, because how exactly can we draw that line in areas of our life that we simply have no knowledge about? Jordan Peterson makes the point in the second video when he gives or the first video when he gives us illustration of prayer, you sit down on the side of your bed and you think, I want to be a better person. And so you you talk out loud, help me be a better person. And as Peterson and Weinstein and to a certain degree, Sam Harris will say, you'll get an answer. And Harris says, but it's not supernatural. And it's like, how do you know that? And Peterson says, and I think Peterson is right, we don't know where that answer comes from. If we know it's not in this little space of my conscious brain, we've got lots of differing opinions about where that answer is coming from. And in fact, the church forever has had long conversations about where that answer is coming from. So then you get into the and that's why I think to get into the resurrection, it's to me, if the creation is such that we are made to be embodied, then I think the fulfillment must also be embodied. Yes. And that's that's something that you touch on. And so yeah, and that's a sticky point for a lot of people because they think, well, there's no they imagine some literal thing with graves opening up and it's the walking dead. And so, you know, and we can't, you know, look at bottom, the ground is the ground. Sam Harris's graph is a linear graph. And he is having difficulty getting to infinity. You know, we're thinking infinite curve, we're thinking unlimited potential without end. And I think that so so we have we're admitting to uncertainty. We don't necessarily know necessarily what it means because we don't to use one of the phrases that's been thrown around a lot recently. We don't want to put God into an iron box. I would not I have too much respect to try to put Christ in chains and I'm not going to do that. And so he breaks chains. He does not be put. You cannot be put in them. And so he says, you're a man of science. How can you recite the Apostles Creed? Because I don't know what it means, son, because I don't know what it means, because I'm humble, because I have to submit myself to the will of God, you know, to this thing. But so the other thing is I wanted to bring up and I want to touch on but I think there's well, we can't talk to Sam Harris. Peterson can. But there's a certain circle rocks that I want Peterson to throw at Sam Harris. There's a box of rocks. You know, it's in America. I want you to throw infinity at him. He's sent it to University of Toronto. There's a box. There's a bunch of rocks. This is what I'm going to throw at Sam Harris. They're labeled. So one of them is infinity. I want you to throw infinity at him. What do you mean by that? In other words, Sam, do you admit that by science you understand what infinity means? So Sam, we're talking about infinity. So take God out of a sentence and substitute in that infinite potential. So maybe what for us God means is infinite potential and admitting that potential is infinite and that by its very definition, it cannot be bound. It cannot be understood and it cannot be defined. So, you know, that might be a place to start because whenever you talk about infinity, you have to admit the supernatural because we don't know what it is. But Sam wants everything to be in this iron box. So infinity, I would hit him with. They like the gun analogy. They both like the gun analogy and they used it a lot. So how about this? Religion's a gun. And so you have to fear it. And then also, guns kill people. People don't kill people. People do. So religions don't kill people. People do. And so when people want to kill someone, then they reach out for two things. A weapon and a justification. I like that one. I like that one. I think that's another good one to hit Sam Harris with. So that's the second rock. OK, so then the third rock is this rock. So he wants to admit to he kind of likes this. He likes he's got like a Buddhist connection, the well-being thing. All right. So let's hit him with Luke 1720. When he was asked of the Pharisees when the kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God is not coming with signs to be observed, nor will they say, lo here or lo there, for the kingdom of God is within you. And so, you know, you know, when my mom gave me my first Bible years and years and years ago, I'm going to do the Donald Trump thing. I got my Bible. When my mom gave me my Bible, she gave me Philippians 4, 4 through 9 is her favorite passage. And there was a marker in there. And that's about and it's funny because that passage has the peace of God, you know, and the peace of God, which surpasses all of us. But then it comes back and says, and the God of peace will be with you. And I contemplated on that. So I got that Bible when I think I was 14, I'm 57. So I've had a few years to think about it. And there's two kinds of peace. So there's the peace of God that is within you that you get, that you receive. And then there's the God of peace who, you know, it affects peace in the world as something that's external. So there's an inner and an outer peace. And so for me, when that passage I quoted, and when I say we need to hit Sam Harris with Luke 17, 20, so I just had a kind of a Twitter conversation with Brad Warner. He's a Zen Buddhist priest. And what I'm trying to get across to him is, dude, it's the same place. OK, so when Zen guys sit and stare at the wall and they achieve one minute, that is at one minute. That's the meaning of the word at one minute. OK, atonement. That is the same thing. So hey, someone else just crashed the phone. He was a little early. He'll be back at 1230. Oh, OK. Hey, John. So my point being that, you know, there's some overlap between these head spaces that you arrived in. So it's like, and I realize I'm throwing a lot out there for discussion, but like, along with some rocks. Some rocks. So Sam, when you, Sam Harris, when you talk about, when you talk about the head space of Zen Buddhism and all that stuff, you can get there in a Christian viewpoint, too. There's an inner peace that comes with that. And that's how you get into St. John of the Cross and his book, Dark Night of the Soul, where he says, he says, what you are looking for is what is looking. You know, you're looking to find the divine eye, the true eye, that's in you, that is aligned like a tuning fork with with God's grace and mission, you know. And I think that's another thing. God's grace. Like, what is grace? What is grace? Well, you know, what is peace? You're not going to throw a rock that's that's labeled grace at Sam, are you? Throwing a rock that's labeled grace doesn't seem like that's going to go. OK, all right. Grace is a weapon. It's that's the Holy Spirit. We can't we can't write the Holy Spirit on a rock and throw it at anybody. But, you know, they don't like the words. They don't like that. He doesn't like religion, period. But he especially doesn't like Christianity. And some of the things that we that are in our lives like grace, the Holy Spirit, peace, all these sorts of things, they have a definition that they think it means and, you know, those of us that have studied the origin of Hebrew laws and stuff. And so people on the outside, they look at it and they go an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. This is all fashion. This is this is a vengeance oriented, you know. But, you know, at the time when that was written, Hammurabi was saying, you know, off with their heads, two sets of laws for the people of the world. You know, two sets of laws for the noblemen and the regulars. Society, yeah. And so, you know, you take a class, you know, I want to yell at the guy like you don't know, like because it takes years. And, you know, I just started the seminary. I've been in my seminary for about two years now. And I didn't know. What seminary do you go to? And then an online seminary called Ecclesia Epagnostica. It's a liberal Catholic seminary that allows people to be married. And but it's basically it's basically Catholic. And that's a whole other talk we could have. I mean, I was raised as a Presbyterian and my parents had a falling out and then they went to a Christian church and we fell out of that. And then we didn't do anything after age 10 or 12 years old. My mom wanted me to be a spiritual person and I went on a spiritual quest. And then I spent many, many years. I was I was I got way, way into Zen and way, way into Taoism. I did Wicca for about five years. I went all over the place. And then I started coming back to to Christianity. And then what pushed me over the edge was Jordan Peterson. He shoved me. It was just like everything clicked. And when it clicked, I was just like, what am I doing? Like, you know, everything kept leading me back to the logos. And when I got to the lecture, his lecture about it's the one about the meaning of redemption. It's in one of his older videos. And I was like, the logos, the logos. It's always the logos like it's it's it's it goes all the way back to Hermes. It's the caduceus. And it's what he talks about. And it's like, I know what the Holy Spirit is. And I've felt it. And once I've felt the Spirit, I just need to go with the mythology that has the best description of how we get to the Holy Spirit and how we get to grace. And I have to have faith in that. And once everything aligned, it was like every tune and fork of the universe came together and I was like, I have to I have to preach the logos to people so they can understand it. And so I've been reaching out to people like that. I know we're in the Zen because that's that's the one that clicked most for me that has the most overlap. It's to me, it's like 70 percent overlap with Christianity. Now, I do realize that there's the sacrifice thing that we pull back from. You know, so we're into going in. We believe go in, go in, go in, go toward the suffering. I see what you mean. Yeah, but there is a little pullback from suffering on the Zen side. But there's also overlap. And like in the Shobo Genzo of Dogen, which is a big, big Buddha, a big Zen Buddhist text, there's this whole quote and the quote. And you'll recognize it immediately. It's Matthew six. It's Matthew six. So basically what it is is just practice good, do good for others without thinking of gaining reward. Right. And it's the same thing as Matthew six, where it says, sell no trumpet before you as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets. It's the same thing. And wisdom is wisdom no matter where you find it. You know what I mean? But what Sam doesn't understand is he doesn't understand. He hasn't, well, he hasn't, I think he understands it, but he won't admit it. And that is that you have to have a framework. Well, you know, your point about infinity I think is an important one in this conversation because, you know, when, so I was listening, I was listening to the second, was it the first? It was when they got into the, it was at the end of the first one, when they got into the conversation about the resurrection and Peterson's, I mean, Peterson's, again, people say Peterson's dodging this. I don't think he's dodging this at all. He, I think he's genuine when he says, I don't know, he said it to Tim Lott, he said it repeatedly, I don't know how far down this can go in terms of the bodily resurrection of Jesus if in fact the God can, and see this is again why I do believe in a physical literal resurrection because for me that then makes the story complete in that how, but Jesus' resurrected body is, and actually the Apostle Paul makes this very clear, it's a very different resurrected body. He shows up in a locked room, he doesn't, he shows up in a locked room, but he's not a ghost. In other words, he's not less real than the walls, he's more real than the walls. And he's not less real than a fish, he's more real than a broiled fish. And so then here's, Sam Harris would say, well the universe is in a box, and that box would be let's say the energy death of the universe. There is the limitation that every story must adhere to, and what Christianity will say is God is not limited by that story, and he's not limited by that story because he built the system that has that story within it. And that is something that at this point Sam Harris would simply not accept, but Jordan Peterson would say, he would be an open agnostic, he'd say I'm not ready to admit Sam Harris' limitation. And that's what frustrates Sam Harris. Therefore, Sam Harris' limitation has in an effect become his creed. And that's the final creed of the materialist, that this is your limitation. And you're coming along, and many other religious traditions have come along and said that's a rather small-minded limitation. We can conceive of larger, which might suggest we should keep thinking about this limitation. Yeah, yeah. I mean, basically it's like Sam Harris saying, well, I can't talk about this with you until you define infinity for me. Can you define infinity for me? We're recording this, John, so don't say anything if you don't want to be recorded. Otherwise, you can pop out and pop back in in about five minutes. We should be done. No, I'm okay. I'll just listen in. It's fine. Hello, YouTube. So there is infinity. And so we have a graph, and we start at zero. And then Christ enters the universe. And we go from what's the potential is zilch. But God descends to the finite and becomes human in Christ. And so now we have a graph of the universe. And so when when when so what Sam Harris is saying is that, no, there was some potential here always. And then maybe there's some potential possibly at some point. But, you know, really, it wasn't it wasn't zero before. And it won't be infinity in the future. And what I think Peterson is saying, and I think I'm going to be a little bit more specific about this, but it's not that it's not zero. And so we have a graph of the universe. And we're going to start at zero. And then we have a graph of the future. And what I think Peterson is saying, and I agree with you 100%. He's we've heard him saying I had written down a quote to throw at you from Peterson that. Rock I hope you're throwing at. Not at all. Never. If we ever talk again. Well, I'll never live that down. No, but. He says something like. We don't know what our potential is. That's right. That's exactly what. What the problem is, is because Sam Harris will not admit to zero. Normally admit to infinity. But anyway, I would like for you to. Put that in there. Put the, the, the rocks that I want you to throw out. Or infinity. And. And the gun. That's what I'm saying. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. I'm not going to throw it out. That's true. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. Well, thank you, Robert. This has been fun. And I'm going to end the recording, because I don't know what John wants to do. But I'm sure I appreciate you reaching out to me. And it's been a lot of fun. It's great to hear your thoughts. And I love your videos. I really do. They're fantastic. I'm amazed. I'm amazed that I've just so many interesting people in the world. Thank you, Robert. Enjoy your conversation with John. You take care. All right. Bye-bye. Bye now. Thank you.