https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TauEJi_Q1wc

 Hi, this is Paul. One of the things that's sort of bubbling around is Hermes, of all things. And this, although John mentioned he talked about it in After Socrates, this part of his conversation with Jordan Peterson sort of caught everyone's attention. And I want to run through a bunch of things with respect to this. John and I might have a conversation about this coming. But I wanted to frame a number of things because this has caused a lot of question and a lot of debate. And I see this very much in the continuation of the recession of modernity. Now, I know when I say that Jordan Peterson calls it a counter enlightenment. I don't I don't think that's the best way to frame it. When I say a recession of modernity, when when you think of a recession, you think of a tide coming in and a tide receding. And I think modernity reached its high water mark at some point and it is receding. And as modernity recedes, well, as I mentioned earlier in the live stream today, it's it's human beings when they find something and then they discover something, they overreach. And then there's sort of an opponent processing it gets pushed back. And so what we see happening is that modernity is getting pushed back. I'm not going to play any of it, but it's got a few views now thanks to Jonathan's presence. But this conversation between Rafe Kelly and Jonathan Peugeot was absolutely tremendous. And you can see the recession of modernity very clearly as these two talk. And you can see it in this portion. I'm going to play the portion that has Hermes and John Vervecky and and Jordan Peterson's conversation. I had I don't know how familiar you are with IFS, internal family systems, where you do parts work. So what's going on right now is this huge convergence within the psychotherapeutic domain of dialogical models of the self dialogical practices. And I was in the middle of doing parts work and I was working with a part. What would that mean practically? What were you doing exactly? So what happens is you what you'll when you notice that you're sort of possessed by something, you try and step back. Your mother, your father, ancestral spirit, fragment. Yeah. And you try and step back into. Well, Schwartz calls it the seed of the self. But I don't think that's quite right. But what you try is you try and step back into that more sage like awareness. Right. Right. So you're going deeper or higher. Yeah. Yeah. And then what you do is you try to and you don't demonize this part. You try and enter into a dialog. You realize that it is guarding something. This is it's it's it has some adaptive. Now, let's add a little something. I'm going to play a little bit later on a clip from a conversation I had with John and someone else that I had a couple of years ago. Where John's going to talk through some of this too. And he's going to get into some detail from it. And I think it's really helpful clip to sort of understand some of the conversation going on around this. It is so interesting how this debate Santa Claus isn't real. Well, how real is Hermes? Hermes seems real enough to provoke a very interesting debate and conversation and set of thoughts and anxieties that are going on now. That's pretty real. And in this clip that I'm going to play from my conversation with John a while ago, he gets into the real. And I think that's listening to that a couple of years before is really helpful to sort of understand. He was reading Lerman at that point and he brought that into the conversation. But part of the recession of modernity is the continual awareness that despite the fact that we as physical human beings are wrapped in skin, there's a reality that we have that goes beyond our skin. There's a reality that we have that goes into the culture through relationships, through the things that we make, through the things that we do. There's a even in the 1960s, there was a fascination with multiple personality disorder and there were movies about it. People were very fascinated by the idea that one person could be divided in themself through years of psychology, talk of psychotherapy. People have adopted in the culture all kinds of language about, let's say, the inner child. People, let's say, who grew up with an alcoholic could be very attuned to the different personalities that might come up in a parent when they are sober, when they are drunk, when they are angry and drunk, when they are depressed. And you begin to see that although all of these people are wrapped within this skin and are one human being, there are all these dimensions to a person. And we don't have too much trouble with that because we're speaking, as Jordan Peterson always says, psychologically. And we sort of have a sense that sort of the mind has within it these these selves that aren't, then we use this word, this term like integrated. And so you have all of that kind of conversation. Then we begin to, and as part of what we've been talking about over the last five years, are the realities of distributed selves, of other levels of participation that we participate in. When we're at our job, we are performing the role of a worker or an employee or a boss. And when we're at home or a father or a son or a wife or a mother or a child, and we have all these different roles. But again, we don't really have any problem understanding that these are within us. And then if you're trying to deal with some things in your life, let's say some things, we'll use this word, these words have become common in our language. Some things trigger you. You walked into a certain situation, you became angry all of a sudden and you don't know why. And so then maybe you go to a therapist and you want to explore that and you go back into your childhood. Maybe there's trauma. Trauma is sort of the new self-esteem now. And you go to, you do EMDR and you watch that little thing go back and forth. You say, well, how on earth is that supposed to help? And it helps. There's a retired therapist in my church who did a lot of EMDR work. And this is a very, in many respects, a very conservative Christian evangelical woman. And she says it's just amazing the kind of progress people can make with that kind of therapy. And it's a little bit mis- mystifying to us that this little thing with lights can really make a difference. If you don't know what that is, I'm sure you can look it up on the Internet or on YouTube and find examples of it. And so then we tend to get the sense of that there are within us, there are competing versions of ourselves. And there are in some ways even residual pieces of other family members. We've got parts of our father that live in us. And when certain thing happens, something responds. And we're like, oh, my goodness, I'm my father. I see that sometimes in myself. I'm in a situation usually because very good situations, not always. Something will come up and I find myself acting out something because this is this is when I was a child. This got this I mapped this into me without even any thought about it. And I sort of played these routines of my father. We don't know how to act in this extremely complex world. So what we kind of do is we our parents act out within us. And so John is talking about this form of therapy whereby in a sense imaginatively sort of transcend ourselves. And with the help of someone else, we begin to explore these these things in ourself. And then the question is, well, what about when? Well, my father isn't in me in a physical sense. My father has been dead for over a decade now. But there are parts of my father that live inside of me still. And some of those are good parts and some of them are some of those are less good parts. And they're parts of my mother. She continues to be alive. But part of those are good and part of those aren't. And part of me lives in my children, both my sons and my daughters, my wife and I who know each other for for decades now. We have parts of there are parts of her that are mapped in my head. And I say, well, that's not really parts of hers. Nothing physical in there. No, that's right. But we're not merely physical creatures. We are we are also we are also ways of acting that are ourselves. So you have all of this complexity. But what about other things and cultures and cultures are, in a sense, the way a much broader body gets inhabited within us and we act out of our culture. You can see that in various cultures around the world. There's you know, this is particular warrior dance that that the Maori do. There was a New Zealand basketball team and I think they were playing the American All the American Olympic basketball team. And before the game, they were doing this whole it was dance and it was chant and it was facial movements. And well, what are they when they're doing that? And we know this with roles. A fireman might have a family life and all of these things. But when they go to a fire, something else kicks in. A soldier. Soldiers know this because of, again, trauma. When they hear something, something else kicks in. It's like another program begins to play. And so what we do is we on one hand begin to understand that we have all these programs within us that are that are often at play. But sometimes these programs are from other different people. And sometimes they're not from people like us. Sometimes they're from cultures. And even when we use things like racism or homophobe or some of these things, you sort of have a spirit that inhabits us. Now, I'm going to get into this a little bit, but part of what happened in the Enlightenment was, well, a deep criticism and exclusion of at least initially for a very long time, everything. But let's say, especially in the Protestant world, God and the Holy Spirit, everything in the middle was excluded in missiology. About 30 years ago, 40 years ago, they talked about the excluded middle, how Westerners would go to these countries and preach about God and Jesus and the Holy Spirit. And then the people down here. And if they go to a place like Africa, the Africans had all of these spirits in between. That sort of unnerve the missionaries. And what might really under them is if they read their Bible carefully, they'd be like, there's like these heavenly hosts and, you know, Michael Heiser. You can you can look up his work because actually behind the text, you know, what about angels? What about demons? What about Hassatan that shows up in the Book of Job? And God is, you know, kind of has a wager with with with with the Satan, the accuser. And, you know, Job sort of suffers because of it. What do we make about these? How are we to regard these? And part of what's happening in the recession of the recession of modernity is that I like to use the example of Mono Lake. Mono Lake is this. Maybe I can find a YouTube of it because that's what YouTube is good at. Well, this is good. Here's a here's a time lapse of Mono Lake. And you can see the lake go up and down and you can just Google Mono Lake and you see these two formations that are that are all around. And and these things, these these strange formations are these strange formations are what's revealed when the water recedes. And so part of that is what we see happening is as we sort of already had the high water mark of modernity and it's receding as we're sort of recalibrating. And again, a lot of this recalibration has come to us by virtue of science, cognitive science and psychology and robotics and all of this, that the water levels are changing. And when the water when Mono Lake gets less water now, it's a dead lake. It's not dead. Actually, there's a lot of life in it. But when when the tributary streams aren't putting fresh water in it, the water level goes down and all of these two exhibits are revealed. And so here John is talking about doing this work of basically working with someone else to explore the various parts within himself. And that was the context for for what he described here. Functionality. Now, this is my take. When I use this part, you try and enter into a dialogue, you realize that it is guarding something. This is it's it's it has some adaptive functionality. Now, this is my take, not necessarily his. But I think what what you do is you bring sort of a mirror of agency or self-reflectiveness to this part. You act like a mindfulness mirror to it. You dialogue and you get it. You get to say, well, oh, well, what you try to get it to explicate its normativity, what's actually governing and guiding it. And then you get to and then you get you can help it develop. Yes. And you call it and then you become socratic with it. But how much part are you following the normativity that you're enforcing on me? Yeah. And what will happen frequently is it will relax and because it's being listened to, it's being listened to. And it's also realized that there's an opportunity here for now. Now notice that did you see what Jordan just did right there? It's being listened to. Well, what what is it? Well, it's this it's this part of me that's being listened to. Is it a part of me? Is it a part? Where did that part of me come from? Is this a part of me that I picked up somewhere from my father? Is this a part of me that I picked up from something else that's out there? For growth. Yeah. Of course, this overlaps with a lot of you. You recommended naming those things. Oh, you do. You know, you know. Yeah. OK. Pause there. Naming those things. OK. Well, what would that do? Now, we've seen a lot of naming lately. So, again, one of one that's quite recent and now it's far enough back that we don't even pay much attention to it. Let's say woke before woke was a name of something woke had another function in the language. But but after woke stuck. And then once woke stuck as a name, it had it had a degree of being in our. Relational landscape in our cultural landscape. And you go back in time and you see that once things sort of get named. This is what Donald Trump was a genius at in his run up to the 2016 election. He was naming people and crooked Hillary. Just just two words. Just put them together and say it a lot. And you sort of create something and you can you can win the presidency with with this kind of thing. And on one hand, it's it's from the playground. You learn this as a child, but you can you can master this now. Now we're talking about things outside, but what about things inside? And so Jung says, well, you should name these things. Well, why? Because then you can kind of get a handle on this. Now, anybody who's paying attention to, let's say, the biblical text. We'll notice that. There's. Jesus runs into this demoniac. Who is living in a Gentile area on the other side of the Sea of Galilee. And his life is so bad. That he's driven out of town. They try is probably family members are deeply worried about him, so they try to restrain him. They put chains on. He breaks the chains. Something's going on. And then you creep. You go around psych units and different corners and you hear about people exhibiting superhuman strength and this way or that way. And you look at exorcisms and, you know, this is sort of a shadowy part of our world. Partly thanks. And I'm going to talk about this thanks to the Enlightenment, sort of pushed over to the corners of our world. But inside, Jesus, Jesus meets him and right away he says, Jesus, get away from me. I know who you are. And Jesus says, what is your name? My name is Legion, for we are many. And Jesus didn't act like a psychotherapist and sit down and try to sort all of this stuff out. And that's how Jesus just basically tells him, you all have to go. We don't throw us into the abyss. Throw us into those pigs. OK, go into the pigs and the pigs often go into the lake. The stories in the Bible is a very famous story. And I'm not saying that all of us who have pieces of us are possessed by a demon or a spirit or something like that, a malevolence. But we do experience that dividedness as malevolence often because what we want to have is, this is the word we use, integrity. We want all of our different pieces to be integrated and we don't want to be triggered and we don't want to suddenly become our father when someone says something or does something. We don't want to become our mother when someone says something or dumps something. Or maybe we do. But you begin to realize that the virtue and the excellence that your father or mother possessed and exhibited was something that they actually grew and it was an achievement. Maybe part of it was inherited. And over the last five years of doing this internet ministry, I've been able to realize a lot of the good that I've inherited from my father. And I didn't even know I was inheriting it. But usually when people go to a therapist, they're looking for things that they have inherited from the outside that they wish to resolve in them. So now maybe they can be in a situation where something happens in a marriage and they don't fly off the handle and break things or yell or storm out or go get drunk or go get a hooker or something like that. I mean, people do all sorts of things. So psychologically, this is part of the reason why churches will sometimes have therapists on site or on staff or send people to therapy because, well, you really don't want to keep playing. You don't want that. You don't want your father to keep possessing you when your mother, when your wife says something or your child does something. And you want to resolve that part and you want to be conformed to a different norm. Something happened and you'll probably see a very union thing in this. Like I said, this is difficult for me to talk about, but I did talk about it already publicly and after Socrates. A hell of a thing for an introvert to do. Yes. So I was in the middle of one of these sessions and an archetypal presence came in and pushed aside all the parts and said, no, you're going to listen to me. And who are you? I'm Hermes. Oh, yeah. The god of interpretation, the god of meaning making. Did he have little wing slippers on him? Well, no, he was... Wings messenger of the gods. He appeared, he very much had a presence of a cycle of pomp. And when you say appeared, what was the phenomenology? The phenomenology is like the phenomenology of the presence of a mind. Like I have a sense of, I have a mind sight into your awareness. Now, what's interesting about these things, and this is again my take, not the IFS people, although I've talked to Mark Lewis at length about this, and he thinks it's a good take. I think of these entities as neither subjective nor objective. I think of them transjective. And I think this is in the domain of relevance and relevance is neither objective nor subjective, but what binds them together. He's binding the inner and the outer, the upper. Now in that clip I'm going to play from my conversation with John from a couple years ago. He'll walk through that in a little bit more detail. I just wanted to note that here. In the lower and all of that together. And so it's the sense of a presence, but it's like what Charles Stang talks about, the divine double. It's both you and not you. Kind of like the way conscience is. But it has a... Right. And so I have an ongoing dialogue with Hermes. It's very much... Is this a presence that you visualize? How do you know of its appearance? I've had only one sort of vision. What was the vision like? The vision was very much... Well, I've had... The vision was very much what I laid. Now you can see Jordan go into scientist therapist mode. And now all of this is on video. So in a sense, I don't have to necessarily go back over this with John if we talk about it. Maybe we will because I'll certainly probably push on a few things that Jordan didn't. But it's interesting this turn that happened in this conversation. The amount of attention this turn has had, at least in this little corner. Very much like sort of Michael, the archangel. Which is very interesting. And then I've had one of sort of Thoth from Egypt and Hanuman from the Vedic tradition. As well as Hermes from the Greek tradition. And in the ancient literature they're often seen as corresponding to each other in some fashion. You understand? I'm treading on this very... Okay. So what was the consequence of the appearance of this superordinate spirit, arguably superordinate spirit, in the presence of this domain of chaos? Well, it made it very clear to me that it... I don't want to say it anymore. He wanted to make it very clear that there was a dialogical relationship that needed to be developed and cultivated. And it would be a relationship by which I would cultivate something analogous to Socrates' demonium. And that's the promise that was given to me. Oh, that's a good deal. I think so. Well, it's dangerous, but so is everything else. Yeah, excellent things are rare, or we wouldn't pursue them, as Spinoza said. Or we would all pursue them, as Spinoza said. So I found Raph's work on ally work. And I've talked to a bunch of people that have the kind of practices you can do to enter into this. And I've got a friend of mine very helpful around this. And so what became very apparent was that this demonium and the way I've internalized Socrates as a sage were very allied to each other. Because Socrates also portrayed himself as being Metaxi, being between the human and the divine. And then to get to the deep answer to this, this all started to psychodynamically integrate. Now, part of what you're going to, you know, when he says to get to the deep answer of this, well, my question would be, well, what exactly are you looking for from this? I'll let him finish, and then I'll do a lot more talking. With the intellectual, philosophical realization of the Platonic proposal that human beings are supposed to always hold in tonos, creative tension, Nicholas of Cusa, Heraclitus, our finitude and our transcendence. If we only hold on to our finitude, we fall prey to servitude and despair. If we only hold on to our transcendence, we fall prey to hubris and inflation. But if we can hold the two together, if we are the Metaxi between the beast and the god, right, we can properly realize our humanity. And this is what Socrates sees himself. This is how he portrays Eros. This is how he portrays the task of philosophia. And so for me, that Socratic spirit and Hermes as a psychological, dialogical presence have become integrated together. So that's, that's the answer. That's quite a trip. Well, I mean, yeah, it's quite a trip. Now the video goes on for a while and it's the link is below and you can certainly watch it. Now he just, John just recently did a conversation with, with Michael Souter and Michael Martin on the Regeneration podcast. It's a small podcast. I did an event with Michael Martin in Washington, D.C. last summer. Michael is very much a part of this corner, sort of over in the Grail country corner of the corner mostly. And so part of what's interesting about the corner is that there are sort of different, different corners of the corner have their own, have their own particularities. And so John, John goes into a little bit. This caught their attention. And so they had a conversation about this. And John mentioned that even though he had mentioned this and after Socrates, his appearance with Jordan Peterson sort of provoked a response and a whole, a whole range of responses. Many of the responses John received were responses of care and love and concern because, well, I'll just tell you, let's, let's, let's talk about how I'm playing with this thing. Let's talk about how. Let's talk about mappings that are in us. I've used the example before. Sam Tiedemann, who is a biblical Unitarian, he came into sort of at the end of the OG phase of my own waves in this corner. And when Sam came in, somebody who had come in before him, who is no longer with us, Mary Cohen, who's very much a beloved woman, had conversation, many conversations with myself, with John, with Jonathan, you know, that all of our all of our visibilities were lower and our availabilities were easier at that point. And then when Sam Tiedemann came in, someone who was principally not in subscription to the doctrine of the Trinity, whoosh, Mary, who was just the lovely, kindest, gentlest grandma just went after Sam. And it was like, oh. And I remember the, I remember when Sam first contacted me, actually, the first conversation I had with Sam, we tried to record, but his sound equipment was so bad, it was unusable. So that one never got published. We published our first conversation was actually the second conversation we had. But I, I traded very carefully with Sam at that point because for many of the things I talk about in my channel, I'm not hazarding a heresy trial or subscription problem within my own denomination and with within the groups to whom I am accountable. But hey, the Trinity is, yeah, you subscribe to that if you're a minister in the Christian Reformed Church. And so it was fascinating to me how this very ancient thing, which was the, the fight about Christology and the Trinity sort of welled up through the centuries, through the body of the church and manifest itself in me. And oh, I got to be careful with this Sam, because very quickly he wasn't just someone who would walk in and say shallow things against the Trinity. Sam was extremely well read in Trinitarian controversies and in early church history and a whole bunch of things. And he's extremely intelligent. He, he works for major corporations and he's, he's a very, very smart guy and a formidable guy to, to decide you want to argue with. This thing came from below. Trinity defense mode came in. I remember in the Brad Bird movie, The Iron Giant, when the suddenly someone, someone's, you know, the tanks roll in. And of course, Hobart and the Iron Giant have sort of been playing together like a kid and a found puppy. And then the tanks roll in this circuitry and the Iron Giant wells up and suddenly the Iron Giant becomes our killing machine and starts laying waste to armies, et cetera, et cetera. And so what Sam did in the corner was trigger the Trinitarian defense. And so you had a nice lovely grandma, you know, suddenly like the Iron Giant start, you know, shooting at Sam. And over the last few years, some of what we've done is sort of, I wouldn't say we let down our guard with respect to the Trinity. I haven't seen a lot of people switching sides on the Trinity or any mass scale defection from the Trinitarian church over to the Unitarian church. But we've all sort of figured out how to, how to do that. I had a very similar reaction when I started talking about John Vervecky. And once I brought John into the mix, I suddenly getting emails from some people who were following things saying, don't talk to that man, et cetera, et cetera. And well, you know, I've also got my father in me and my father and me said, no, do talk to that man and do talk to Sam and do talk to people that other people won't talk to. Because because you are an emissary of Christ. And so you have to figure out what to do and you have to figure out how to go about this. So I told that to talk about old programs that come up now and even older program than, let's say, Trinitarian defense in the church that sort of wells up like the Iron Giant. And even older program is against opening that door to the spirit world. And if if if John had simply said, well, you know, I was talking to these different parts of myself and these. And so this other part of myself, that would have all sounded very psychological. And people wouldn't have thought too much of it because we're we're used to that idea and psychology of of having different personalities within us and different programs. We have all of these metaphors that sort of work through those things. But opening up a spiritual door and now suddenly that I know when John and I talk about this, because this has been a constant thing that John and I have wrestled with in terms of when I read what talk about the spirit of finesse and how. Use the spirit of geometry to in a sense to deal with, let's say, God number one and use the spirit of finesse to deal with God number two. You use the spirit of geometry to use to deal with inanimate things, things without personhood. Use the spirit of finesse to deal with persons, not only persons, but personalities. So if you're a therapist and you're working through why, let's say why I get angry when someone lets the dog in and they trample mud on the floor instead of just saying, oh, no, I got to clean up the mud. Now suddenly I'm ready to beat the dog within an inch of its life. Now, that's not true. It's my father was never, ever like that as anybody who kind of has a sense of me and my father knows that. But a therapist would say, OK, well, let's let's talk about your relationship with your father and let's talk about how you were a child. And when the dog got let in and your father threw a fit and then your dog disappeared and when you ask where your dog went, he made up some story about it being on a farm someplace. I've heard similar versions of that story many times from people. The dogs disappear because the dog did something. Well, one of the things that wells up is, well, the Witch of Endor, the Law of Moses, because, well, you know, the Trinitarian fight. Now we're talking, you know, third, fourth, fifth centuries. You're talking. You're talking law of Moses, Israelite laws with respect to witchcraft. And dealing with spirits. And just like there's a Trinitarian defense system, there's an even older, deeper, I would argue, and I would argue very powerful defense system that have been built into many of us Christians, some Jews and Muslims, too. But now we're going to when I got some slides I'm going to run through because we have to talk about the way the Enlightenment plays into this. Because part of the reason, let's say Michael Martin brings up what he does is, well, you get into medieval Christianity and some of those things get a little different. So we're going to have to talk about these dynamics. Now maybe this is a good time for me to put in this little clip from my earlier conversation with John, so I'll make a pause here. Hopefully the sound won't be too, the sound levels won't be too different. So, I'd like to reply to, there's a lot of threads there. Let's, let's first of all let's go back to the phenomenology of the uncanny. The uncanny valley, the uncanny is when things are close enough that we sort of recognize them but far enough away that we're going, I don't understand. So when you get, when you get the, when they're making the robots look like humans, when it's clearly robot, right, people, but it says it starts to look more and more like a human. That's when you hit the uncanny valley, because it's similar to a human, but it's still not a human. And you're getting right you're getting the uncanny is the same sort of place where wonder and horror it's that place that's on the horizon of intelligibility. And shamans were perhaps the first individuals to cultivate practices that made, that took them to the uncanny they, they were not liked by their communities generally, they're always suspected of doing nefarious things, because they're uncanny they're weird even in their own community. They're odd people that's what they're the ones that know, like the classic sub. So, and I think the thing we need to know is that to me points to something even deeper that is I think the core of what's going on here in this discussion. I keep referring to this book, how God becomes real by Lerman who's one of the great anthropologists right now. And she talks about the reality of spirits, and, and that they're not real in the two, like, so our, our culture, our standard modernity we have the two ways in which things can be real subject, they can be subjectively real they can be objectively real. And we'll have a heck they go together but we'll just pretend that we'll that's okay. Right. And then what we, and what people like Heidegger and others have been pointing out is the older, the basically, at least in ancient Greece idea that no no the what grounds the possibility them fitting together is the most real. And I tried to coin that term the transjective and Lerman basically argues that a lot of the sacred phenomena are trends are are are real. And they are real in a way I would call transjective. And give me a sec because this ties into the very thing. I think we want to talk about, which is these, these entities don't exist by our assertion as romantic, or by our reception of them from the world smashing into us objectively member object means to smash into. They exist dialogically. And Jesus even says that not to be, not to be insulting but we're two or three are gathered in my name. There I am also there. Right. This is the idea that these, these, these entities are realized. And I know there's metaphysical questions here and I'm happy to discuss them but I'm trying to get right now the phenomenology and the functionality on the table. These entities are realized dialogically. And again I'm not making a metaphysical claim here, but Jesus only real to you. If you pray to him. If you talk to him. If you let him into your life, even you can even hear evangelical and fundamentalist language being used that way. And, and by the way, this is not specific to Christianity. This is Lerman's point. So, this is a different sense of real and if you'll allow me there's, there's a transjective realness. And it's very, very important because the transjective realness that is approached dialogically right puts us on the horizon of intelligibility. And that's the place where we have to seriously play for transformation, if we want to move from one world to another. That's the liminal zone that's the roof of the cave. Right, that place there that that's the cognitive roof of the cave. And what's happening in shamanism right is right that the monological view of the mind is being directly challenged, because the shaman is basically a suit is that they're in during a dialogical identity with other entities, right and the us to be possessed by the Right, and they so they're challenging our monological mind. They're challenging our monophasic. This goes towards Capella's question about, well, where's what's what's what's a normal when it's an altered state of consciousness. I agree with David Lewis Williams that we should stop thinking of it as a binary. It's a continuum. Right. And what we have is a certain state and I think this state that we that we call normal consciousness is exactly the one that is highly coordinated with what you know what Taylor calls the buffered self, the monological self that is locked and closed within and it's, it's protected by a barrier of completely coherent propositions that present prevent any of this yucky stuff from getting into us in some ways, and the shaman is uncanny because it's in us deep enough but it calls to us to the dialogical. It calls us to the transjective horizon of intelligibility, it challenges the idea that there is one state of consciousness that gives us access to reality. And so that that that is precisely the issue. I think that's at hand here is the degree to which this is uncanny stuff could be appropriated and also therefore misappropriated in order to afford the kind of radical transformation I want to point out to you, Julian, that you're invoking of Whitehead, but that's that's deeply that's deeply the idea of an open future, and that we co created with God, right Whitehead is picking up on a very something that has been deeply written into us by the Judeo Christian heritage. And so, note, like, you're invoking it right but you're what I'm saying is it still fits in with this, this, and the figure. One more thing, and then I'll shut up. There's a figure that sits there on the uncanny doing all of this shamanic stuff and trying to call us into the future, not for tell the future, but that's the prophet. Right, and the prophetic figure. And so, one of the challenges, and I mean this is almost Paul knows this better than I do probably like when you do religious studies you'll often get the priest versus the prophet, you know schema as even understanding Christianity and then there's the king and then there's the weird triangle between the priest the prophet and the king, and somehow, and this is the this is the, this is the thing. This is the uncanniness we have to get back, even as non Christians, Jesus is somehow supposed to do all of those. Right, and that's what's super uncanny about him. I'm reading David Bentley hearts translation of the New Testament and everybody is commenting and I totally understand why, because it makes the, it makes the sorry the New Testament makes the New Testament weird again, like it's really weird it stops taming down the Greek text to our modern sensibility and throws it in your face in a way that's like, and I keep, I will read a passage I do Lexio divina and I go, that's just weird I don't know what that means, like, and if I go back to the older versions there. I feel like I was a little bit misled I feel like I've been duped a bit was that I read these older translations they're all they all they make sort of wonderful sense to a, you know, a modern mind that has gone through the Enlightenment but when you read it, the uncanniness. I'm trying to suggest to you Julian, there's a long argument and I'm not a Christian, but I'm trying to be, I'm trying to be fair to the. Well first of all I love Paul, and I want to be fair to him, and I want to be fair to the context of the conversation which is possible bridging, I'm trying to show you that outside of the rules and the dogma in the figure of Jesus, you've got all of these things, you've got everything we've been talking about in the prophet intention with the priest intention with the king and somehow going beyond all of them in a way that's I'm suggesting to you if you look to the uncanniness. And I don't mean that insulting. If you look to the uncanniness of Jesus, that might give us a possible bridge. I'll stop talking because I've said too much and I've probably been insulting, and I was desperately trying not to be. So my first reaction, I haven't told John this but I'm sure it wouldn't surprise him. My first reaction when I heard this was very much, oh I need to be in prayer for John, because doors can get opened. And part of that spiritual defense system that we have built into us and this comes through, you know the Gospels and the stories of Jesus is don't play with these things. And, okay, but then you have the question what are these things and then you have questions of ontology and it's interesting. One of the things that I think as modernity continues to recede one of the things we're going to continue to wrestle with is the relationship between ontology and agency. So one of the continual conversations that John, Jonathan and I keep coming around to is this question of ontology and agency. And how in fact do we define these things? And so in that little clip that I just played you can see that, well let's say again, let's say if my father had been an angry man and my dog had disappeared and beloved dog had disappeared in childhood because the beloved dog came into the house and dragged mud into the house and my father threw a fit of rage. Well what exactly is the ontology of my father? To what degree does a part of my father still live in me? How is that sort of called my father? And so these questions of ontology and also this spiritual defense system that many of us in the church possess. As I said before there's sort of corners of the church. You can find them on the internet because the internet loves corners. And you'll find them in the Roman Catholics of course have maintained a vigorous tradition of exorcism. I'm sure there's some in the Orthodox Church too because of the way Protestantism has rolled out. There are especially in some Pentecostal corners traditions around exorcism and the like. And even in the Christian Form Church, even in our seminary I remember because that of course comes up you get these seminary professors and when you're a young seminary and you think well they're going to answer everything. And the answer with respect to all of that is you know the kind of demon possession that we see in the Bible is rare but real. And so you, I'm going to use the supernatural category even though I often downplay it. When you see someone know something they cannot know or do something that human beings can't do. It's a sign of something. Now I just finished recording my rough draft for Sunday where I talk about this dunamis and this virtue and all of this language and of course if you go back and you look at the ancient world this is a power exerting itself. And of course with a very different world view and ontology behind it the language and the imagination of how all of these things flow, flow. And so, yeah when I hear a story like this it's just, be careful my friend, please be careful. Because even with, you know I worked for missions for a while with Haitians and yeah. There are many things that happened there that would not happen in a church in North America. And of course for some of you having heard stories here and there that will excite some of that but it went far deeper than just the kinds of stories that you hear in Voodoo and Santaria and some of these other things. And that's where the slideshow that I'm going to be is not designed to sort of, and some of you are going to take it this way because that's the way the internet is, disarm the defense system that's deeply built into us as Christians and in some of the other religious traditions. I'm only talking about Christians because that's mine. But help us to understand that while there is this defense system there's also a fair amount of nuance and complexity that is around. So I made a little PowerPoint. Before I went to bed I had to fold some laundry and so I listened to some of Michael Martin and the regeneration podcast with John in it. And so then when I went to bed I prayed for John and I prayed for his protection. And I prayed for wisdom. Just John's my friend and I don't want to see him hurt. And, and I don't know I don't know and that's a big part of this is that I think a big piece of the Christian defense system with respect to these things. Is discretion is the better part of valor in many cases and so don't don't go looking for don't go looking for things that you don't understand. And I think part of the reality of the spirit world is we know so little and we are so weak within it compared to spiritual beings for whom that is their native realm. And so the constant attempt that interaction if you looked at Voodoo or Santaria or Brujaria in the Dominican Republic. I don't remember what I listened to recently but someone said you know part of part of what the spirits seek is instantiation they seek to take on a body and so the way it would work with a with a with a Brujo would be and most of the people that I knew in the Dominican Republic knew this quite well because many of them had lived in that sort of thing and then had left it for Christianity and that's a very common story in terms of animistic read animistic cultures that part of the reason they that Christianity is so desirable for them. Is that it offers an escape from the dominion of these spirits in their lives. So now this first slide I want to talk about how so John mentions the buffered self both in the regeneration podcast and and then also in that conversation he had with me. And so a few slides later we'll talk about the Enlightenment because that adds another layer to this and again I don't want to sound like a completely uneducated Protestant and not be aware of the fact that in different places of the church because that's certainly the case now when the Dominican Republic Africa Haiti. These things are dealt with in in in slightly different ways some things remain the same some things vary. But there is the. The buffered self is. A secular thing and many Christians who are traditional enough are basically. Are unbuffered one of the things that have long thought about the Pentecostal ism as it rose in the Azusa Street mission and sort of spreading all over the world is it is a it is sort of an outright rejection of modernity and some of those lines. So I entitled this slide conversations with spirit persons and I really wrestled with okay actually how will this be because of course when a Christian is praying to a triune God he is. He is having a conversation with a spirit person. Now the word being is more complex when it comes to God for reasons that we've talked about at length but the at least in a Trinitarian tradition the word person is is not as complex there's this great moment in the Jonathan Peugeot. And I think that's a great point in the Jonathan Peugeot. Rafe Kelly conversation when. Rafe Kelly notes that the. If you go from. Be a good man to be a good person that a level of differentiation is removed and John. Jonathan Peugeot short of jumps on that and it's a great conversation. The person is is the right level for this and it begins with a personal relationship with God. I summarize some of what happened in Chuck Colson's born again, and this is sort of my God number one and God number two. What happens in the 20th century in places like the United States with the excluded middle is that God number one sort of disappears God. God is reduced to God number two sort of is reduced to a super thing in the sky sort of is reduced to another thing within creation and. And that sort of sets up Sam Harris and the celebrity atheist to make the points that they make about it and part of what happened part of what I figured this out when I watched Jordan Peterson's conversation with Sam Harris because when Jordan Peterson opens his laptop and starts reading. I recognized all of that from very early reformational period recognizing that oh this is what I call God number one God the arena. There's got the arena and got the agent now the agent arena relationship is quite complex in itself arenas can become a gentic and agents can become a reenac but this is sort of this differentiation that helps and so Chuck Colson in a sense season deep trouble. Because you know Richard Nixon was a God for him and he worshiped Richard Nixon and then he begins to realize that well Richard Nixon is a God to him but the kind of God Richard Nixon is is not like Jesus Christ Richard Nixon is more than happy to see Chuck Colson go to prison for him and Richard Nixon isn't going to jail. And so poor Chuck Colson doesn't know what to do and he has gotten involved with a group of evangelical Christians in Washington that in Chuck told Chuck Colson's torment they offer him a personal relationship with God. So he goes home to his wife and basically says I've become a Christian. And she says I thought we were Episcopalian. Well what does that mean? Well in some ways their Episcopalianism was sort of the residue of God number one and now Chuck Colson has an encounter with a living God. And you find this theme throughout the Bible and of course evangelicals pick this up and you see this in the 1970s. Of course Time Magazine portrayed Jimmy Carter as the first born again president that born again sort of went through the culture as the Jesus movement sort of brings about another little great awakening that ripples through the culture and ripples through the church. And so what happens in church after church tradition after tradition is people begin having a personal relationship with God. Well what does that mean? That means the end of the buffered self that that they are talking with God and walking with God and then suddenly then you have sort of the spiritual practice movement that wells up with people like Dallas Willard. And now suddenly Brother Lawrence is being brought out so now we have monastics being brought out into the Protestant world and people are having a continuous conversation with Jesus all throughout the day. This is part of what Lerman picks up that what John is talking to about Lerman that well I'm having a personal relationship with God. Now in my experience as a minister people frame this in lots of different ways. One person always talks about the little voice. I always listen to the little voice. Other people talk about the Holy Spirit told me. And then skeptics will say well did he hear words? No I didn't hear words. You hear people talking about this all the time. And what was it just a feeling and how do we know it was true? And you have all of these things. But so again the main thing is sort of this Christian defense that wells up against non authorized spirits. Okay let's think about it that way. God the Father, Jesus the Holy Spirit, they get credentials. Then you get so personal relationship with God. My personal relationship with Jesus. My personal relationship with the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit speaking to me. This is common and this is part of what T.M. Lerman has studied and has written about so well in her books. And leadings and promptings and words from the Holy Spirit. But then you go back into the Middle Ages and you go into Catholicism. And you know you have apparitions of Mary. You have lords. You have Maria de Guadalupe. Maria de Alta Gracia. That's in the Dominican Republic. You know Mary shows up and she's crying or something like this. Or there's blood or something like this is on a statue or something and off it goes. And you have appearances of angels and saints. And to my Protestant listeners I know there are parts of the reforms that are not there. So there are parts of the reformed church that are secessionist and basically what they say. All of these things have stopped. That I'm not going to have that conversation now. I am not myself one. But there are those who make that argument. And you'll find them on the internet and you can listen to those arguments and you can listen to those debates if you want. I am not in that category. The Christian Reformed Church has always tried to be seen that as Adiaphora. I know a story of someone who was in a more conservative, secessionist, reformed church. And he was a devoted Christian having a personal relationship with God. And in his prayer he discovered he was speaking in tongues. And this was he wasn't supposed to speak in tongues. And so he didn't know what to do. And what he did was join the Christian Reformed Church where speaking in tongues is not a sign. Of the presence or absence of the Holy Spirit. But it is also something that well that's there it is. We're not going to pass too hard a judgment on. We'll talk about it. We'll discuss it. But it's open. So but yeah throughout history you'll see and in the Bible you know. And look at the book of Revelation. This angel keeps showing up. And you know John mentioned in that thing about bronze and I just reminded me you know the angel in Revelation. And part of the thing about angels are that whenever they show up. This is where I always sort of chuckled at touched by an angel. So I talked a little bit in some of my Islam videos about simple believers and common religion or folk religion. And so American folk religion has touched by an angel and Highway to Heaven and these Michael Landon shows from 20, 30 years ago. That's sort of common religion. But whenever an angel shows up in the Bible if the angel shows up in their glory. People lose their stuff and are fall flat on the ground and basically say turn it down. Sometimes angels show up incognito so you can just read all these stories of the angels. And then of course if you're Orthodox or Catholic you kind of have a larger semi-canon where you have a tradition and you've got stories in there. And so the Christian tradition Protestant and Catholic is not quite as is more porous than the defense system. Now again I said before and most of you many of you will ignore it that none of nothing on this slide is supposed to set aside the defense system. The defense system is there for a reason. When the tanks and the battleships show up to shoot at the iron giant the defense system shows up. Even a pet dog if you do something to it the defense system will show up. It's the fight or flight. And the tradition has this built in. My point in this is that there's always more nuance to this than what we might imagine. So God shows up through dreams, through visions, through voices, through signs, through prayer. This is just common life within the church. Now depending on how secular a particular area might be people might be more or less covert and a little embarrassed by it. Maybe we'll only tell the pastor and a few close friends but they'll sort of deny it in public. That's just sort of this secular suppression system that we've been under for a long time. Regularly people in church will have conversations with dead relatives. They'll show up in their dreams or after they die. That's very common even in Protestant churches. It varies by degree to different cultures. Some Christian traditions in Asia, some Asian churches will have not really put away ancestor worship or ancestor veneration or ancestor attention the way let's say you'll find say some Anglo churches do. You've got conversations with saints. It showed up on Jonathan Peugeot's Ruslan interviews. So veneration of saints. All of this stuff that the Protestant Reformation sort of fought over. And you can read Encounters and D.W. Pasulka's work on aliens. What's interesting because of course her first book she wrote about purgatory. She's a devout Catholic and a scholar of religious history. So part of what's going to continue to be questioned is okay well what about these, what about spirits and aliens and entities and then psychedelics. So then again we've got our defense system and the defense system is there for a reason. And I will not criticize anyone for whom that defense system rises up because I want you to have that defense system. But we should recognize what is within our tradition. We have a defense system but we should talk about these things. One of the things that White House, White House, Alfred North Whitehead gets mentioned and one of the things that has been interesting and something that doesn't get a lot of attention is sort of the rise of process theology or perhaps let's say the integration of process theology and all of this. What is process theology? Well it sort of became the theological conversations downstream from Whitehead and his philosophy. Recognizing that, once you recognize that God isn't a thing like a lens cap is a thing. Sorry I still haven't gotten the old phone stand out of the store room. There are just like there are arenic aspects. You can see God as arenic. You can also see God as process. And again Christian language has this. The Holy Spirit came. Jesus was in the room. We have all of these things and we're not talking about Jesus being in the room. We're talking about what has happened in worship or what has happened in the community or what has happened at the spirit level within the church. And this is a continued I think a continued critique of the super thing in the sky and it's interesting how process theology is sort of employed to undercut shallow new atheism. And not even full blown process theologists recognition that you have this biblically in certain in certain metaphors. The right hand of God or God's strong arm. You know this is in our hymnody. This is all over the place. This is God as actor the living God all of this biblical language. So you know we have the reduction of God to God number two alone in the middle 20th century and the reawakening of that. The reawakening of God number one what we've seen in the recession of modernity and the continued recalibration of the Enlightenment because the Enlightenment sort of was designed to put a lid on this. And if you read Reformation history many parts especially of the magisterial Protestants were Catholics do miracles not Protestants. Sort of the roots of secessionism. But of course the Anabaptists. Those early Anabaptists yeah things got wild. You of course have the first great awakening with with Jonathan Edwards and all of the kind of writing that he did with respect to these manifestations. And that's often what they're called in Christianity manifestations. That's what they were called in the Dominican Republic often. But the Enlightenment which which basically looked at a lot of this stuff to try to wring out a degree of BS. The excitement over wow look what we can do when we isolate variables and we take the personal out of it and we just reduce God number one to a bunch of laws of physics and systems. This is what happens with deism. Well that's scientist lab leak just sort of continues to run through the culture and then suddenly there are no spirits and you know. Suddenly you have no answer to why Jordan Peterson's wife no longer has cancer. And I have multiple examples of this. There is a podcast that Jordan went on in his early days and he told the story of let's call them manifestations a haunting in a hotel room. And I had some communication with a colleague of Jordan's that had shared that room with him. And knew firsthand of everything that Jordan had said and added in fact even more details. This person was a thorough going materialist. And so I said to him I said what do you make of this strange things happen. Oh OK. Strange things happen. Agreed. The scientific lab like sort of tried to clamp everything down and of course large sections of the church never bought it. And some sections of the church like Pentecostalism the charismatic openly rebelled and then as in the postcolonial period as as now. Indigenous churches began spreading in the old colonial periods basically. Displanting displacing. The old colonial transplant churches just growing like fire. Well you know the scientific lab like was just you know run out of town. A lot of what developed in this was the wisdom of habits and practices and so sort of gets transformed into different language psychological language and the wisdom of the spiritual finesse and the relational mode. And so when you listen to this you know some of these practices recognizing the multiplicity within us. And if you look at what John said in that little clip that I played you have this relational mode. And as we begin to have a greater respect for process. What begins you know when you when you listen to John and sort of the verveky corner of the corner talk about practices. I remember when I first heard them talking about I think I've heard this word in church for 20 years. Because you look at the work of Dallas Willard former professor of of philosophy at University of U.S.C. Wrote his dissertation on Husserl was a phenomenologist and also was a significant church leader wrote numerous books wrote a really remarkable book on the sermon on the mount. Was good friends with Richard Foster wrote celebration of disciplines really brought practices into the Protestant realm. And so this is where we see sort of the the the walls between Protestant and Catholic breakdown as Protestants are sort of borrowing practices from Catholics and Catholics of course we're looking over and they become sort of Protestant and so they're more and more sort of coming together and able to talk with one another. And just in terms of psychology you know you're shaped by you're more shaped by your habits than your aspirations. Well this is who I want to be open I've got all this multiplicity within me and I'm going to have to work all of this through. Hence the renewal of interest in practice that well actually if I practice these things transformations I can I can I can be changed you have CBT which is basically a practice in many respects. You have all of these things that about okay so if you want to be happier smile more. No no no I thought smile was the result of happiness no it's also the priming the pump of happiness if you smile more all of these funny tricks and hacks that we find about human beings. And that's also sort of a coming to terms with terms with time that I am a I am a being who has parts of my father and parts of my mother and me not just my genetics but but also the my parents mapped on to be not only in terms of my genetics but also in terms of my practice and in terms of my formation and in terms of my mapping. So I not only got genetics from them I also got mapping from them and so some who are adopted didn't get generic genetics from their parents but it's remarkable how much got mapped it's remarkable how much genetics is in there sort of a diverse excellencies of nature versus nurture. Now I talked about the Christian safeguards and cautions strong tradition against divination and witchcraft ties you know tries to draw lines within the tradition and sort of you know so you have an authenticating thing and so of course when you say Hermes whoop that authenticating program is going to come right up and say you're letting a Greek God in. No we don't do that. Be careful with those Greek gods well why well yet when we you know yet at the same time there's been a secularization of the diamond of Socrates. Was it a demon of course demon comes from diamond and now we're sort of working through all of this language again and trying to figure it out for many people it's just a hard line. Okay I'm not going to fight you on that I'm not going to fight you on that at all because I've got that same defense mechanism in me and I've got that same caution in me and and I am I am going to stick with the authenticated spirits of God Jesus the Holy Spirit and the angels that are beneath him. But of course part of what we're dealing with in this little corner is the realization that this word spirit is a very broad word. And that I can rightly say the spirit of my father is within me. That sounds really strange as a Protestant to say but there it is. Well what do I mean by spirit. And when we when we have an estuary meeting there's a spirit of the conversation now if I say it that way nobody bats an eye. But it when Jonathan like when Jonathan Mizzou said well there's an angel of the relationship and everybody sort of shocks and wants. These are the things that we are sort of trying to figure out and those of us who are Christians and bound within a tradition you know recognize those lines and. Stay try to stay within our lines. So a strong tradition against divination and which class rich craft and this is an arena that we have limited agency and understanding. So we have a lot of respect and humility and even some fear. And there are implicit aspects of this availability availability availability of God to us. I mean that's that's one of the major things that. You know you go into an animistic culture and you can have a relationship with the most high God. You mean I don't have to sort of work my way up the hierarchy. Of course I get super complex with the ways that. Let's say Catholicism. Made inroads into certain animistic cultures you look at Voodoo. You can't be a good you can't be a good practitioner of Voodoo as a Christian. You can't be a good you can't be a good practitioner of Voodoo if you're not a in a sense a Catholic. It is funny things but I'm not going to try and tease them all out here. I know this is going to drive comments which is fine. Leave your comment say your piece I'll read them. But availability of God to us and God can send messengers angels and so in the Pentecostal tradition you know you'll see more and more angels and angel ology and all of that. You'll find that and you know we've seen in this little corner you've got corners of the corner that that play with things that other people in the corner look at and say I'm not going there. And you know and I myself am a pretty cautious guy with respect to a lot of this stuff. You have response of this of God to us prayer. Again people just prayer change God. I don't know I'm a Protestant I stick to the Bible. Why does God have a conversation with Abraham in Genesis 18. Why does Jesus prayer what is pray in the garden. Sometimes the answer is yes sometimes the answer is no sometimes it's a negotiation and they meet in between. Well how can that work. I don't know. There's a lot I don't know. And when you get into this area that's the first answer. There's a lot I don't know. The trustworthiness of God for us in an unseen realm. And so in many ways as a Christian you say OK I will I will be obedient to the Lord as he reveals himself in his word to me and I will I will leave the rest with him. And so when you go into conversations with people in areas that you don't understand you practice humility. And but you also have your own practices. And of course there's the church traditions and exorcism and baptism and prayer exorcisms were very much a part of baptism in the in the. I've told this story before on the channel when I the area of the Dominican Republic where I worked was quite a ways from the capital city. And in the areas where we did baptisms we always did it always did him in a river in the ocean and it was quite common when someone would go in for baptism they would start praying. And then the pastor would grab them and dunk them again and dunk them again and the pastor would keep dunking and they wouldn't drown them they're just dunking momentarily. This would do it to adults not doing it to children. They dunk them again until finally they would relax and I different missionaries had different takes on this. I know one of my missionary friends when he'd see people do that he'd get into the water and he'd grab the pastor. He was a big guy wouldn't allow any of that foolishness. The missionary who was my mentor said no you have to understand the spirits are in the water and the spirits are in them and so their baptism is a war against the spirits. And baptism is going to baptize those spirits out of them. And so that pastor is going to take that person and they're going to keep going under the water until the Holy Spirit has fully and you know has driven out all of those other spirits from them. Boy there's an opening to a whole other conversation and I'm sure after this there's going to be lots of conversation and lots of comments and people are going to be sending me notes. Can we talk about that thing that you just said? Yeah we can we can talk about it. But again there's so little that we know and there's so many cultures and now with the recession of modernity in a secular culture oh wow figuring this out is going to be quite something. It's going to be quite something. The Enlightenment has an expression of Christian caution with spiritual relationships yeah. Recession of modernity a recalibration of the Enlightenment that's what we are at now. And it's driven in many ways by Jordan Peterson and by John Ravake it's driven by science. For Peugeot and I it's driven by other things. For me it's driven by just watching people and watching the world and reading the Bible and trying to live in these two worlds. That's what drew me to Jordan Peterson because I was always dealing between the world of the Bible and the world that we live in and trying to bridge that gap. John Stott wrote this book on preaching between two worlds. That's what a preacher does. I was trying to bridge these worlds and I listened to Jordan Peterson. He's doing it in a different way and he's doing it in a productive way. I've got to pay attention to that which I have. Human communal spiritual opponent processing yeah that's what we're doing. We tend to overreach and it is by pushback that we recalibrate and correct this over time. Remember the process that's what we're doing. Same could be said of the Protestant Reformation abuses in medieval Catholicism but also sometimes an overreach within reformational reactions. I've said for a long time at some point the protest has to end. But you know whether or not people like to admit it the Catholic and the Orthodox have also been in their own modes of transformation. The reformational force with caution and suspicion mostly of BS you know and so part of it is just lots of human things that we're worried about. Part of it is our spiritual agencies that you know when we look at I mean part of the remarkable thing about the Mosaic Code is the complete is the complete refusal to play with the sorts of levels of divination and such. And I think this is part of what provokes Kaufman in you know where I get this whole business of the meta divine realm provokes Kaufman to say that Hebrew monotheism is revolutionary not evolutionary. That something happened to the Hebrews that changed their story their other piece of the ancient world but they're starkly different and they remained different and they continue to remain different and their ideas continued to flow out through Jesus into Christianity out into the world all the way up into this one pastor sitting at the top of the hill. And so we have multifactor authentication in terms of someone comes into church and says I think the spirit is leading us to okay we're looking for multifactor authentication on that. So you think the spirit is leading us to okay we're looking for multifactor authentication on that. So you think the spirit says this they don't we're going to look at well we test the spirits with the word of God we test the spirits with the Bible is this in keeping with the Bible other traditions will lend more to tradition we test this against the tradition actually Protestants do that a lot too. They do it a whole lot just kind of don't. Don't expose us too much please friends we all have our we all have our inconsistencies in our traditions accountability within the body of Christ this is the arena of the body of Christ. So I think God is telling us this okay are you sure that isn't just making you money or giving you importance or something like that. So we have a lot of inconsistencies in our traditions. So we have a lot of inconsistencies in our traditions. So we have a lot of inconsistencies in our traditions. So we have a lot of inconsistencies in our traditions. So I think God is telling us this okay are you sure that isn't just making you money or giving you with importance or something that you ate or something psychological in you we test this within each other and so you know when John talked to me in our conversation said I'd like to talk to you more about this. I said good let's talk about it because this is what we do this is what friends do and I deeply respect John and some of you might think I deeply respect him because he's he's brilliant and well studied and learned and all of that is true but no actually my respect for John comes much more from my personal interactions with him both on the camera and off the camera. And so you know part of part of what all of this estuary stuff is about is is it's through talking and relation that we build trust with each other and once we build trust with each other then suddenly we can talk about more difficult things and we can share disagreements and say I think this and you think this okay. Well what can I learn from our disagreement what can I learn from you what can I maybe borrow from you and improve the way I think and what can you borrow improve the way you think so there's all of that. So we test the spirits by wisdom within the tradition we have reverence and fear is expected even with God's messengers again what happens with angels in the Bible it's alarmingly consistent. And to me as a Protestant that factors pretty heavily I'm not saying that angels can't show up and turn the wattage down a little bit make us a little less scared but when biblical angels show up. The first thing out of their mouth is do not be afraid and I always want to say well if you don't want us to be afraid don't come in here like that. Maybe sometimes they don't. And the Holy Spirit just look at the Holy Spirit look at read the Gospel of John and all the ways that the Holy Spirit all the jobs that the Holy Spirit has conviction of sin reminds us of everything that Jesus taught us a still small voice look at look at the story of Elijah on the mountain. And a comforter divine comforter who who comes and angels can be sent to comfort as well I should make that comment to of course you know Elijah running from Jezebel and the angels and Jesus in the wilderness angels don't seem to scare Jesus but they sure scare the rest of us. It's not quite. What's her name and Michael landed touched by an angel and all of those movies. The Holy Spirit is manifest in the church and in her ministry. And so all of these are our calibrations and guides and things so so when you're within a tradition when you're within a Christian tradition when you're with you're within a church you have all of this stuff now I know there's going to be Pentecostals out there they have their own traditions Catholics have their own tradition I'm sure the Orthodox have their own tradition. The tradition of the Christian reform church isn't terribly well developed with respect to many of these things again that's partly because many within the Christian reform church are are they believe that this stuff has ceased that's where secessionist is not succeeding from the union in terms of the American Civil War it's that these things have ceased. And yeah I think that's has a lot to do with the Enlightenment and the old fights with Catholicism at the early days of the Protestant Reformation so. But again I've been a foreign missionary. I by no means count myself an expert in this I don't I don't know to what degree any human being can be an expert in this. And I actually don't think I would ever want to be an expert in this. I do not go seeking. I do not go seeking these things. I've. It's funny. One thing you learn as a pastor is there's certain things you just don't go seeking because you've either seen enough of it. It's like when you know some some pastors can be gossips and you know so and so slept with so and so and blew up his marriage and destroyed his ministry and it's like I don't really want to hear about it. I really don't want to hear about it. I've seen way too many of those stories. I know way too much about that. I. I find no joy in it. And so. Whereas in some ways this whole area has a degree of fascination for us. Because it's uncanny. And so I thought you know that's why I played that clip because that uncanny nature is I thought John really put it together nicely in that in that conversation that I had with him but. Yeah, it's it's also. The Lord has put it the Lord has put plenty on my plate but that doesn't mean John if you're listening to this which you probably will that I don't want to talk to more than happy to talk to you about this on camera and off camera. But I know that this is sort of going around in the corner and as a pastor within the corner. I think I have a degree of responsibility to let people side of kind of know some of my thoughts. So as usual and you want to know my thoughts you have to listen to an hour plus video. But there it is. So I'm going to I'm going to end this with. I'll see if that I'll see if that branding of my. That song from my sister's funeral because. Yeah, it's it's not the end a branding but. It means a lot to me and it's sort of at the heart of this whole area for me. I got into this a little bit with my live stream with Ken Lowry today with Ken Lowry and Jordan Hall. What does it mean to have Jesus. It's getting more and more complex and rich as we learn about cognitive science as we learn about ourselves as we learn about just how complex we are as modernity recedes and the enlightenment. Let's call it the recalibration of the enlightenment. Let's say it that not the counter enlightenment but let's say the recalibration of the enlightenment. So there's that. So yeah there's going to be comments to this one. I know there are. In the morning. I rise in the morning when I rise in the morning when I rise give me Jesus. Dark midnight was my cry dark midnight was my cry dark midnight was my cry. Give me. Give me. Give me. Give me. I will come to you in the silence. I will lift you from all your fear. You will hear my voice. I claim you as my choice. Be still and know I am. I am hope for all who are hopeless. I am eyes for all who long to see. In the shadows of the night I will be your light. Come and rest in me. Do not be afraid. I am with you. I have called you each by name. Come and follow me. I will bring you home. I love you. And you are mine. I am the word that leads to all freedom. I am the peace the world cannot give. I will call your name embracing all your pain. Stand up now walk and live. Give me Jesus. Give me Jesus. You may have all this world. You may have all this world. You may have all this world. Give me Jesus. I love you and you are mine. Give me Jesus.