https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CK6iLyeg-PU

 So we have sort of a COVID Christmas this year. Financial Times has, I think, one of the cleverest little graphics on this. As we ponder people traveling or not traveling, as we ponder the spread of this infection while people get together and try to enjoy the holidays, this is a Christmas like, well, probably none other than any of us remember. I go back to the first week of Advent when I asked, what kind of world did we imagine we were living in? Are we offended by the interruption of the presumed shalom? Did we imagine that wars and plagues and famines had passed from the earth? Did we imagine we have so quickly and easily tamed this world and to one degree or another, at least the more belligerent of those among us, that somehow we have the strength to acquire for ourselves exactly what we want and that this would make us happy? Is this what we imagined we had achieved? Well, it appears we have not. Not only because of COVID, but because of every other malady and injustice that continue to plague us. Did we expect it to be always Christmas and never winter? Who whispered this in our ear that we thought we could manage this on our own? The Kingdom of Israel had a renaissance during the reign of Jeroboam II and King Uzziah at the beginning of the eighth century. And they imagined that everything would be wonderful. The nation thrived. It reached borders that it hadn't seen since the time of Solomon. Times were prosperous. Everyone imagined the good times will never end. We have a handle on things. But as historians today would note, well, part of the reason they had a handle on things and part of the reason things were going well was because other forces stronger than themselves were not in the neighborhood. The Book of Isaiah in Chapter six notes that Isaiah receives his calling in the year King Uzziah died. The death of a good king means the anxiety of the nation. Will the good times last once he is no longer seated on the throne? Will the next king, even if it be his son, be able to manage? So the Lord visits Isaiah in the temple and there he was seated on the throne, high and exalted in the train of his robe filled the temple. And Isaiah knew he was undone. Well after that, things in fact would come unglued and Aram and Israel would join forces and they would attack Judah and they would besiege Jerusalem. And as Isaiah seven notes, the hearts of Ahaz and his people were shaken as the trees of the forest are shaken by the wind. Isaiah the prophet would lend reassurance. Don't worry, Judah, your enemies Israel and Aram will be destroyed by a bigger wolf, Assyria. And so a prophecy was given. The people walking in darkness have seen a great light on those living in the land of deep darkness. A light has dawned. You have enlarged the nation and increased their joy. They rejoice before you as a people rejoice at the harvest. As warriors rejoice when dividing the plunder. Always Christmas and never winter. For as in the days of Midian's defeat, you know back with in the book of Judges with Gideon, you have shattered the yoke that burdens them. The slavery they experienced in their own land, in their own land, in the promised land was broken. The bar across their shoulders, the rod of their oppressor, every warrior's boot used in battle and every garment rolled in blood will be destroyed for the burning. It will be fuel for the fire. You'll have no more need for weapons. You can keep warm on a cold winter's day by burning those weapons. For to us a child is born, to us a son is given, and the government will be on his shoulders and he will be called wonderful counselor, mighty God, everlasting father, prince of peace. Of the greatness of his government and peace there will be no end. He will reign on David's throne and over his kingdom, establishing and upholding with justice and righteousness from that time on and forever. The zeal of the Lord Almighty will accomplish this. This is what Isaiah promised. But you have to watch prophets because they seem to always overshoot their mark. Yes, Assyria would come and Assyria would destroy Damascus, Aram, and it would destroy the northern kingdom and it would divvy up the lands into its own provinces. But then Assyria would threaten Jerusalem. And then Babylon will lead Assyria and will destroy Jerusalem and the temple. The world seems to operate like the law of the jungle. Viruses stalk us just as we try to kill it. Empires rise to replace one another, each taking their turn to consume, to plunder, to tax and to consume. The strong take the weak. Babylon gives way to Persia. Persia gives way to Greece. Greece gives way to Rome. The prophets cry and endures, oh, oh, that you would rend the heavens and come down and the mountains would tremble before you. As when fire sets twigs ablaze and causes water to boil, come down and make your name known to your enemies and cause the nations to quake before you. For when you did awesome things that we did not expect, you came down and the mountains trembled before you. Where are you? When the virus rages, when the earth quakes, when the nations consume. Since ancient times, no one has heard, no ear has perceived, no eye has seen any God beside you who acts on behalf of those who wait for you. But we seem to wait and wait and wait and wait. Death and taxes, they say, are the things that endure. Empires rise and replace one another, each take their turn to consume, to plunder, to tax and to take. For a census, Caesar Augustus issued a decree that a census should be taken of the entire Roman world. Romans didn't pay taxes. All those who had been conquered paid their taxes for them. This was the first census that took place while Quirinius was the governor of Syria, and everyone went to their own town, their familial town, to register. So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea, to Bethlehem, the town of David, because he belonged to the house in line of David. He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child. Do you think it's inconvenient to get on an airplane when you're nine months pregnant? Imagine taking a journey on foot or on an animal through the countryside to do for the government, to do for the empire what it demands. While they were there, the time came for the baby to be born. The language is so antiseptic. If you've been around a child born, you know the travail of the mother, the pain, the anguish, the clutching, the crying, the begging, the pushing. And she gave birth to her firstborn, a son, no ultrasound. She wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger because there was no guest room available for them. It seems so common, so non-royal, so pedestrian. He didn't rend the heavens. Oh, that you would rend the heavens. It was an invasion of sorts into one young woman's life, disruptor of her betrothal, disruptor of her plans. God announces his intentions to Mary as contrast from Zechariah, who couldn't speak until he gave up the name. Accepted, she did as best she could, endured the trauma, endured the pain. God would instead open the virgin's birth canal and he would come into the world like every single one of us. Would anyone notice babies come in all the time? Tonight in hospitals, in the arms of midwives all around the world, they will come. Mothers will cry, will be in pain, will have the relief and the exhausted relief of having given birth, bringing the baby to the breast. It happens all the time. Does anybody notice? Does anyone care? There would be witnesses to this one. There would be strange witnesses. This is the town of Bethlehem, the town of David, where David was such an insignificant shepherd boy that Father Jesse didn't bother calling him when Samuel came anointing. This is the house of bread. This is the place where shepherds are out in the field keeping watch. And while there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night, an angel of the Lord appeared to them and the glory of the Lord shone around them and they were terrified. But the angel said to them, do not be afraid. I bring you good news that will cause great joy for all the people. Today in the town of David, a savior has been born to you. He is Messiah, the chosen one, the anointed one. Wasn't David plucked out of the fields for his anointed David, one who was overlooked. This one too overlooked, but not by the angel and now not by the shepherds. This will be a sign to you because he won't have a halo. He won't have majestic clothing. There won't be an angel bodyguard standing outside the door so you can figure out who the royal child is. This will be a sign to you. You will find a baby wrapped in clothes, cloths and lying in a manger. Animals feed from mangers. We will feed from this one. There he will be lying in a manger. Then God sends in the army. Then he rends the heavens, but they don't come to bring fire and shock and awe onto a, an occupying Roman force. They come to sing. Suddenly a great company of the heavenly army appeared with the angel praising God and saying glory to God in the highest heaven and on earth peace on those on whom his favor rests. The angels come, the armies come, the sky is rent open and the angels descend not with shock and awe, but with glory and song because the invasion has begun. But sort of like COVID, it seems unsymptomatic. It comes in quietly, maybe not even a cough, no fever to be seen. There it is, a baby looking like any other baby, a mother exhausted from her labor, a father, probably midwives trying to tend to her as best they can, hoping the bleeding stops, praying there's no infection, teaching the mother and the baby to nurse for the first time. The shepherds must see for themselves. When the angels had left and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, let's go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about. So they hurried off and found Mary and Joseph and the baby who were lying in the manger. When they had seen him, they spread the word concerning what had been told to them about this child and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them. When the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all of the things they had seen and heard, which were just as they had been told, they likely quickly forgot. They didn't forget the angels. They didn't forget that evening. They didn't forget the story. But did they track the baby? Did they follow him to Nazareth? Did they pay attention? Did they, did they set their Google alerts so that they could find every move he would made? Did they follow him on Instagram or Facebook or Twitter to see what he would say? Into obscurity, he would go with all the other little boy, little babies born of that time. He would not be followed. He would be one of us, quiet, unassuming, asymptomatic. But God's agent on the scene, the one to whom an angel had come before, the one who submitted herself to this painful, costly service, she paid attention and she treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart. What would being willing to serve cost her? What pain must she endure? Now this might seem in the ninth month of COVID, always winter and never Christmas. C.S. Lewis, the one who asked about always winter and never Christmas and the lie in the witch and the wardrobe, said in his book, Mere Christianity, good things as well as bad, you know, are caught by a kind of infection. What is it really that you want? If you want to get warm, you must stand near the fire. If you want to be wet, you must get in the water. If you want joy, power, peace, eternal life, you must get close to or even into the thing that has them. They are not the sort of prize which God could, if he chose, just hand out to anyone or deliver at the edge of a celestial spear. It has to come quiet, unassumed, asymptomatic, at least at first. There is a great, they are a great fountain of energy and spring spurting up at the very center of reality. If you are close to it, the spray will wet you. If you are not, you will remain dry. Once a man is united to God, how can he not live forever? Once a man is separated from God, what can he do but wither and die? We have not got the Zoe, the Greek word for life, or spiritual life only by us or by our biological life which is presently going to run down and die. Now the whole offer which Christianity makes is this. What we can, if we let God have his way, come to share in the life of Christ. He came and shared in ours, didn't he? He didn't ride down on a chariot of fire surrounded by angelic armies. He came through the virgin's loins and became one of us. If we do, we shall be sharing a life in which, sharing a life which was begotten, not made, which always has existed and always will exist. Christ is the Son of God. If we share in this kind of life, we also shall be sons of God. We shall love the Father as he does and the Holy Spirit will arise in us. He came to this world and became a man in order to spread to other men the kind of life he has by what I call, what Lewis calls, a good infection. Every Christian is to become a little Christ. The whole purpose of becoming a Christian is simply nothing else. This world will shell out its moments of plenty. Israel and Judah's borders will enlarge and then death and taxes will have their way. Empires rise and replace one another, each taking their turn to consume, to plunder, to tax and to take. But the good infection has arrived. For some, it may look asymptomatic. You can't find it from a swabbing a nose. You can't find it by taking a temperature. But it can be seen by Christ breaking out in the lives of his followers, breaking out with the kind of life that he had, with the kind of life he shares with us, the kind of life that comes from him that has invaded us all quietly. The angels sang, the shepherds forgot, but the world slowly but surely has never been the same.