https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A4Q_gZYQcqs

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a new voice on the channel, Sherry Hawkins. Do I have that correct? No, it's Hawkins. H-I-R-K-I-N-S. Very close. Yeah, that happens a lot. So Sherry contacted me and we were just discussing, I just shared with her that the demographic group that I've done the most conversations with and afterwards the people have said, Let's not share it on your channel, have been middle-aged women, not older women, not younger women, but women right in the middle. So we already negotiated that. So we'll see how this goes. That's right. We'll see how it goes. That's right. Well Sherry, let's begin with your story. Who are you and why are you talking to me? Well, I found your channel through Jordan Peterson listening, like many people. I was very interested in what you had to say. I have been a Christian since I was 18 years old and I sort of came about my faith in a more unusual way and has taken many twists and turns and it's been an interesting journey. But some of the ways that you were talking resonated very much with my own ways that I've been thinking lately, especially maybe in the last five years or so and kind of giving consideration to what God might be doing in the world and how are we supposed to respond to it. And like many people, I think the older I have gotten, the more I've realized I don't know. And I think that can be a good place to be. I mean, I think I've always been kind of open to the mystical and to an understanding that we really don't have a handle on things. But at the same time, we always want to fit in with where we are. And I also think God gives us different things at different times and seasons in our life. And so the last five years, even the last 10 years has really been a different season for me. And then when I listen to your channel, there's things you're saying. What do you call a podcast? When I listen to your podcast, what's the best way to refer to that? Just your podcast? Podcast line. Yeah. Many of the people that I hear talking and many of the ideas are really similar to a lot of my own thoughts. So just again, I feel like that's kind of confirming that God is doing something. So, presently, I am an artist and I have four children and they're all grown up and doing great. And I've been married to my husband for 42 years and I have eight grandchildren. Now I'm jealous. I got five kids and no grandkids yet. It's like, when I think about grandkids, it's like, that's what I want. I'm unfrozen now. I got my little rant on my side, so it got recorded. Good. Yeah. So it's just interesting to find myself here. I live in New England and it's a very progressive liberal area and most of the people around me are very progressive and liberal. And so trying to find opportunities for conversations where we can explore different ideas can be really difficult. OK. OK. OK. What do you want to talk about today? Well, I'd be happy to tell you about how I became a believer. I think that was what I... I'd love to hear that. Yes, on your website. So it has been a number of years, but it's a good story still, I think. So I grew up kind of moving all over the place. My parents were young and beautiful and I was the oldest of four kids. And I do want to be aware of how I speak about this. So they... They... My mom actually met my dad when he was speaking in a church as a youth speaker, which was kind of interesting because based on what happens in the story later. But they got together. They were both from New England also, different towns, but, you know, both very smart, very beautiful, very destined for big things in the future. My dad came from a different background than my mother did. My mother's dad was a professional college graduate who, you know, she had always intended to go to college. My father's family, he was one of eight children and the oldest of eight. And, you know, grew up in a small house with three little bedrooms and a lot more of a little more togetherness and probably tension in the house. So they got together and got married and started their life together. And, you know, they were very young. My dad was 19. My mom was 20. They were both in college at the time. And then he, after graduating, went into the service, went into the army. I was with my mom for a little while before we moved to Germany and lived in Germany for a couple of years and then came back and he kind of started on a career path. And he was sort of, I mean, it was such an interesting mix because originally they were both sort of somewhat conservative, moved away from the church and got more and more involved in the culture of the 60s and the 70s. I mean, it seemed like it was a long time, but really I was only 13 when my dad left. So, you know, it wasn't, couldn't have been that many years, but it felt like a long time. It was a sort of gradual progression of a lot more partying in their lives. And my dad became more and more successful in business. And my mom was a stay at home mom. And what year did you leave? Oh, maybe 73. There was a lot of that in the early 70s. Right. Exactly. So we had, we had kind of moved around to a lot of different areas. And as a result of that, I was kind of my mom's confidant as well as, you know, having to sort of make new friends and trying to figure out your place in a new place. And I was very awkward, you know, very sort of, I was much bigger than everybody else. I've kind of been the same size I am now, maybe 20 pounds lighter, but the same size I am now since I was like 10 or 11. So I was bigger than everybody else. I, you know, it was just a bad situation for me often. And I don't know, you know, I'm really not sure what all went on in my mom's head, but I, because we moved around a lot, I think I part of the one small part of the issue between us was that I was kind of a confidant. So as my dad was living this life that was increasingly flirtatious and increasingly drug and alcohol related, particularly alcohol, and they were moving up in the world and social status and gaining different things in their lives materially, I became aware of a lot of bad things in their marriage and bad things in their life. And it was not good at all for a 10 year old, 11 year old to be in that position. And so there was a lot of, you know, there's all kinds of things I'm still sort of realizing that I didn't have an accurate perception on as a kid that, you know, continued to become uncovered. But, what my dad was doing, and he was also a very brilliant man. You know, he wrote a lot of books. I mean, he was very young. He was a vice president for a major corporation before he was 30 and just doing very well in a lot of areas. And so he moved to an area of Pennsylvania. They built their dream home. I was 13, I think, at the time. And basically, my mother told him he needed to stop drinking or leave. And he left because it was, you know, he was only 33, 32 at the time. And instead of living at home with four kids, he was able to go live in a high rise apartment and date girls that were just a little older than me and live a very different lifestyle. And again, you know, my perspective has changed on some of what happened and recognizing things are more complicated than we think. But my mother basically just went crazy. She kind of just had no idea what to do with that. She wasn't prepared for it. And there was a lot of really bad dynamic that continued to happen between the two of them. And my it just the family just, you know, sort of dissolved. We tried going to see the pastor of a church that we had been kind of somewhat attending very irregularly since we lived there. And we tried going to a family counseling center, all kinds of things. My dad was no part of this. This was my mother and my siblings and myself. And I have a sister who's three years younger than me, who had a really hard time with my mom. And she kind of refused to take sides is the way that, you know, the way that she would frame it and didn't want to be there. I was trying very hard to sort of keep things together for my my brother. That was only four at the time. And my mother was seven years younger than me. And my sister was seven. And I was very concerned about them because my mother was doing the best she could, but not at all able to manage life or anything. The biggest thing is that there was hysterical screaming and demanding and everything every day. And we were, you know, we were living in a lovely home in a lovely area and very unprepared. We didn't have any family in the area. In fact, I remember my grandfather standing in the kitchen and saying, Satan is in this house. Satan is here in this house. And they were I mean, he was, you know, sort of my hero in many ways. He was very kind of rock steady. He many times as I was growing up, my mom would and dad would have an argument and my mom would grab my siblings and I get in the car and drive back to her parents' house. And so they were certainly aware that things were happening, but it had just escalated to such a terrible degree. So the hardest part of it was the yelling, you know, and just like not and her not being able to kind of control herself in the in the way that she responded. So meanwhile, my father was, you know, just continuing on the road that he was on. And my sister, who was three years younger than me, ended up going to live in a group of women in foster care for left at home because she and my mother were just not able to work things out. And eventually, after a little while, moved in with a friend's parents and a friend's family and stayed and became kind of a part of their family and never came home. My other two siblings, my best friend, who ended up becoming my husband, and I tried to talk to them about going to live with an aunt in New England because it was just so bad at home and there was just no stability. And so one of them did. My sister did go and live with an aunt. My brother was not able to. He didn't want to leave my dad, which was very understandable. So meanwhile, and this is so crazy part of it. So meanwhile, there was all these crazy things happening in the house. The house was apparently haunted. And it was a brand new house my parents had built. There was no like ancient Indian Native American ground or anything like that. This was a brand new house they had built. But there was all these crazy things that were happening like intense smells that would show up in one particular pocket of the house or temperature changes that would go on or the front door would blow open in the middle of the night and had been locked and it would blow open or furniture would get moved around from one spot to another. Just crazy, crazy things. So I was working after school at a diner nearby and I had a good friend there who was very helpful to me. It was the sort of thing because of the behavior of my mom, I didn't feel like I could leave my siblings at home with her. So as much as possible, I tried to be with them or take them with me or just have my friends. And she was trying to sort of find her way with dating other men and I'm sure sort of reassuring herself in the midst of what was happening in her own life and the way everything was being crumbled and destroyed and all the pictures she had of life. So she was honestly doing the best she could. Again, in retrospect, you look back and you can see that. And I felt very close to her. I felt more like she was my friend than something else. At the same time, it was just so difficult to deal with because I didn't know how to stop it. When she would turn into the rages, which were almost every day, I couldn't stop them. There was nothing that I could do that could stop it. I could see it overtaking her. And when she wasn't in that state of mind, she was funny and pleasant and she ended up going back to school to finish her degree and she went to work full time and all of those things, I'm sure, were very difficult for her. She was very beautiful and very young too. There were all those parents without partners and all those singles groups that she became a part of. I know she was having a hard time balancing school and work and parenting and trying to find a life for herself in the midst of this. So taking care of my youngest siblings felt very natural, like being the oldest sibling. I had always been in that role anyway, especially because my parents had had such a rocky relationship. So I was sort of used to kind of trying to manage things for everyone. But I ended up becoming very involved in some of the partying myself that was going on at the same time. If you could say I was a responsible pot smoker, that is how I would define myself because I was still very much taking care of my siblings. But that was kind of my escape. Because my mom was so involved in other things, she wasn't really policing or caring anything about what was going on at the home. So my house, and I lived, I had a giant bedroom over a big two-car garage. So all my friends just came there and hung out at the house with me so I could get my siblings to bed or just make sure they were around. That worked out okay. So my best friend was very helpful to me in navigating all this. I couldn't have done it without him. He was very good at sort of walking me through and being there with me and taking the siblings out when we needed to. We even had them for holidays sometimes with his parents. You became de facto parents in some ways. Exactly. Do I have any questions so far? I'm sorry. No, you're going great. Keep going. All right. So then there was all these weird things happening in the house with all these spooky things. I mean, everybody that came to the house noticed it. There was even some dangerous things that were going on like my husband and I were walking through the house and trying to do things that would make my mom happy. She wanted to wallpaper the bedroom. So we were doing that and we were unrolling the wallpaper to put it up on the wall and the lamp that had been sitting somewhere suddenly jumped off into the watering trowel that our hands had just come out of. It was really interesting. It sounds so crazy, but it was really crazy. Things would come out of the closet from behind other things and land on the floor. Then I was in a car accident when I was 16. I had just run out to get gas in the car before I went to work and had my little baby. He was probably five at the time. He was probably six. He was probably five at the time. His little girlfriend that was playing, they ran over with me. It was just like five minutes from my house. Then in the afternoon somebody who was drugged out ended up smashing into me head on. I lost my eyelid and had to have quite a bit of plastic surgery over a long period of time just sort of dealing with all that. Praise God, I did not have any damage to my sight at all, which was just, years later, I'm still so grateful for that when I think as an artist, it's all about seeing. It's just an amazing thing that God did not let anything happen that would affect my eyes. Anyway, a few other minor injuries, but that was the big one. Anyway, my mother around this time went to talk to the psychic and where we lived. In that time period, psychics were even more of a big thing than they are now. How do I say this? Basically, the psychic told her we were under demonic attack. I won't go into more about why she said that was happening. She said we were under demonic attack and the only way to do battle with that was to put our faith and trust in Jesus Christ. We needed to pray that he would protect us and we needed to get crosses, all of us, that it needed to be something that we were under the protection. My mother came home and it was a very long story and has to do with a lot of the things I don't want to go into detail. We had been through, like I said, we tried to talk to the pastor, we had all these family interventions, we tried to go to counseling. At the counseling, my mother and my sister would just scream at each other at the top of their lungs. There was nothing that helped. There was nothing. This was a few years, maybe three or four years after it had all started and there was nothing that was making any difference, maybe even a little more than that. Nothing helped. There was just like, I just went through the days sort of not sure what to do, thinking I just didn't know. By that time, it was just my brother and I at home with my mom. He was still seeing my dad. At that time, I wasn't seeing my dad, partly because of some things that happened in relationship to when I was in the accident, but really, mainly it was because I thought it was one last thing I had to deal with with my mother because she was so freaked whenever anybody would go see him. It was a definite catalyst. This psychic tells my mother that. My mother came home and told me this very long story as we were sitting in the evening after dinner and told me this story. The same table where just a few days before I had been drinking a glass of milk that flew out of my hand across the table and smashed into the wall behind my siblings who were sitting at the table. It was just that sort of craziness. Like I said, everybody who came to the house responded, didn't know anything about the story. They heard all the yelling because there was nothing that would make my mother not yell. She didn't care if people were there or if anyone was around. She came home and told me the story and it was remarkable because there were all these pieces that fit into the dynamic that was happening at home. I was just sort of blown away. It was just such a crazy idea, but I went and bought crosses for everybody and I talked to a couple of friends of mine later that night, my husband and another good friend and told them all these things that had happened and they were both like, wow, that's so crazy. I think all these pieces of what you're talking about, a lot of which has to do with how cults work and how sort of demonic worship works and how things like that go on. So it all seemed very crazy to us, really, truly it seemed crazy, but we sort of had nothing to lose in trying to pray. I did that. I bought crosses for everyone and then within a few days, Rob, my husband, my friend at the time was over and we were doing something and my mother came in and started. We could hear that she was building up to a rage and so we just said, let's just pray. So the only prayer we knew was the Lord's Prayer. We both started to pray that. He was actually in Catholic school, but we worked together in this restaurant. So we just started to pray. We held hands. We prayed and for the first time in five or six years, she stopped yelling. There was nothing I could ever, ever before that that would make her stop. I would cry. I would plead with her. I would try to say, can you think about it this way? Nothing stopped, but she stopped and she opened the door. We were standing on the stairs to the finished basement and she opened the door and she said, Rob, Shari, are you OK? We were just completely blown away. I could not believe that there had been an impact. So, you know, but we thought maybe that was just a fluke thing. But OK, that is kind of cool. Let's see what happens. And so then we continued to pray the next time she did something. And again, there was an effect that had never been there before. And so we just continued to build up our faith. So then we started doing all this research on what happens with demonic worship, what how, you know, how do cults work? How do covens work? What is all that about? We started to read our Bible and just looking for the answers to could this be something that's actually going on? Could this be something that was happening? And we went and talked to the psychic ourselves and she, you know, gave us all this information and told us about more of the same thing. So it was a fascinating way to become a believer. But I don't I don't think there was another way necessarily that God could have reached me, you know, like I don't I don't know that I would have that another entry in would have intrigued me as much as this one did to kind of say, hmm, this is fascinating. Could it be true that there are demonic spirits and could it be true that evil is real? And and yet I was seeing it every day and in my in my daily existence. And so it was a part of your felt need at that moment. I mean, you're living in chaos. Your parents marriage has blown up. Your mother is not doing well, let's say it that way. And you're you and your best friend who are really not yet at an age where you should be responsible for your parents are not only having to take responsibility for your parents, but also your siblings. And, you know, you needed you needed help. You needed real help. And when it comes to someone who is not in good control of themselves, especially with respect to their anger and may very well have some very legitimate things to be angry about, but it still doesn't mean that just being angry and getting angrier and angrier is helping them at all. You two needed help. And, you know, I've seen many times in my life, God can bring help to people in very surprising ways. And I find we're often a lot pickier than God is in terms of the in terms of the people and methods that God chooses to use to to help people and rescue people. So, wow. So so so what happens next? Do you become Christian? You start going to church. What does what does that look like? Well, I think it's a very interesting question. Well, first, we just kept smoking a lot of pot and telling our friends about how amazing this was, that Jesus Christ was real. And that I mean, everyone knew, you know, all of our the people that were at our house all the time knew that what the situation was at my house, the creepy, scary stuff and the rages that happened every day. And so, you know, maybe that gave us some sort of credibility at the same time as everyone was incredulous that this could actually be happening. So we but, you know, we just ended up having all these conversations with people telling them, you can't believe this and all these other, you know, details that that she talked to us about that the psychic talked to us about that seemed to make sense to us. And so it was very exciting. So it was very exciting. I mean, as much as it was like, so weird, it was also very exciting to, you know, to have to be entering into this alternate universe and finding that there was reality to it. So at the same time, so that my my the person who eventually became my husband, who was my best friend, we just eventually said we may as well start dating. And then once we were starting dating, it was like, well, we may as well get married because, you know, that that would just be the next step. So it was none of the none of the wonderful stories you hear today of all my daughters have these great stories of their husbands proposing to them. It wasn't like that. But he did great stuff and being there for me all those years. So we I got married when I was 20 also. So it was a few years. But interestingly enough, he had grown up in the Catholic Church and his he went to parochial school his whole life. His dad was part of the Knights of Columbus, very involved in the church. His mom was Lutheran. So they had had to get married outside the church. But at the same time that we became believers, his sister was going to a Baptist Bible study at work. She became a believer. I mean, not I mean, they may have been I don't want to say they had no familiarity with with being believers, but he would not have said he started the journey really until this whole time period. And his brother, who was 10 years older than him, was part of the charismatic Catholic movement. So he had sort of really embraced his faith, too. So the three of them and then his mom also ended up joining a Catholic church and becoming very involved in that. So it was very interesting because they all, you know, like within a year, they all became believers in totally different ways. His sister mostly thought that we were not really Christians because we still smoke cigarettes. And she didn't she knew that there was other involvement, but we were not even really considered believers. But his sister thought speaking in tongues was of the devil and his brother thought you had to speak in tongues to be saved. So all the family gatherings were very intense, you know. And so Rob and I smoking our cigarettes were like, well, you know, let's go look it up in the Bible. And so we would go home and read and see what it said. And then, you know, well, it's Paul does say which is everybody's book in tongues, but there does seem to need to be an interpreter. So, you know, it doesn't seem like either of them are really. So we were like always doing that kind of and looking and then doing research about trying to figure it out. So we went to the Catholic Church at first because, you know, he was he was associated with the Catholic Church and we weren't I didn't want to become Catholic then. I didn't feel like I knew enough about it. And he and we were just deserved childishly. I think that I was not able to receive communion. And then we did get married in the Catholic Church, but we had a sort of negative experience with the pastor, the man senior who married us. So it was just kind of a good excuse to all right, let's find something else. Let's see what else is around. And we didn't know anything about denominations or anything. So we happened to live near a Mennonite church. So we went to a man hitting all the items on the menu. I know. I mean, which I think is so cool because I think that's sort of what God did on purpose. You know, not to sort of get us in one place so that we sort of were forced to think about things in other ways. So we went to this Mennonite church for a little while. And but then we ended up moving. We were in outside Philadelphia area and then we ended up moving to Maryland because Rob got transferred for work. And so we went to a Methodist church there for a little while. I mean, again, we were very young. It just was like nearby. The church was pretty. And then they had some they had a nice group that met in the evenings. I've had a few couples our age and some of them were still actually very good friends with today. So we had a good experience there. It was nice being in a small group. And there were a few older couples who were very good at mentoring and moving people along. And then we started a Bible study in our neighborhood and we lived in, you know, like some condo houses and we started a Bible study there. You know, back then it was easy. I mean, it's not something I do now. I wish I did. But, you know, I put notes up like I want to start a play group for kids. And then we gave all our neighbors letters about we'd like to do a Bible study and all those things, different time period, like in the early 80s. And so we ended up having this Bible study. And there was another couple. I think actually I met them through the play group I started. And then they were going to a PCA church and they said there's a new one starting. So why don't you come check this out? And we did. And we really liked that. And it was a very good experience for me because I learned a lot about the Bible during that time period. Like I learned a lot of history. We had a great pastor that was just a few like our age. And there was a lot of young couples. We had two children by that time. And it was a very good experience for me, especially. I think, you know, Rob and I have different temperaments and our different things appeal to us. I'm much more in my head. He's much more in his emotions. Although, interestingly, he was like the wonderful student. You know, I was well, I was a little distracted, but memorization sort of information is not good with that at all. So he was a brilliant student. I was not a brilliant student. And so then we were at the PCA church. Then we got transferred again to Cincinnati and we ended up going to a vineyard in Cincinnati. I know, it was very different. Denominational loyalty, not a thing in your path. No, it really wasn't. It really wasn't. It was kind of Presbyterian charismatic. But you're losing options on the menu. So you've got to have to have some blends in the mix. Right. That's right. Well, when we were at the PCA church and we were joining and we had the, you know, I forget what, you would know possibly the book, whatever the book was that we had to read. Probably the Westminster Confession. Yeah, actually, you're right. It was the Westminster Confession that I should have known that. Which states that the Pope is the Antichrist. And we said, we just can't agree with that. Like, you know, we want to join the church, but we're not convinced of that. So we're sort of finding ways around like, okay, how do we, you know, how do we sort of fit into this place and appreciate the fellowship and the opportunity to grow and the things that are here. In the late 20th century, that's probably not a core belief in a lot of PCAs. So that one slide. That's right. Yes, I know. I can't even remember what the response was. I think they were primarily surprised that we were actually reading all of the information and sort of talking about it that specifically. That's right. But they were very welcoming to us. And I think it's okay that you don't acknowledge that as a truth. I think you're right. I don't think there was a strict adherence to that belief. So then we went to, when we went to Cincinnati, it was interesting because we didn't really know what kind of church we were going to go to. We just, we went to like a local Christian bookstore and said, are there any churches around here that do Bible studies? You know, you sell a lot of Bible study books and that had been a big part of our lives. And Bible study was very much like small group too. Right. So we did, he pointed us to, oh yeah, he said there's this church right down the road, go check that out. He said, well, you could come to my church too, but you might really like that church. So there was something about the idea of him pointing us to a different church that made us think, okay, maybe that is where we should go. And we went there and Steve Shogren, I don't know if you've read any of his work, he actually was one of the founders of the Vineyard. And he happened to be there throwing a frisbee for his dog or something on the lawn. He was another person our age and we got to talking and he said, come. And so it was, we had a very good experience there. We were only there for a year, but we got pretty involved in the year that we were there before we moved again. And it was, it was just great. It was very different. Like we had sort of been at the PCA church and as the PCA church was growing, which I loved the church, I loved the people, but we noticed how similar everyone was getting, you know, how like people would come in and they'd have these very different backgrounds and then everybody would be so homogenized and the same movies they saw, the same books they read, the same things that were allowed. So we had kind of been talking about that before we left. And then we got to Cincinnati and went to church and there was like an older woman with blue hair worshiping and right behind her was a rock and roll star with blue hair. And we just thought that was so great that there were these people that had such different backgrounds. So it was a very good experience for us. That was a year. Meanwhile, we had another child. So we had three. And I was not working. I felt very committed. It was very important to me to, it was very surprising because when I was pregnant with my first child and I met because of what I had seen happen with my mother and my father, I never, ever intended to be dependent on my husband or any of that. I was probably six or seven months pregnant and I was just seized with this conviction that I could not put my child in daycare. And I mean, I told Rob, you know, this is what I'm thinking. We both had always assumed, of course, I would be working and she would go into daycare. And I told him and he, you know, praise God, believed that I was hearing from God and was trusting me. He made $14,000 a year and we lived in a little townhouse. And I mean, it was 1980, but $14,000 did not go very far then either. So, you know, I ended up waitressing at night a few nights a week. I had always planned, I had always hoped to go to Rhode Island School of Design. When I would visit in New England, my family always said, as a kid, I always, you know, was creating things and drawing things and painting. And so that was sort of my plan. But as things fell apart, I did not feel like I could leave the family. And so I went to the local community college. I don't know if I would have gotten accepted, but it's a really interesting thing because I have a lot of people in my life right now who went to Rhode Island School of Design. But anyway, I went to the community college for a couple of years, and then I ended up working in sales and I did really well in sales and ended up managing my own office when I was 19. Then I ended up working in retail for a little while, because I wanted to be on more regular hours because my, before we moved and had children. So then once we had kids, I stopped working, except I just did different things at nighttime to make money. And I did a lot of commission portrait work, charcoal portraits and things like that for people. Just little supplemental things, not anything, you know, that I could have supported myself on. So then we moved, then we, well, Rob had a dream, a very specific dream when we'd been in Cincinnati for a year, that we both believed was leading us to come to New England. And that was kind of surprising because things were still very rough. Every time we would come up to visit, I would generally leave in tears. And, you know, it was still, there were still things that were set off. There were new marriages and difficulties there. And so it was just, it wasn't, it wasn't good, but we were feeling very compelled by God to move. And our oldest daughter was nine at the time. So we, and we had two others. And then, so we thought, well, all right, however long it takes, you know, we'll just put a couple of feelers out there and pray and if it's supposed to happen, it will. And so Rob talked to a headhunter on the phone and said, this is what I'm interested in. And he said, oh, there's nothing happening up here right now. Thank you for your interest. But, you know, the economy, the job situation is not good. And then he ended up getting two interviews within like three weeks and came up and had two job offers. So we said, OK, this must be real. This must be, you know, what God is calling us to. So we came up and there was a vineyard church that was starting in the area at the time, too. So we thought, oh, this is all serendipitous. You know, this is what this is all part of the thing that we're supposed to be doing. So that was how many years ago? Thirty years ago? We have been here all that time. Sometimes we wonder why, you know, I mean, oftentimes we wondered why just in terms of. Actually, I can't really say that that way. Now I don't want question at all. I feel very much like there's been many places and ways. I'm not sure what is happening right now. I'm a little confused about that, but I'm trusting God. But in the beginning, we kept we you know, we became part of a small group with some people in Providence from a church. It was very exciting and lots of good things happening. We've actually been through a few different churches up here, too. Part sometimes because our kids needed to be in a youth group and, you know, we were living an hour away from the church and couldn't do it. But the results of that is that we're very connected with different people. I mean, New England is so hard. It's a completely different church experience than anywhere else. Yes. Well, my mother, my mother and sister live in New England. And so my you know, my mother is from New England. So New England was sort of a second home growing up. We'd always come up from New Jersey. And so, yeah, I'm my father when when my parents retired, they moved back to New England. And so my father, after he retired, spent well, he was his upstate New York was the last church that he was in. But then, you know, helping out churches in the in the town that my mother lives in and in south, you know, just over the Rhode Island border. Yeah. Now you say not sure what's happening now. What do you mean? What did you mean by that? Um, I mean, you're doing art now and your kids are your kids are grown. You've been in this place for 30 years. You had a variety of church experiences. Um, that was that was an interesting thing that you said. And you can pass on it. I mean, because or you could say pause the recording and I'll tell you we could do that, too. Um, well, you can always erase something if I say something I don't want to. Right. Yeah, I can. All right. And I mean, I don't think I'll say anything I don't want to, but just in case I slip. So I don't feel reassured. OK, we've been in a few different churches since we've been up here and I see great value to people who stay in the same church for. Yes. I ever I think that is a wonderful thing. So I but I also don't think it's universal. I feel like some people in some circumstances and I don't think there's anything in scripture that says we have to do that either. So I think that. You know, there are people that God chooses to move around for whatever reason. So we've been a part of a variety of churches here to non-denominational churches. We weren't even part of a Grace Brethren Church for a little while. We've been in the Evangelical Covenant Church a few times. You've been all over. Yes, we really have. We really have. Well, let me before you go into too far into this, I got a question to ask you. So I have. Except for my time in the Dominican Republic, which was the Christian Formed Church of the Dominican Republic. I have been in the Christian Formed Church all my life, and that doesn't mean that I don't talk to people from other churches or have some kind of. some experience with people from other churches, but what have you learned looking at this, you know, because you've had a few decades now visiting and being members of churches all over the evangelical and Christian menu in North America. What have you learned about churches in North America? That the denomination itself is not that significant in terms of how the people express their faith or respond. Some people are very much adhering to the place where they came from and some people are not. So, none of, nobody seems to have the whole right picture and nobody has the wrong picture. I feel like, I think that God meets people where they are and in the spaces where they are and sometimes people need one kind of thing more than another. So, I think it's a beautiful thing that we have all different denominations. I, you know, I think it's really good. And again, the older I get, the more I realize I don't know everything or I realize I hardly know anything at all. So, you know, and we've been very involved. We've not ever been people who like said, well, I'm not getting anything out of this. It's not ever been that. I mean, my husband was a teaching elder, you know, in a church that didn't have a pastor. He was one of the teaching at a pretty large church for New England standards, you know, probably 400 people and we've led small groups all along. We've led, I've led all kinds of women's Bible studies and women's study groups. I've spoken at retreats and we've always been very involved. Sometimes we've been, sometimes the disagreements that we've ended up having have just precipitated the need to move on. You know, I mean, sometimes you can say, I'm going to stay here. This is fine. I, you know, like the Pope's not the Antichrist. That's fine. I can be there, but sometimes it puts you into a situation where you don't want to cause division in the church or, you know, you don't want somebody to be looking at you, feeling frustrated by your unwillingness to go along with what they want or something. So we've always prayed a lot that God would lead us where we're supposed to be. So the most recent church that we were heavily involved in is a great church in, I mean, our daughter goes and she's quite involved. All of our kids are believers, which is pretty amazing. They're all very strong, faithful, very involved in their churches. And our youngest daughter was going to a new church that was starting up, whose pastor was like our kids age, our older kids age. We went there for a while and it was, you know, there's a lot of wonderful things that they're doing. There are a lot of great things that we're doing. And we were super involved in sort of launching it because we became, I think one of the first weeks that, or when we went a few times, one of the persons who's now an elder said, oh, like, I guess we're a real church now because this older couple is coming, you know. So, but, you know, I feel like we played the role that God designed for us to do there in sort of helping to legitimize who they were and supporting them. And it was a very good experience for the time that we were there, but it's very progressive. And we found more and more that there wasn't as much room to discuss some of the other sides of things. And I think a big part of that is just being a different generation, you know. And I, you know, young men dream dreams. I think that's a very true thing. I have, was often reminded when we were there that when I was their age, I wasn't looking to people my age for insight and wisdom and wanting to hear their perspective. And they may be exactly doing exactly the right thing. So I don't claim to be that they're doing the wrong thing. You know, it's just a different thing than what I'm doing and a different thing than I feel led to. But it's a great, you know, I pray for them all the time because I think there's some very cool things that they're doing. And it's just a different way of looking at faith and Christianity and all of those things than I might have. So that was when we, then we ended up moving again. We were living in the small city of Providence and we ended up moving a little close, a little outside of the city last summer, unexpectedly when there were helicopters flying over the house quite often and the firecrackers were going off every night. It just was a little tense from all the the riding. And we never got it, you know, we were sort of in a lovely area of Providence. We didn't get it too badly, but it was, it was just, we weren't sleeping. It was just very stressful. And we happened to go visit some friends who lived somewhere else and they said, we think we could sell your house and it would go really well. And we were like, all right, well, let's try it. And then we didn't expect it to quite sell so fast and not have time to think about it. So since we've been in a different place, we've been kind of trying to figure out what to do. And I, I'm finding it a little hard to find people. I mean, almost everyone that I know is very progressive, almost every, or they're very conservative. I know when I spoke with Karen about this, she expressed something very similar. And so I'm having a hard time and I know they must be there. So, and that's partly why I contacted you because I thought, you know, you may be able to help me connect with people who are wanting to have the conversations and wanting to talk and wanting to say, this is what my journey's been and, and how do I, where do I go with it from here? It's getting late. I see we're almost out of time. I don't want to We're okay. We're all right. I don't, I don't have anything. I don't have anything at the top of the hour. So we're good. Okay. Okay. So my husband has gotten involved in the marked men. I don't know if you're familiar with them. It's sort of, yeah, a church we were visiting. It's actually been very life changing for him. And as a result, very life changing for both of us. We went through some things too, a few years ago, and this has been pretty remarkable what, how the changes that have worked out in, in, in our lives as a result of that. So he's, he's gotten kind of more involved in this particular church, just because of his involvement with that. It's not actually through the church, but, but it's, there's, you know, the person who runs it in the New England area goes to the church. So we have occasionally visited with COVID, you know, churches have not really been meeting regularly anyway. So I don't know, I, part of what I think is for, for like about, oh, and then the other people that are in my life that are very important to me are my artist friends, because I, well, I ended up when my youngest was in high school, I went back to school, finished my undergrad degree, got a BFA in painting, and then went and did landscape design, worked landscape design for a while, which I could do as a independent consultant. And I worked primarily for one landscape nursery, but I was still able to do it on my own time, most of the work I did at home. And then, but then I wasn't earning anything towards retirement. So when I was 49, I decided I better get a job, or I wasn't going to be able to get a job that had retirement. So I took the Massachusetts teachers licensing exams and got a preliminary license to teach art in high school, and then got a job teaching art. And then, in a high school, worked there for eight years, and then was having very little time in the studio, and that was frustrating and disappointing. And so there was a new school opening up, which was a virtual school, fully virtual. And so I decided to give that a shot. And I've been there for five years now, six years. COVID didn't bother that one a bit. Exactly, exactly. So we got a lot more kids. Yeah, we went from like 300 kids to, I think, our numbers. Well, we have 300, it was originally when I started 300 kids, K to 12. Now we've got 1200 kids just in high school. So it's a big group. So yes, so I teach art there. And we're actually a public school, which is kind of interesting the way it works. But I have a lot more time in the studio. And particularly when we moved to the city, I was able to get juried into a great art group there. And I've been able to do more exhibiting. And when we go anywhere, I talk to galleries. And so I've gotten really good reception. And that's been wonderful. I wish I had more time to do that. And, you know, trying to figure out when it's safe to retire, so I can devote myself to that. And then I have these eight wonderful grandchildren that I love to spend time with and work that out. And I have a great husband time with so just all those working out all of that. But I have been able to paint like crazy, but all my artist friends, you know, they're, they're way, way progressive. So I know I didn't say that properly. But, you know, they're, I love talking art with them. And I love talking mystical ideas with them. But there's not always a lot of opportunity to talk about faith with them. That's interesting. Well, when you say that, well, let me ask it this way. What would it so what are you looking for? What would, are you looking for a church where you're more on footing with people? Are you looking for, for a group where you can, what kinds of things would you want to discuss? Well, I meet with, with a crit group, a critique group now. I mean, the the club where I was a part of, we're not able to do as much in person as we were, and a lot of the people there are retired. So more that happens goes on during the day rather than in the evening when I'm available. But I do meet with, with a crit group, and it's great, you know, I mean, we right now we're still doing it virtually. So everything's gotten to be virtual, I would, I would love to be able to share I would love to be able to share my work with people and talk about how we feel like the spirit is leading what we're doing. And I would like to be able to, yeah, I would like to be able to talk about it from the perspective, not only from an art criteria, but how it fits in with and I don't even, it doesn't even have to be people who are creating art, you know, like I just I'd like to be a part of a group that is willing to talk about ideas, and that art would be a part of that. So I heard you mention, that's why I got in touch with you, I heard you mention something about a group that was doing something or meeting somewhere or something. And I love my art people in my life, and I do have, there's a couple of them that are, they don't want to say there's nobody, there's a couple, but it's just hard sometimes to figure it out, you know. Well, that's, that's really interesting to me. Because, I mean, part of why I started my YouTube channel was I, I was looking for, I was looking for more conversation partners about the, the peculiar things that I was interested in. I, you know, of course, I was interested in what Jordan Peterson was doing, I thought it was significant. I didn't know who around me, and I had a couple of pastors that I'd talked about it with, but it was quite clear. I had more appetite for conversation about this than they did, and I'm not about to, you can, you can pose on people and you watch the eyes glaze over and it's like, I don't want to waste your time, I don't want to waste your time, you know, life is too short. So that's part of how I started my YouTube channel, and it obviously has grown since then quite a bit, and has produced something of a network. And obviously, in terms of the network that it has produced, a lot of it discusses faith, but certainly not all of it, because there are many people in the network who are not Christians, they have either they wouldn't describe themselves as religious at all, or of other religions, or spiritual or something. So I, in the last three years have certainly learned something about the capacity of most of what I do, I do on Zoom and YouTube, and then Discord, the Discord server. Those have been sort of the ways that I've, I've grown this. Karen, who I pointed you to her with her Meaning Code channel, she, after I started making videos about Jordan Peterson, she contacted me, and she's, she's in the Bay Area, I'm in Sacramento, so it's not a, not a crazy drive at all. And so she came to a couple of our local meetups, my vet, I had a couple of conversations with her via the channel. She started her own channel, and she has developed in that channel, really another whole community of, of people. Her videos are usually one or two at a time. And when I listen to you, it almost sounds like you're looking to develop, oh, it's really cool. It's a really cool image or picture of some like minded, not too like minded, you don't want that, but you, you know, getting the relevance realization right, getting, you know, enough commonality around art, at least an openness with respect to faith, probably the people don't have to share everything that you have with respect to your faith, and then figure out how, you know, how to create a community. One of the, one of the interesting things about the internet and these tools that we're using is that they do collapse time and space, in that now we're talking live right now. But the kinds of and I do a fair amount of live conversation, obviously, but it's also a way of I publish a video, someone else publishes a video, and we, we sort of are connected in a, in a large disconnected conversation that I personally find enriching. It helps, I wouldn't, I wouldn't still be doing this thing for three years, if I didn't find it satisfying and productive for my own development, my own spiritual growth, and of course, I'm, you know, deeply embedded in a church, obviously. So it sounds to me like that's something of what you're looking for, or maybe even interested in developing, do I have that right? I would definitely consider developing it if I could figure out the time, like, you know, the timing is just the tricky part. But I mean, I would definitely consider that. And as you said, they don't have to be artists, they don't have to be Christians, I'm just wanting people who are open to the conversation, who are open to sharing ideas, who don't feel like they understand exactly how things work, kind of, you know, or that or that how the spirit is moving through, what are the messages that people are bringing in with art or with something else, with what they're writing or what they're reading or older people are so often, and they don't have to be older people, I actually have a lot of younger people in my life, but there's also shared experience with people of all different ages, and it's nice to get that, that information too. So people who are open to different ideas. I, it's been interesting in my, in the development of this channel and sort of the networking community around it, there have been a fair number of illustrators, I have recently had some conversations with some, there are a certain number of them on the Discord server who are illustrators, a fair number of artists that I've had conversation with, I had conversation with one young woman from Grand Rapids a couple of years ago now, and of course Karen in the Bay Area, you know, even Mary Cohen who doesn't necessarily identify as an artist or she hasn't, but when I listen and talk to Mary, she certainly is someone who has a lot of aesthetic sensitivity, who has a lot of aesthetic sensitivities. I think about Sally Jo, she's in, she in Florida now, I think she's in Orlando area, and so actually I don't know that starting something like this would be that difficult. I don't know that that would be that difficult at all. I kind of wonder, just even in fact doing this conversation and a few emails, if in fact, the question, if in fact I, you know, just off the top of my head, I could probably pull together four, six, eight invitations, just people that I have emails of and know by name and have a degree of confidence that they might be open to something like this, and usually something like this has a chance to grow in other ways. In fact, my sister who is in Connecticut, and I've done, before COVID, I did a retreat, just an overnight retreat with a bunch of people from my channel. She has a farmhouse in Connecticut that she has kind of turned into sort of a bed and breakfast, so she's got enough bedrooms that she can host a lot of people, and so I did sort of a 24-hour thing there at her place. So no, if this is, well let me ask you this question, have you gotten onto the Bridges of Meaning Discord server at all? I tried any of that? No. Because one of the questions, one of the questions I would have if you're going to try to set up a virtual group, what tool works best? Now I've, the three main tools I've used, maybe four, would be obviously YouTube, Zoom, Discord, and then also to a degree Twitter. Facebook, I have so much contempt for Facebook. I don't even check my messages, which I have enough guilt over to feel it, but not so much that I change anything. So I'm not going to change anything. I'm going to change my Yeah, so I know I try to make myself once a week go on, and even that is really hard. Yeah, so is that the kind of, I mean, what kind of pacing would you want from such a group in terms of check-in? If it had to be synchronous check-in, or would it more be something that people could post and when you've got time you check it and have conversations that way? Because that often, the what tool you'll use depends on really timing and how that works. If you're talking live like we are now, which is, you know, it's very intense, but it also means that you and I, which for you and I, it took a little doing to actually find the time so we could talk at the same time. Whereas with Discord, once you get enough people together, it's sort of a text chat and every now and then you've got video chat and voice chat. So what are your thoughts on, or are you saying, no, I want a live group in person? I understand the limitations of the current situation that we're in. So I'm kind of open. I would love to do something regular, whether it's once a month or twice a month or something like that. And it would be great if it was live, if it doesn't have to be in person. I sort of can't even imagine that, and I'm probably being too cynical about it, that I wouldn't find people up here. I'm sure there are people up here and I'm sure as you said, you should meet my sister. I should. You should meet my sister. My sister is, my sister is something else. And we haven't even, on email we can talk more specifics, but it doesn't sound like you're very far away from her at all. Okay, that's a pretty small place. Yes, that's right. It really is. That's great. I would like that. So I'm really kind of open. Again, I'm willing to let the spirit lead. I just, I feel like we're on the cusp of something in the world. And I would like to explore that with people who are also open to that idea and try to sort of see what are the different, even my husband and I, as I said, our temperaments are so different and part of our sort of getting to the place where we could not be threatened or envious of the things that the Lord was working in each of us, but instead accept them as isn't this cool that we're so different and the Lord is working out, giving us both different pieces of something. And I feel like we're in a good space with that right now. I'd love to meet with other people who don't necessarily see things the same way as me, but I want to learn from other people and I want to share with other people. I've been learning so much in the last few years. Like I just, you know, my head feels a little overwhelmed and also so excited about what's going on. And it's all, everything's a little scary and uncertain right now too, but I'm trying to decipher the different things coming through and respond in the way that God wants me to in the kingdom and be whatever he's calling me to be in that. And so I'm not sure what that looks like and I don't mean that to be evasive. I just mean I'm kind of open and like I'm so excited about what I've been painting and how that is going and what's occurring there that I'd love to share it with other people that are sort of willing to look at it from a spiritual perspective as well as an aesthetic perspective. Well if we said that anyone who wants, who is interested in this should, you can leave a comment below. You can email me if you can figure out my email address. It's really hard to figure out, isn't it? My email address is such a mystery. Is it really? I did email you though. Yes you did. So I figured it out. It's such a mystery. I mean it's amazing anybody can figure out what my email address is. Or on the Bridges of Meaning Discord because again I can think of, another thing that's interesting on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and I'll send you a link to that after we're done here and I'll send you a whole bunch of stuff in that email. Another thing that has happened on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server is that even though the server is probably 90% men, the women on the server, they in some ways rule the server. It's a very interesting dynamic and many of those women are artists. That's been very interesting. Yeah. And some of those, not all of those women are in their 20s and 30s. Some are older and so and even again I know when we started this you said most of the people I see on your channel are young men. That's true partly because young men are like yeah play it on YouTube. I don't care. But there are a fair number of women who do watch my channel and sort of keep a much lower profile. And so I would say if this is something you're interested in, anybody watching this video who has gotten all the way to the end here, there's a little prize for sticking it out. Contact me one way or another. Can be on Twitter, can be on the Discord server, can be via email. And if you're interested in sort of exploring what could be done in terms of a group like this, let's see if I mean I, you know, it's I won't, I'm not an artist. I probably won't be active in this group but I can facilitate people having each other's email addresses and figuring out where to start with this stuff and maybe because I really love the vision and right from the start part of my mission in what I've been doing is to try to facilitate groups, the formation of groups. Sometimes that's online but even the online groups I have a preference that an online group is okay but I'll tell you when you get together in person it's so much better. Yeah, yeah right. So how does that sound to you? Does that sound like something? That sounds great. I appreciate your help with that so much Paul. I know I could not reach the people and so I'm very very grateful. I appreciate anything that you are able to do in moving this forward. Then again I kind of feel like I'm, you know, around and part of the journey but I'm willing to take the reins in whatever way I need to too so I don't know what that means. I'm just open to what it might mean. Well in my experience we've built a lot of this just sort of ad hoc and now I've got enough of a network that if you need a little help, you know, setting up let's say a portion on the Discord server that's easily done. I can either do it myself or ask Rick or Joey or someone to do it and the number of the people on the server, you know, immediately I think about Sally Jo who I just had a conversation with recently who is an artist and I can think of another number of people that I can just shoot put an email group together and shoot it all together and say hey is this guy listen to this video right here. Does this kind of group really excite you? I think actually partly it's been so funny because, you know, this it's been the women and again there's so few of them but it's been the women in this community that have been so active and so often doers whereas the men need a little sometimes need a little bit more, you know, got to get them going a little bit but the women once the women see something boom they're on it and it happens so that's why the women in this community have been so important. So I don't know is that a good place to stop and then I'm going to send you an email and I'm going to get this ball rolling and we can see where it goes. Are you there? You froze for a second. Oh yep I said I said so is this a good place to stop these shall we get this thing going and see where it goes it's kind of exciting I'm really I'm really quite excited about this because I think there's a lot that can happen. Yeah I think that's very cool thank you Paul I appreciate that very much. Should I you want to put a link to my website or anything too in case anybody wants to see what sort of work I do and as a way to sort of help them see where I'm coming from in what my work looks like? Yes definitely I think did you send that to me on the initial email you sent me? I did because you told me you looked at it I had the giant ice cubes oh you probably couldn't tell they were giant but and the story about CS Lewis and okay which this when is this going to air because I it will be a good deadline for me to make sure I put some of my more recent things up there. See the problem I have is when something like this happens I don't want to wait I want to do it like tomorrow because the truth is if I wait till Monday I get distracted with you know I've got my sermon between now and Monday and I've got my we've got the generational handshake our generational handoff conversation panel discussion on the discord tomorrow morning and I mean the way my life is going right now there's 10 things that are going to intervene I'm going to have some new video ideas that I'm going to want to do there's 10 things are going to intervene before Monday for me and so if I if you're okay with me sharing is anything you say in the video that you'd want me to take out just kind of going back over it mentally? I mean is there anything that you heard that you it sounded good to me I think you were fair sometimes people say things to me in videos it's like yeah and I don't I don't want to be a part of someone blowing up somebody else's life I don't want that on my channel so but you didn't say anything that I think would be oh you shouldn't have said that so okay all right that's good that's very good to know so yeah no I and I so appreciate what you're doing I mean I can see that you're putting all these things together and people together and circumstances so what a cool thing for you to be involved in you know like I just think you know I mean as a pastor like not only being able to reach your congregation but all of these other people that you're involved with it's a very exciting thing and hearing all these young men who are telling you their stories of how they came to faith and it's just it's so remarkable what's happening right now like it's just it again it's one of the things that convinces me we're right on the cusp of something the more I learn the more I'm finding words to describe some of that and learning that there's a whole lot of other people it's just so fascinating too because you know you start listening and then all these ideas that you feel like you've been thinking about for five years or you're hearing other people express them and and they have words for them yes it's great it is it is well wonderful sherry this has been terrific and I'm going to send you an email right away and add some email links to some people that you know I've already sent you Karen's contact and but again it's it's been really incredible for me how many artists have responded to my channel I didn't expect that but that happened so and I'm going to put you in contact with my sister because I think you two are going to have fun I would love that that would be great really good if you think if you think I'm an extrovert my sister is a whole nother level and my sister's an artist and my sister's a musician and she is my sister is so much fun um little chaotic more chaotic than I am yeah but um but again I think and I think she'll I think she'll and she's doing she's doing everything right now she's sorry you're frozen again I don't know if you know okay well I'll send you all the stuff but this has been great fun to share and again if you've got to this point and you're interested in something like this send it to me or your website will be down there so they can I imagine they could probably contact you through it um yeah one way or another I'll just push all that stuff over to you that comes my way and you can and if you need help facilitating something like getting together with a zoom call I'll send you an invitation to the discord discord isn't the easiest thing to learn at first but after you get to know it it's quite a flexible tool and that's part of the reason and it's free so it's part of the reason we've used it so that's great to hear thank you very much all right sherry we will be in touch thank you so much that sounds great paul good evening take care bye