https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4wJo9ZtluE8

 Hi, this is Paul. Over the last few months a number of us have been through Karen Wong, kept in touch with Mary Cohen's medical situation. When I first met Mary, she had sent me emails when I first started making videos about Jordan Peterson and she started sending me emails almost right away, and fairly soon she was on my channel. I've compiled all of my conversations with her into one video, which I am putting together and will be released quite shortly if it's not already out right now. And right away when I talked to her, it was just life. Now immediately you could notice that she had a scarf over her head and that's because she has for a number of years been battling cancer. When I spoke with her and I wanted to make mention of this, she said no, she didn't want to talk about that at all, she didn't want to draw any attention to it, she didn't want anybody to threaten or fussing over her cancer fight. That was not what she was going to be about on the channel. She had bigger fish to fry and she was all about it, and she was. At the end of this video I'm going to play just the first part of our first conversation where as usual I get people's stories and you can get just a little taste of who she was from there. Just full of life, full of love, full of passion, full of brilliance, full of enthusiasm. I remember one of the first comments on my first conversation with her was from Julian. Oh that's the smart lady from the comments section. She was all over the comments section. She eventually started her own channel. She had conversations with quite a few people beyond me. She did an in-depth series on Cardinal Ratzinger's book on an introduction to Christianity. She taught me so many things and when I would say something wrong she would be right there in the comments or in my email correcting me. One of the times I remember most was when I said something rather flippant about transubstantiation. She was a very faithful Catholic and she said you're not getting this right and you should see Bishop Barron's video on it, which I did. It really corrected me and that of course led me to other people. Brett Sockeld and his book and I talked to him. Mary was a huge part of this. She hasn't been around much over the last year or so because again her cancer was flaring up. There was not too many months ago some positive news and she had sent me a note basically saying that she was going to be better soon and she had a number of bones to pick with me again and she wanted on the channel. I said Mary you just tell me whenever you're ready and we'll do it all over again and you can set me straight and tell me where I'm wrong and we'll have a great time doing it. So it was just a few days ago I got a note from Karen Wong with a note from her daughter asking for some video testimonies of her mother. Then of course we knew at that point because she said that the time was short. She had a matter of weeks or days. Last night in fact I got a phone call from Mary's number and it was Dan and he explained that she was resting in bed and that the grandchildren had come to see her and the children had come to see her and the priest had been quite frequently at the home. She had made her confession. She couldn't really speak and I couldn't really hear her but she could hear me and so I just did some reminiscing over our times together. I tried to bless her as best I could. I said a prayer for her as a pastor. These scenes aren't unusual for me and people often sort of recoil from them as if they're horrible but in fact they are precious because Mary is secure in her faith and her knowledge of the Lord and she anticipates shining even more brightly than you will see her here in these videos. Again as I'm going to I'm just going to end this video with a clip of a few minutes of the beginning of our first conversation and there she is just shining brightly full of ideas full of passion and gives you a little sense of her story and one of the things that I thought about when I was thinking about well what would I say if the family were to ask me to give her a eulogy what would I say? Now it's a little bit more difficult of course even though we had a number of conversations online and via email and in the ways that we do with this new technology I knew that only to know her through this medium is really only to get a side or a piece of her and of course as a pastor when I give eulogies for members of my church I know them in a much more in real life sort of way a sort of 360 degree way but even though this passage is sometimes a bit maligned what comes to me is the noble woman of Proverbs 31. A capable wife who can find she is far more precious than jewels the heart of her husband trusts in her and he does and he will have no lack of gain and he hasn't. She does him good and not harm all the days of her life she seeks wool and flax and works with willing hands you'll hear how she and her husband have this one acre lot with all sorts of gardening and you know she would talk about that in her videos how she teach her children and grandchildren she's a home she's a home schooling grandma she as again if you go through the long conversations that we had she was active in various causes she was in many ways people often say rather glibly they've lived a full life but Mary certainly has and you know this isn't just in sort of a stereotypical a woman shut up in the household no she was all over the place but but she excelled at home and she loved being in the home and the conversations that we had over gender roles she just she would just go after me and and it was just delightful just delightful. She is like the ships of the merchant who bring her food from afar she rises while it is still night and provides food for her household and tasks for her servant girls she considers a field and buys it and with the fruit of her hand she plants a vineyard she girds herself with strength and makes her arms strong she perceives that her merchandise is profitable her lamp does not does does not go out at night distributism this this Roman Catholic idea this vision of economics and social and family life she she introduced me to some of those ideas she puts her hand to the disk staff and her hands hold the spindle she opens her hand to the poor and reaches out her hands to the needy she is not afraid for her household when it snows for all her household are clothed in crimson she makes herself clothing her clothing is fine linen and purple her husband is known in the city gates taking his seat among the elders of the land she makes linen garments and sells them she supplies the merchants with sashes strength and dignity are her clothing and she laughs at the time to come so her don't I don't want to talk about this scar for my chemotherapy or my cancer Paul if I've got a short time I'm going to make the most of it I'm going to go after all of these ideas and engage with all of these people and and and and she's shown like the light she made she made linen garments and sells them she supplies the merchants with sashes strength and dignity are her clothing she laughs at the time to come she opens her mouth with wisdom and the teaching of kindness is on her tongue that is so her she opened her mouth with wisdom and the teaching of kindness was on her tongue she looks well in the ways of her household she does not eat the bread of idleness oh no her children rise up and call her happy or blessed her husband too and he praises her he did to me on the phone what a precious precious inheritance she leaves for her family in her wake many women have done excellently but you surpass them all charm is deceitful and beauty is vain but a woman who fears the Lord is to be praised give her a share in the fruit of her hands and let her works praise her in the city gates in some ways YouTube is the city gates this is where we meet this is where we talk publicly and this is where she's shown I've done some videos recently about all the thinky talky stuff here on the YouTubes and she could think and talk with the best of us but her real legacy is of course far beyond the screen it's in the soil she enriched in her backyard it's in the lives of her children and family it's in the life of her husband and the church that she leaves behind saints saints uphold the land uphold the culture build strong people and give us legacies and memories to remember that is Mary I'm gonna say a prayer Lord you are a good God and you don't treat us as our sins deserve as far as the east is from the west so far you have removed our transgressions from us Lord our dear sister Mary you gave us for a time you worked through her life you crafted her story into an amazing story that enriches us all that stands to bless her children bless her family bless her church and bless these city gates that is YouTube I pray Lord that you would be with her family and her church especially at this time as they are having those final conversation and moments together that are so bittersweet on one hand tinged with sorrow because they know that the blessing in the way that it has come to us will be with us no more but also hope and promise that our goodbye is just for a while and when we see her again she will be transformed and the brilliance that we've seen in her now is just a foretaste of what she is becoming Lord we anticipate that day as long as you give us life and time here may we labor diligently for you and your kingdom and Lord now may we on one hand grieve but on the other hand grieve with hope that she did not labor in vain we see the fruits of her labor all around her and we know Lord that in the life of the age to come she will shine brighter still so give us your spirit to comfort us and be especially with the family as they grieve and may we remember her Lord as a testament to the power of your spirit as it changes us and transforms us into men and women who dare to love, dare to speak, dare to care, dare to give give us your peace as you give us your kingdom. This we pray in the name of Jesus, Amen. You know the drill so here we go I am recording so tell me a little bit about yourself Mary Well let's see I live in Georgia I'm a homeschooling grandmother and I get into a little bit of that later on I have nine grandkids and my husband and I have one acre property that we're trying to do use as productively as possible we try and grow as much food as we can we have chickens and so we do a lot of that kind of stuff and you know it's just it's a lot of fun and it's a great education and so that's sort of how we live my husband's actually an engineer so we couldn't possibly support ourselves off of our acre but he has his income and then I have all the you know home economics stuff that I'm trying to get have going on so that's pretty much how we live I really want to start off by telling you how much I love and appreciate what you're doing and like I told you in the email I'm going to give you a little love and you're just going to have to put up with it You know I started watching you almost I think from your very first video that you did about Jordan Peterson I started watching you and I know I actually communicated with you early on before you became rich and famous here with all your thousands of subscribers and one of the things I would just want to tell you that one of the videos that touched my heart so much was the one where you talked about the defeated lobsters and your service to the people in the Dominican Republic I think it was and you mentioned about how you know it's all well and fine Jordan Peterson talking about the hierarchies and climbing the climbing the hierarchies and the status and all that and you know his a little bit of like stoicism that he has going on in his approach to things but that there are these people that they are never going to climb the hierarchy you know they've either started off on the wrong so far down and maybe nutritional deficiencies in their mother before they were born they may have mental handicaps they may have physical handicaps or a combination with a social structure that's oppressive and they're never going to get up that hierarchy you know and Jordan Peterson you know he says we don't know what to do about that we don't know what to do about the fact that hierarchies dispossess people Well and you came right back and you said well Jesus knew what to do about it he knows what to do with those dispossess people he tells us how to treat them and he tells us yes we can't change the fact that hierarchies will dispossess people but we have an approach in a way through Christianity of dealing with those people that are the defeated lobsters that really answers that that issue and I just love that I mean that one that just moved me to tears I thought that was just absolutely beautiful And I do very much appreciate your openness about your sister's passing and the way you've shared about that because I think that sets a great example of people to see the difference that faith in Christ really makes for us as Christians I thought that was just that has just been really amazing I love the way you communicate with people because to me you're setting an example for all of us Christians in how to listen to people and speak to people about our faith you know I think it's hysterical when somebody will say something to you and you'll go oh well that's really a little bit of a heretical thing that you're saying and then you'll just laugh Oh well here I must correct you right now on this one. I think that's just terrific I just love that. The point about you know you're dealing with your sister's passing it opened up to me I started thinking about the way you approached it as saying that how a death in the family or a death of anyone close to us is in a way an education about the human condition You know and I thought that was really good and it prompted me to think about I actually I lost a daughter who was 22 years old in a car accident in 2005 on Thanksgiving morning. She was coming home from work she had worked all night she's coming home apparently fell asleep at the wheel of her car and she drove up under a park tractor trailer and was killed instantly. Oh yeah it was it was very it was a very devastating thing for our for our family but there's some things that I just I just really remember about about that event like my daughter-in-law who was only a few years older than her and had already a couple of children she she spent a couple of days in my house and she was in my house and every time I would look at her she would shake her head and she'd say you never know you never know you just never know and it was like I watched her processing in that way and realized why she's saying this over and over it's because she's trying to absorb it deep into her soul. You know and I could see that you know that process happening with her and really it was such one of the reasons it was such a great shock is her my the daughter who passed her younger sister was in the Marines and was in Iraq. Of course I was worried about the one in the war zone and I lost the one that was living in my house less than a mile from my home. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That was that was in itself kind of this weird sort of inversion of what you know of what my concerns were. Yeah. And then another thing that I noticed that my daughter had a lot of friends. She's very active in our parish with the youth group there were hundreds of people at her funeral. One of the things that I observed was her her nieces and her friends and going into her room up into her bedroom and just sitting there crying together amongst all of her things and then they would come down you know out of the bedroom with a t-shirt or a sweater or a stuffed animal and it's like is it okay if I have this. And you know I could have been like no don't touch her things you know leave it but I realized why did they want those things because they were going to they were going to make them feel closer to her. Yeah. You know. And so I freely said yes you know you can whatever you want you can you can take and you know just to give them that that little bit of comfort of just being able to hold close to them something that belonged to her. And it reminded me of how we are you know I'm Catholic so how we are in the church with the relics of the saints. Yeah. You know that these holy people have passed on before us. We still want to keep them close to us in the family of God. So we have you know their relics that we keep. Yeah. You know I just thought that I saw that connection and then I know that you know you talked about how out of order it feels to lose a younger sibling. And some of the commenters in under your YouTube video about it made the same comment about how wrong it feels when someone who's younger than us or a child or younger sibling passes. And you know that I recognize that that's really how I felt you know my oldest daughter to her it was like a combination of losing a younger sibling and losing a child in a way because she had been nine years older so she had been so you know helpful and you know taking care of the younger sibling. You know over a period of many years so for her it was just so devastating. Yeah. And I remember telling a friend of mine shortly after my daughter died about how it feels like the universe has turned upside down. Yeah. And I said you know if I if I poured water into a pot and put it on the stove and turned the fire under it and then watched it turn to ice before my eyes. I couldn't have more of a sense of everything being backwards. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, everybody says that losing a child is the worst thing and everybody's right about that, you know, I certainly, certainly feel for your, your mother I know that must be terribly terribly hard on her and it doesn't matter how old. No. How old is you know if they go first. I remember this story about this, this woman who was in her 90s and her son who was in his 70s died in the hospital, and her laying up on on top of his body and crying my baby my baby. Yeah, yeah. That, that never, the age doesn't really matter when it comes to that. No, no. So that's just some thoughts that I had of things that I kind of observed. Well, those are really helpful. Thank you. No, that's really helpful and I, you know, part of the reason I want to part of part of what I want to do with this channel is exactly what we're doing here so we can share these stories because it's, I can't tell that story. You can. And that story should be told because there are, there are many people out there who are suffering, who are suffering and they feel alone and they feel that nobody understands or knows or has been in their place and it's not true. We're not alone in our suffering but we did suffering grief makes us feel isolated. And it's a it's a hard thing. It's a hard thing. So thank you for sharing that I appreciate it. Well, I think sometimes we isolate ourselves in our grief, like one, one friend of mine was talking about, you know, the reaction of Americans to a death versus the reaction of people, say in the, in the east or in the Middle and how she said, you know, here we are, you know, went to the grave side and we're all standing there, you know, yes, there's some crying but you know there's no extreme outpouring of motion. Right. And, and she said, whereas she said, you know, if this was, if this was in some other countries, you'd be wailing over the death. That's right. I think that that in a way is part of, you know, we isolate ourselves by not wanting to engage with the engage with the emotions and let them out. Yeah, that's that's probably part of it.