https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vy0crlyyntg

 Hi, this is Paul. This is my Rough Draft for Sunday series. I usually run through my sermon to the degree that it's done on Friday often and just kind of walk through it audibly and put it out for comment and to hear what you have to think as I'm preparing to preach it on Sunday. If you're interested in the final Sunday version, I have a separate YouTube channel for my church content. I have my Sunday School class and my sermons on there and you can find those there. Sometimes if I remember, I'll drop a link to the final version into the comments. I want to begin this week talking a little bit about Thomas Hobbes. Thomas Hobbes wrote a book Leviathan and he was an English philosopher in the early 17th century and he's best known for his quote, and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short. And sometimes people will align Thomas Hobbes' observation about life with Buddhists' first noble truth, which is that all life is suffering. Now Hobbes basically says that people are perpetually at war with one another and they're equal enough to make life miserable for each other because of the competition for just about anything and everything, because of diffidence, angst or restlessness and desire for glory. And so life is a perpetual war often for people and Buddhism weighs in on this and says, well, the way to stop the war and to stop your suffering is to stop attachment and desire. Now Buddhism comes up with Sam Harris. Sam Harris is near the person on the left. I have trouble with right and left because I'm dyslexic. The person on the left and he's one of the four famous atheists, new atheists as they were called about 20 years ago, and he continues to have a podcast. And just recently he had Bart Ehrman, who's the guy on the right. Bart Ehrman is also quite well known. He grew up an Episcopalian and then converted to be a fundamentalist Christian and went to Moody Bible College and was very interested in the Bible and so went on to Wheaton and from Wheaton, went on to Princeton Seminary in New Jersey and became a rather prominent skeptic. And it was quite an interesting podcast between Sam Harris and Bart Ehrman that are both quite excited to hear each other. And Sam really enjoyed having a biblical scholar who could validate a lot of Sam's assumptions. And Sam felt quite free to ask questions about the Bible, a lot of things he didn't know. What was probably the most interesting takeaway of the podcast though was that Ehrman said it wasn't all of the things about the Bible that he grew to doubt, like the bodily resurrection of Jesus or miracles or any of these things that actually drove him to lose his faith. What drove him to lose his faith was he couldn't square there being a good and all-powerful God with the amount of evil that there is. And that finally for Bart Ehrman meant giving up his faith and becoming how he categorizes himself today as an agnostic. Now modern godlessness, modernity affords the mental option to give up believing in God or the gods. Most ancients didn't have this option, it just wasn't a respectable public position to have. But obviously in our secular realm it's much more respectable today. Those who claim so, those who claim so emotionally however, usually have a kind of difficult time explaining why. Now why is there relief when you give up on God? Not believing in God or the gods doesn't actually change the circumstance that causes the skepticism. For example, if your life is hard, if your life as in Thomas Hobbes' way of saying has been nasty, brutish, and apparently short, not believing in God doesn't necessarily address that. And in fact asking why giving up God because there's evil in the world helps the situation for you I think leads to some really interesting thoughts. It seems to boil down to the personal and that there's a personal god. And I think for a lot of people, they're being evil in the world, they would rather deal with an impersonal god or a pantheism. They don't want to take something personally. And this is an interesting human dynamic because for example, if you discover that something bad has been done to you, let's say you go into the hospital and the hospital messes up, it's one thing if it's an unintentional error that somehow the bureaucracy or someone goofed somewhere. It's another thing if someone decided to harm you with that same error and even if the outcome of the injury is the same, the intentionality adds to it. And that's a very interesting dynamic for us. We care deeply about persons and people. And so even if the pain on the other end is the same, if you are injured intentionally or unintentionally, people really care. Now this is not a new realization. If you read the book of Job that deals with a lot of these kinds of issues. Job who has had everything taken away from him and whose life used to be comfortable and wonderful and the kind of life everyone wanted and then after the little bet between God and Satan, his life is miserable and his children are wiped out and his wife is telling him to curse God and die, Job wants to talk to God. He wants to put God into the witness stand and grill him and make him justify himself before Job as to why God should get away with all this. These questions are not new. And so let's pick up our reading through the book of Second Kings and you can look back on last week's sermon and we'll talk a little bit about it because this week's sermon starts dramatically different. Sometime later, Ben-Hadad, king of Aram, mobilized his entire army and marched up and laid siege to Samaria. There was a great famine in the city. The siege lasted so long that a donkey's head sold for 80 shekels of silver and a quarter cab of seed pods for five shekels. Now translating some of these things for a modern world is really difficult, especially when it comes to the value of money, but just to give you a frame of reference, later in the story obviously these prices will be shown to be quite different to show the dramatic change in situation, but a male slave in his prime sold for 50 shekels. And here a donkey's head, which is quite obviously the most unappealing portion of a donkey to eat, is selling for 80 shekels and these seed pods are also known as doves dung. You'll find that in some other translations. They were the seed pods of a pretty little plant called the Star of Bethlehem, which were known to be horrible to eat, but a quarter of a cab of seed pods for five shekels. So a tiny little bit. This is how desperate the people were and how everyone was absolutely starving to death. As the king was passing by on the wall, a woman cried up to him, help me my lord the king. The king replied, if the Lord does not help you, then where can I get help from? From the threshing floor? From the wine press? Then he asked her, what's the matter? And she answered, this woman said to me, give up your son so we may eat him today and tomorrow we'll eat my son. So we cooked my son and ate him. The next day I said to her, give up your son so we may eat him, but she has hidden him. What an amazingly ghastly story. And just looking at the situation, it's so horribly surreal in that. So what does justice require of the king? To find the other woman and have her cough up her son so that they can eat him? Is the king to sanction cannibalism? Or is the king to arrest and condemn the first woman in front of him for eating her son and go find the other woman for eating her son? Now this gets into this great chain of authority that was in the ancient world and really throughout much of the history of the world. The king was in a sense the proxy for God, but the king here is declaring his helplessness. What could he do? It's higher up on the pay grade than the king and so he's angry and frustrated. And now it's also interesting here that we have this story of two women and assumedly two sons or two infants and this reminds us about Solomon. And of course Solomon had the perfect answer for two women in conflict over a dead baby boy, but Joram is no Solomon. When the king heard the woman's words he tore his robes. As he went along the wall the people looked and saw there under his robes he had sackcloth on his body. Well what did this mean? Well this meant that the king himself was putting on a show, a public show, to help the people keep a stiff upper lip, but underneath he was in mourning and in torment. He said, may God deal with me ever so severely if the head, the Elisha son of Shaphat, remains on his shoulders this day. Now the king is at his wits end and this is what I call something like kicking the dog because sometimes when people get frustrated they get drunk or they seek diversion, but sometimes they just get so at wits end they look for someone weak to beat on, which is usually a spouse or a child, and they just want someone to vent their rage and frustration on. Now if you go back and you see last week's story, which is just if you're looking at a text just before it, we have this highly idealized story. It was almost seemed like a fairy tale of Elisha blinding the raiders and then feeding them in the center of Samaria, but again if you look at the story there's no names given, everyone is just stock characters and they're the same enemies as here. Now you should keep in mind name and the leper as we get a little bit further into this story. And here we have a sense of King Jorm, and King Jorm is kind of a middle-of-the-road king. He's not exceptionally bad like Ahab, he's not exceptionally good like someone who pleased the Lord. He got rid of the cult of Baal, but he never gave up Jeroboam's golden calf cult ways, and so he's kind of a middle-of-the-road king, which actually was how the king is characterized in the previous story, but we see him here, and so we see now in this story a very moderate, ordinary king that's basically running at the spiritual speed of the rest of the nation. Now Elisha was sitting in his house, he's actually living in Samaria, which gives you a sense of, well he's not totally on the outs with this king, and so the king is in some ways a servant of the Lord, but his theology and his practice is all messed up. So Elisha's living in town, now Elisha is sitting in his house and the elders were sitting with him. Well who are the elders? The elders are the tribal leaders of the people, and so Elisha has some popular support, and he's got the ear of some influential people. The king sent a messenger ahead, but before he arrived, Elisha said to the elders, don't you see how this murderer is sending someone to cut off my head? He's talking the king down in front of the tribal leadership. Look, when the messenger comes, shut the door and hold it shut against him. Is not the sound of his master's footsteps behind him? Now again, this is interesting. This is Elisha who prayed to the Lord and had an entire army blinded, and Elisha who was surrounded by the armies of the Lord, chariots and horses of fire, but here he tells the tribal elders to hold the door and keep the messenger out, who wants to take off Elisha's head, because he's going to wait this out and he's going to talk to the king, because he's got a message for the king himself. While he was still talking to them, the messenger came down to him and the king said, this disaster is from the Lord. Why should I wait for the Lord anymore, any longer? Now what's interesting here is that in a sense, the king and Bart Ehrman are together because, well, what causes us often to throw off belief? We're frustrated, we're angry, God hasn't delivered on the assumptions that we've always had for him. Well, what are the assumptions we've always had for God? Well, we're assuming that it's God's job to give us a good life. It's God's job to give us the things we want. It's at minimal God's job to give us the things we need and to not let us suffer. This is something like contemporary moralistic therapeutic deism, where it's God's job to give us what we want and we usually kind of, we don't bother him too much and we hope he doesn't bother us, but when we're in a jam and we're in a fix, well, then we reach out to him and then suddenly we either get all religious or in this case, we get all irreligious, but in either case, as interestingly enough in the Sam Harris Bart Ehrman podcast, God is simply not someone that you can ignore. Either you love him because you want something or you hate him because he hasn't given it to you. And again, now, ancient peoples weren't naive to any of this. All of these issues today were back there in the ancient world, but what's important to see is that the crucial emotional factor here is trust, not really facts, because where does God show up here? He's not here at all, but seemingly, but we're angry with him. Now there were four, did I miss a slide? Hang on. Oh, I did. So now finally with the king present, Elisha replied, Hear the word of the Lord. God is going to talk now. You want to listen? You can do with it what you want. This is what the Lord says, About this time tomorrow a sea of the finest flower will sell for a shekel, and two seas of barley for a shekel at the gate of Samaria. The officer on whose arm the king was leaning said to the man of God, Look, Even if God should open the floodgates of heaven, could this happen? You'll see it with your own eyes, answered Elisha, but you'll not eat any of it. You see, skepticism isn't anything new. It wasn't that, as Bart Ehrman had mentioned, in fact, in the podcast, it's not that ancient peoples just thought that everything is miraculous and unicorns and rainbows. No, they've got a pretty realistic view of life, and they know how hard life can be, and the army officer is saying, Look, even if somehow we were able to lift the siege, there's no way we'd find all this food. The siege has gone on for a long time. The Arameans have already raided and taken everything from the surrounding farms. The stores are gone. Even if the war were to end today, we would still have deprivation for a long time. Elisha, you're a liar. Now, there were four men with leprosy at the entrance of the city gate. They said to each other, Why stay here until we die? If we say, We'll go into the city, the famine is there, and we will die. And if we stay here, we will die. So let's go over to the camp of the Arameans in surrender. If they spare us, we live. If they kill us, we die. Now, what I love about this is that these lepers, the whole story changes. We were just at the pinnacle of the hierarchy for the city of Samaria. We have Joram, the king, and we have Elisha, the prophet, and we have the city elders, and we have Joram's right-hand man. And now we go to all the way to the bottom, and we have lepers. Now, lepers aren't even allowed in the city. They have to beg at the city gate, and they can't go by anyone. They live in the shadows and the outskirts of the town. And because of their view of the underside, they have a very pragmatic and practical cost-benefit analysis. And they say, look, we have nothing to lose. We have absolutely nothing to lose in this game. And what's interesting is that what this shows is that now in this situation of catastrophe, the hierarchy is flattened. Now, recently there was a book that came out because economic inequality is a big part of the conversation. And part of what's been happening in the West over the last 30 years is that income inequality has been getting, well, income and resources have been getting more and more unequally distributed. And so Walter Seidel did a study on this over long periods of history. And the conclusion he came to is that nobody has actually found a solution for inequality, and that usually what happens is that inequality gets destroyed and things get more equal when there's a calamity or a catastrophe, carnage, famine, plague, war. It's interesting because that's, in a sense, exactly the story we're seeing here. And so what the author does is invite us to compare the mental workings of the lepers with the king. And it's interesting how the king who has high status, who has a comfortable life, who has a sense of his own security and economic privilege very quickly gives up on God because, well, you know, God doesn't seem to be coming through for me. I'm the king after all. God's supposed to be here for me. The lepers who are at the bottom, they don't blame God at all. And in fact, when I think about many of my experience with the people on the absolute lowest level of society, they might have messed up theology, they might have mental illness, they might have substance abuse, they might have every self, they might have every problem and a lot of them self-inflicted problems, you can imagine. But you know what I find with them? They're almost all religious. And where some of them might turn to blame God, most of them don't seem to. And it's a very interesting dynamic. And here the text invites us to kind of compare the emotional assumptions of the king versus the emotion who's at the top with the emotional assumptions of the lepers who are at the bottom. Now, don't forget that a few stories ago, now for us it was a long time ago because it was a number of months since we've been in second kings, Naaman the leper, who was someone of high status, came to Elisha and was told to go wash in the Jordan. But he didn't want to wash in the Jordan. I don't want to wash in one of those dirty, dirty Israelite streams, don't we have better rivers in our own country? And again, it's his low status slaves that say, hey, what do you got left to lose? And of course Naaman washes and is cured. And this is just kind of a story about how power and influence changes our perspective and in fact changes our opinion of God, and we could say probably psychologically, based on our comfortable expectations and assumptions about how life should go. So the king and the officer have revelation inside information, but the lepers don't. They just do a pragmatic, what do we have to lose? And they go out looking for the Aramean army. The lepers have no revelation, and what do they get? At dusk they got up and went to the camp of the Arameans. When they reached the edge of the camp, no one was there. For the Lord had caused the Arameans to hear the sound of chariots and horses and a great army, so they said to one another, look, the king of Israel has hired the Hittite and Egyptian kings to attack us. So they got up and fled into the dusk and abandoned their tents and their horses and donkeys, and they left the camp as it was and ran for their lives. So all the plunder and looting and wealth of the army is sitting around. Now notice too what kind of miracle this is and isn't. All this is is confusion. All this is is the fear of the Arameans. So in some sense the Arameans are connected with Joram and everyone of high status and everyone of elite status, and they run and flee in confusion. Now what's interesting is that for the Arameans, you know, everything is just, all their decision making is just as expedient as it is for the king, which we're about to see in a couple of minutes. But first the lepers. The men who had leprosy reached the edge of the camp, entering one of the tents, and they ate and they drank. And I think of the two hobbits that go with tree beard and the lord of the rings, and they're sitting and enjoying Saruman's hoard all to themselves. And so here are these lepers, these lepers who had nothing to lose, now are feasting in plenty all by themselves while everyone of status in the city is starving. Then they took the silver and the gold and the clothes and they went off and they hid them and they returned and entered another tent and took some things and hid that too. They're wearing themselves out, looting the army that had fled. Then they said to each other, what we're doing is not right. This is a day of good news. We are keeping it to ourselves. If we wait until daylight, punishment will overtake us. Let's go at once and report this to the royal palace. And it's so funny because the lepers are not men of God. They're just kind of schmucks and they're self-serving and they're unbelieving. They hadn't received any revelation. And so what's interesting is that Thomas Hobbes' view of history is universal, it seems here. And so, well, shoot, this is our good fortune. But afterwards, God's allocation of forcing and misery appear randomly universal, apart from status and undeserving. But the leper's morality and getting caught is what drives them. So it's not even that they're moral exemplars in the story. They're just a bunch of schmucks. So they went and called out to the city gatekeepers and told them, We went into the Aramean camp and no one was there. Not a sound of anyone. Only tethered horses and donkeys. And the tents slept just as they were. And the gatehouse shouted the news and it was reported into the palace. Are they going to believe the lepers? Of course not. So you can imagine the lepers at the bottom saying, Hey, you know, we told them it's not our fault if they come out, if they want to starve in the city. But they're desperate in the city. So the king got up in the night and said to his officers, I will tell you what the Arameans have done. He's still suspicious. He can't trust for anything. We know they are star, they know we are starving. So they have left the camp to hide in the countryside thinking they will surely come out and they will take them alive and get into the city. Get into the city to get what? A bunch of corpses? One of the officers answered, Have some men take five of the horses that we have left in the city. Their plight will be like that of all Israelites here. Yes, they only, yes, they only, they will only be like all the Israelites who are doomed. So let us send them to find out what happened. So it seems that the officers again are brought down to the level of the lepers. This is this great equalizing, this great leveling. So they selected two chariots with these horses and the king sent out the Aramean army, sent at them after the Aramean army. He commanded the drivers, go and find what happened. They followed them as far as the Jordan and they found the whole road strewn with clothing and equipment the Arameans had thrown away in their headlong flight. They didn't even take the horses, they could have fled quicker. They were that panicky. Then the people went out and plundered the camp of the Arameans. So a sia of finest flour sold for a shekel, and two sias of barley sold for a shekel, as the Lord had said. Now the king had put the officer on whose arm he leaned in charge of the gate and the people trampled him in the gateway and he died, just as the man of God had foretold when the king came down to his house. It happened as the man of God had said to the king, about this time tomorrow a sia of the finest flour will sell for a shekel, and two sias of barley for a shekel at the gate of Samaria. The officer had said to the man of God, look even if the Lord should open the floodgates of heaven could this happen? The man of God had replied, you will see it with your eyes, but you will not eat any of it. And that is exactly what happened, for the people trampled him in the gateway and he died. What's amazing is the only miracle in this story is the prediction and the confusion of the army. And what's amazing is that all of the elites in the story are shown to have feet of clay and they don't know anything, they can't know anything, they're just like, they're not caught above the lepers, they're all the same, it's just the game is different. Now Hobbes is right about life in this world, Elisha is not spared by any miracle in the story, he holds the door against the king's killer. The advantages of the human hierarchy are only temporary buffers from the catastrophe of this fallen world, in the end they level us all. Like King Jorm we resent God for remaining above it all, where is God when we're starving, where is God when we're suffering? The lepers aren't calling this out, we interpret silence for complicity, we don't know, so we fill in the gap. It feels emotionally beneficial to evaporate God rather than imagine he's impotent or cruel, which is kind of the other modern take. So we kick the dog if we can, but moderns and ancients presume the exclusion of God from our suffering. The ancients resented God for it and moderns evaporate God for it and seek our own evaporation at death to be like God. So the irony here is that moderns evaporate God because God is indifferent or God is absent or God is not here, and then we seek our own evaporation at death to be like God and this is promoted as consolation. So in other words the bad news is that you're going to suffer, the good news is is that we know how to fix it and that way is death and nothingness will fix the suffering. So in other words, yeah life is bad now, what do you have to look forward to? Death and nothing. Okay that's good news. Elisha's miracle here is one of abundance, it's almost Jesus feeding the 5,000, this is abundance for the poor at the bottom. This is good news for the poor because the lepers who seem to have no moral quality of their own now because they simply don't have anything better to look for, now they have abundance and this seems to be God's joke on the whole affair, a joke on our whole pretense. Elisha's miracle here is one of abundant good news for the poor at the bottom. This is God's exposing the folly of our status pretenses, it's how grace levels us all, moral posers like Jorm and pragmatic lepers who are not moral in any way. Oops looks like I just included the editing in the video, I wonder how many other little mistakes I made along the way. Grace says that our station in this world matters not, Arameans fleeing confusion, leopards feast while the king suffers in unbelief, the commander sees but never tastes, no one has faith but Elisha and who is not vexed or alarmed but simply anticipates his unearned deliverance. So where do you want to see yourself in the Bible? The question is who do you believe, who do you want to live like, who do you want to follow, who do you want to trust in?