https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QLf2MffzxtU

 Hi, this is Paul and this is another one of my Rough Draft to Sunday videos where I basically walk through the current state of my draft of my Sunday sermon and look for input from the YouTube community. And so I just kind of put it out there and hope it helps you or, you know, I'm appreciative of the feedback. As many of you know, over the last couple of months I've been making YouTube's on video about Jordan Peterson and some of what this has brought in has been a stream of emails and comments and new relationships with people who are interested in Jordan Peterson and his work. And one of the people who I've gotten to know a little bit is named Alexander Kamlin. And actually last week we tried to have an online conversation but we had a technical glitch and so we weren't able to record it and post it. But in January Alexander started his own YouTube channel and he's looking to help people work on their stuff as he works on his stuff. And so I wanted to play a little bit of his introductory video to give you a sense of what he's going through and who he is. My name is Alexander. Welcome to my channel. So I've been wanting to do this YouTube channel for a long time now. So by the time that I was 18 I was in my first inpatient rehab. By the time I was 21 I was institutionalized for the first time in a psych ward for a suicide attempt. My adult life up until very recently has consisted of trying to stay sane and sober and trying all sorts of different psychotherapy programs, all kinds of different medications in and out of psych wards and rehabs, trying to hold down jobs, trying to stay off the streets. I tried AA, I tried NA, I tried SMART programs, CBT, and I was put on so many different medications ranging from antidepressants to antipsychotics to anti-anxiety to mood stabilizers to it's a pretty long list. But no matter how hard I tried any of these different programs and I mean a lot of them I really tried hard. I was absolutely desperate but for whatever reason none of them gained any traction and things continued to get worse in my life and in my head and I began having more and more psychotic episodes. I had been diagnosed by the time I was 21 with bipolar disorder. So I had this pattern that emerged pretty early on in my early 20s and was pretty consistent I would wreck my life completely and completely reboot and have to move somewhere new, get a new job and start over completely and things would be going good for a little while and then slowly but surely I would begin to unravel and things would get worse and worse and worse. I would stop taking care of myself, I would stop showering, I would stop brushing my teeth, I would stop cleaning my room and my house and I would stop calling people, family and friends. I would start isolating and just staying at home in my bed. Often times I would stop going to work and I would just stay in bed for days or weeks on and have depressive episodes that would last for months at a time. I would try to go back to school and work towards my education, my goals but I could never keep my head above water and pretty soon the chaos would overwhelm me. Things got so bad, well they were pretty bad the whole time but eventually I got so desperate that by the age of 25, five years ago or so now, I decided that I needed to do something extreme and I quit everything and left the world and I went and lived in a monastery and I trained as a monk for about three and a half, four years and that was when my life finally started to turn around for the better. It was hell getting there. I had one final bender that very nearly killed me but once I had gotten there it was miraculous. It was around that time where I really wanted to start this project and start documenting the process of self-transformation that I was attempting to undertake but I kept putting it on the back burner so I quit everything all at once when I went to the monastery. I quit drinking, I quit smoking, I quit doing drugs, I quit my psychiatric medication, I quit social media, got rid of my phone, I quit TV and entertainment, I quit everything and just dived head first into this meditative practice and this spiritual communal living It absolutely saved my life and my soul and those monks and nuns put me back together again. I didn't think that that was possible but eventually I decided that the monastic path was not right for me and eventually I left the monastery and as soon as I left, like the night or two nights after, I went on a bender. It was right back into all of my old habits and this has been after three and a half years of being completely away from that stuff. I thought that the meditation and the MyFundance practice were what had saved my life and I think that they absolutely helped me tremendously but I really realized that the community was what was really holding me together and the structure of the place and the formal discipline and without that I very quickly unraveled again. My old madness began creeping right back in and I started getting pretty desperate again and somehow miraculously I met somebody who was plugged into an underground ayahuasca community. So I began participating in the ayahuasca ceremonies and that was profoundly transformational. So for almost, you know, going on ten years then, like I had been trying all of these different modalities and approaches from, you know, from Western to Eastern to, you know, New Age to, you know, I mean, once you start getting really desperate you begin trying everything and anything and seeing what works and what doesn't. But there was still something missing and I couldn't seem to find it no matter how hard I searched. Then about two years ago I encountered the work of clinical psychologist Jordan Peterson and something about Dr. Peterson's work just clicked and all of the things that I had experienced over this ten years of chaotic wandering just kind of all came together and finally made sense and I began to see some real change in my life, lasting change. And it wasn't because of the community and it wasn't because of the structure that I was submitting myself to but it was things that I was able to voluntarily undertake for myself and things that I was voluntarily able to sacrifice. I'm just going to break it here. You can listen to the whole thing on your own. And I really appreciate Alexander's story and I appreciate his honesty and I appreciate his willingness to share his story, you know, in order to be of help to other people. And I want to be really careful with a story like this because some of you know that often in churches conversion stories can be used where everything was bad and then I went to church and now everything's great. And that's a powerful simple narrative that often people will hear and they'll say, oh, then I need that too and they'll jump right in and sometimes it'll go fine for them or sometimes it won't take for them or sometimes it'll take for a while. So I'm just with my experience of a number of people that I've known who have similar stories to Alexander, I'm very cautious about giving blanket pronouncements because life is a journey and a lot of things come up and people who are able to maintain sobriety for 10 or 15 years sometimes stumble and crash and stay crashed. So I'm not about to make big pronouncements here. But I did want to highlight some things from his story that I thought were helpful and important because I think his story in some ways indicates something about our culture and something about a Western secular way of life that is vulnerable to the kinds of distress that he experienced. Part of this I think is we have a sense in our culture that because of our technology, because of our science, because of our wealth, because of our power that we sit at the top of the world and we alone know how to put our lives together. But there are a lot of things that suggest that there are ways in which our culture, our secularized culture is toxic. And so I want to highlight a couple of things. So Alexander's story is one point. Another book that I read, A Turn of the Century, he's a very famous psychologist. I won't use his name right now. But he began his career working in an asylum. And in that asylum he was told to not bother talking to the patients because they were sick. And at that point the paradigm was very materialistic in that they're sick because something's wrong with their brains so talking to them won't make any sense. But the more he listened to these, he decided to not listen to his supervisors which could have gotten him in trouble. And so he decided to talk to them. And he discovered that these people had a lot to say and that their internal pathologies were connected with bigger stories out there. And he began to notice that as he engaged with these patients, they didn't have psych meds or anything like that at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century. So all they had were talking. But he began to notice that actually talking to the people could make things better. Now this is an important thing to think about because I think to a certain degree the paradigm that this doctor confronted early in his career is a similar paradigm to what we have today in that well, if there's something wrong with me then maybe if I can take a pill that will fix me. But what I appreciate about Alexander's story and about this doctor's story is that both of them show how not all of Alexander's trials could be resolved with medication. Now I am by no means going to tell people who need psychiatric medication not to take their medication because I've seen many situations in which people taking their medication dramatically helps them. And I've known a number of people for whom if they stop taking their medication they will slide downhill. So please do not interpret anything that I'm about to say in that way. Plus I am not a doctor. So just be sure of that. I'm a pastor, not a doctor. And what I'm trying to highlight though is that we as human beings live in an incredibly complex world where in fact, as I say a little bit later, we're seen as individuals but we're actually deeply connected to each other in ways that are mysterious to us. And the third story is one of the things that I notice about immigrants. There's a lot of debate about immigrants over the last couple of years and a lot of fear about immigrants. But one of the things, you know, I grew up in Patterson, New Jersey, which is a city in the middle of the United States, and I grew up in a city of perpetual immigration where there are always immigrants coming in. And my ancestors in the United States were Dutch immigrants. And the Dutch immigrant story isn't that different from Haitian immigrant story or Mexican immigrant story or Italian immigrant story or Greek immigrant story or Irish immigrant story that immigrants come to the United States. And so often what they bring with them is their culture. And the other thing that we notice sometimes is that we watch Americans and our fully secularized culture who are supposedly on top of the world and we're lazy, we succumb to addictions. We, you know, we always say, well, these immigrants will work jobs that Americans won't work. And the key thing is that Americans won't work them. And in some ways Americans can't even work them because if you take a group of city folks and you bring them out to a job, you know, to do some harvesting or some field work, those people won't last a half hour out there. And so you have to ask what is it about these traditional peoples coming to this country that equip them despite the culture gap, despite the language barriers, despite all of the hindrances that they might have, so many of these immigrants actually dig in and succeed beyond people who were born here and raised here. And when I look at that, I say there's something about their non-secularized cultures. Now, secularism pervades every culture in the world now, but American culture is more secular than most. There's something about our secularized culture that inhibits us and makes us, I think, more prone to succumbing to what the Bible talks about in terms of the desires of our flesh, our weaknesses. Now, what are human beings? This is kind of what it gets into. Now, in my backyard, there are these plants that we call Texas privates, and they're all these lovely trees, and they're evergreen. The greens are there all year, and this time of year they have these little berries and the birds eat them and make a mess of my car. But when we decided to get rid of some of these trees, I discovered that if you cut one down, they just keep growing up all over the place, because what I discovered is that you can't just cut it down. You have to dig it out, because all of their roots, their rhizomes, all of their roots are connected. And where on the top of the surface we see all of these individual trees, this is actually one huge plant that is all connected. And in fact, we know the same thing about bamboo. Now, I planted some bamboo in my backyard, and when I planted bamboo, I was told to be very careful to get the clumping bamboo and not the running bamboo, because if you plant the running bamboo, those rhizomes will run all over the place and eat up your concrete and tear up your house and do all kinds of things, because in fact what we see on the top is just the individual stalk, but underneath they are all connected. And I think there is something about human beings that is like that. We are always a part of our context. We are always a part of our environment, and this connects us to each other. Culture is the water we breathe. And in fact, I think part of the reason that we see in Alexander's case, where part of his journey has been to, you know, a monastic institution could put walls around him and teach him some skills, but without those walls, you know, he went back to his other things. And in fact, he had a, you know, he was drawn at some point to come back to Christianity, and that is what brought him to me. And so, you know, we have been talking and chatting and writing back and forth. But I think what this highlights is our need that we as human beings can't live in this teaching that our culture gives us, that I am somehow this unique individual disconnected from story, disconnected from other people, that I am a rock, I am an island, John Dunn, Simon and Garfunkel, that I somehow stand alone. And so what we see is that to be a human being needs to not only be connected to other human beings in terms of family and community, but also submerged within a story. And that story has to have deeper roots to other worlds. In a sense, we need to live within a mythology. And even as a Christian, I could critique mythologies and religions of other lands. I think it's incontrovertible that people do better with the mythology, which is the reason that people are always going out to watch Star Wars or Lord of the Rings or Harry Potter. They need a fandom to live into. They need a mythology to live within. If you strip them of the mythology, they will find one. They will find one at hand and they will grab onto it because we simply need it to exist as human beings. Now, everyone imagines that, you know, we're, well, I can self-construct myself and I can decide for myself what is meaningful. But what we often notice is that everyone else's choices are constructed except ours. We've got a strange bias against this. And, oh, he believes what he believes because he's a man. Or, oh, they believe what they believe because they're raised in that religion. Now, that's certainly true. I'm not about to deny sociology of knowledge. But in our culture, we have this weird dynamic where everyone else is constructed but me. I'm the one who has the free choice. I alone see the world as it is correctly. I alone can somehow navigate my ship. But then what I think actually happens is that in a culture like this, what this does is in effect strips away the mythology around us and strips away the water that we breathe in. And now suddenly we're at the mercy of our desires, of our wills, of some internal feeling that we think, well, I'm this and I'm that and I should do this and I should do that. And we confuse our desires with some kind of divinity within. And we imagine that somehow my desires for today are dictating truth. And so then what often happens is in a sense we confuse our emotions with God. And our emotions become a God. And our emotions then validate anything we want to do. But even this isn't so simple. I was watching a video of James K. Smith. He's a professor of philosophy at Calvin College and he was doing a Veritas Forum here on You Are What You Love, a book that he's published recently. And he told a story from a Russian movie, which I haven't seen, but I'm obviously going to have to look it up and find a way to see it. And it's a story about it's called Stalker. But the guy really isn't a stalker. This guy who's stalker leads a professor and a writer to a place called the Zone. And in that zone there's a room. And in that room he promises them that once they go into this room their truest desires will be met. And you think, well, who wouldn't want that? Well, let's not waste any time. Let's go there. And so the stalker brings them to the room. And when they get to the room just at that moment they all pause because they're self-aware enough to realize, well, I think I know what I want. But what if what I truly want under the surface? Well, what is that? I'm afraid of that. Because if you know yourself well enough to know that our wants are this tremendous mixed bag. And, you know, actually, Jamie Smith makes this point in the comment that our wants are also constructed. They're formed by the word he uses are the liturgies of the age. And, you know, sociology of knowledge doesn't, doesn't not apply to me. And so, you know, if I were to say I'm going to make your truest dream come true, you would probably say hold back on the truest dream. Give me the dream my name. But I've been around lifelong enough to know that many people if you actually give them what they ask for, well, eventually regret it. And I've seen that time and time again. So, so what if what if we are disconnected from our deepest longings? What if we really don't know what we want? Well, how can we find them? Well, you know, how do I really know what I want? Well, it's probably close to how you're actually living. And what if our culture does by elevating individual choices is just turn us over to our desires and even what's worse our fears. Now, we've been talking about covenants. And if you want to talk about covenants in the book of Genesis, you begin with with heaven and earth where God creates the heaven, the heavens and the earth. And the heaven and the earth are one thing. And and there's a garden of Eden and that's the that's the royal garden for the for the palace. Really, heaven and earth is God's palace. And he makes a man and a woman to live there. But the man and the woman decide they want to take the garden in a different direction. And so God exiles them. And in a sense, heaven and earth are cut off. And then we saw in the story of Mo of Noah that that human beings working their desires, it turns to violence. And it turns to abuse and it turns to to all kinds of heinous things. And it gets to the point that God can't stand the pain and the cries of distress that he hears coming up from this world. And so to shut it off, he decides he's going to flush it. He's going to drown it. But then he makes a fatal mistake because he saves the best man in the world and his family and an element of the animals and he puts them in an ark and and saving only the best man in the world drowns all the people in the world. And the best man in the world drowns all the bad people. But you know what? It goes back to the same. But yet God makes a covenant with them and says essentially with the rainbow, I will maintain the firmament. I will never again drown you. But would you please stop killing each other? And would you please start respecting the life that the animals have? I'll make this covenant between you and me. Have we kept this covenant? So then last week we talked about the covenant of Abraham, the covenant of Noah. God's God asked that we respect the authority authorship over life that he has. But we don't. Then he comes to Abraham and he starts with a new plan where he's going to start on a nation for himself. He's going to build it from the ground up. And so he takes Abraham and he asks him to trust him. But Abraham can't trust. And so God works through his life bit by bit by bit and brings Abraham to a place where he actually can trust God sufficiently to even be willing to sacrifice his son. But then God intervenes and rescues his son and circumcision becomes the sign of that covenant. But then as you know, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, they go into Egypt. And Egypt is emblematic of empire. Egypt is emblematic of human societies that are both powerful and amazing in terms of their power and their technology, but also oppressive because the rules of empire work. My well-being at the expense of others, my well-being at your expense. And Egypt is top dog. And the children of Israel become slaves in Egypt. And so God sends down plagues on Egypt and they release Israel out into the desert to worship. And then, you know, so worship becomes central to the relationship between God and Israel and sacrifices central to pretty much all human conversation or human attempts to relate to God or the gods or divinity at that point. And then God rescues Israel and he takes them out into the desert and he basically says, I am going to train you to represent me to the world. You are to embody the life of the heavens. And Jesus' prayer in the Gospel of Matthew, the Lord's Prayer, articulates this perfectly. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. In a sense, Israel is to be the kingdom of God and bear witness to the kingdom of God to the rest of the world. But how is Israel going to do that? She was formed by Egypt. She was formed in Egypt. She is just as much children of Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, Noah as anyone else. And so all of her desires are the same. And so God brings Israel out into the desert, the land of chaos, the land where the earth is. The land where life can't exist and he feeds her with manna and then he brings them to Sinai and he is going to tell them how to live. He is going to immerse them in a culture which will form them by which they can possibly be his witness to the world. On the morning of the third day there was thunder and lightning and with a thick cloud over the mountains and a very loud trumpet blast, everyone in the camp trembled. Then Moses led the people out of the camp to meet God and they stood at the foot of the mountain. Mount Sinai was covered with smoke because the Lord descended on it in the fire. The smoke billowed up like a smoke from a furnace and the whole mountain trembled violently. As the sound of the trumpet grew louder and louder, Moses spoke and the voice of God answered him. And God spoke all these words. I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not think for yourself an image in the form of anything in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the waters below. You shall not bow down to them or worship them for I the Lord your God am a jealous God, punishing the children for the sin of the parents to the third and fourth generation of those who hate me, but showing love to a thousand generations to those who love me and keep my commandments. You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God for the Lord will not hold anyone guiltless who misuses his name. Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy. Six days you shall labor and do all your work but on the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it you shall not do any work, neither you nor your son or daughter, nor your male or female servant, nor your animals, nor any foreigner residing in your towns. For in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, the sea and all that is in them, but he rested on the seventh day. Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy. Honor your father and your mother so that you may live long in the land the Lord your God is giving you. You shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall not give false testimony against your neighbor, you shall not covet your neighbor's house, you shall not covet your neighbor's wife or his male or female servant or his ox or donkey or anything that belongs to your neighbor. When the people saw the thunder and the lightning and heard the trumpet and saw the mountain in smoke, they trembled with fear. They stayed at a distance and they said to Moses, speak to us yourself and we will listen, but do not have God speak to us or we will die. Moses said to the people, do not be afraid. God has come to test you so that the fear of God will be with you to keep you from sinning. The people remained at a distance while Moses approached the thick darkness where God was. And so here we have the famous Ten Commandments. And historically the Heideberg catechism does this, breaks them up into two tables. There's in a sense love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself. But if you continue reading in Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers, you'll see in fact a whole world that God intends to embed Israel within. And he desires that she will be embedded in this world. And he gives her these promises and he says, if you live embedded in this world, then I will make you flourish. Then your wives will have children, your animals will have herds, your fields will multiply. I'll keep the enemies away from you. I'll give you a land flowing with milk and honey. And I will make you an example to the nations. Now right away we moderners look at this list and say, well, you know, he should have gotten rid of slavery and he should have done all of these things. Well, what you notice right away is that if you look at the law, it's got to be in a sense close enough to what Israel can see in her cultural framework. But different enough to bear witness. And actually we see quite a bit of this. It's got to be common enough to be understood, but it's got to be intelligible to the contemporary neighborhood. And so God puts them in this and Israel utterly fails. And in fact, the entire story of the Old Testament is Israel's utter failure. And if you don't believe me, read the prophets because in a sense what so many of the prophets are, I'm doing the book of Ezekiel with my adult Sunday school class. And I've been doing a number of the prophetic books with that class. And I'm just amazed in so many ways that the Hebrew prophets that these are books that nobody reads anymore. Just about maybe a little snippets at Christmas, but our Christmas and Good Friday. But beyond that, Christians hardly read these books. But what these books are in many ways are therapy sessions where God and Israel are like a bad couple and they are duking it out. And God is trying his best to correct Israel. And in fact, the frame of the conversation is often that God is in fact a husband that Israel has been cheating on. And on and on and on it goes for hundreds and hundreds of pages. Israel is violent. Israel can't be trusted. Israel can't inhabit the culture that God is giving her even with all of the accommodations that God gave her so that she could possibly pull it off. And Israel can't do it. And so we see the same thing with all of these covenants. Noah's covenant. God says, Hey, I'll keep the firmament up. I won't flush you or drown you. But could you please stop killing each other? No, we can't. Could you please respect the animals? You may eat them for food, but just show them some respect. No, we can't. Would you would you please learn to trust me? No, we can't. Now, I'll give you a culture within to live. I'll give you a culture that will keep you sound and sane and give you justice and take care of the poor and treat you to have that balance of of mercy and justice and figure it out in a way that you can live so you can live in a land overflowing with milk and honey. And I'll protect you. I will be with you. No, we can't pull it off. We can't do it. And so then he sends Jesus and Jesus is a prophet and he exposes Egypt for what it is. Jesus exposes empire and Rome, but but he also at the same time exposes the the culture war that at his time the the Jews who are under the oppression of Rome are trying to fight. And so and so the Jews wanted to kind of draft Jesus into their culture war and be the kind of Messiah. If you can if you can still a storm, you can make a storm. If you can raise the dead, you can kill soldiers on a mass level. And Jesus says, I'm not fighting your culture war. I am not kicking out the Romans. What does that mean? What does that mean that you're down for the you're down for turning Jewish girls into prostitutes? You're down for the subjugation of your people? Jesus says, no, the Jews aren't the only ones who are subjugated here. The Romans are, too. Empire is just as is just as bound by its own self as those who are beneath the empire. It's not a story of oppressed and oppressed oppressor and oppressed. Everyone is oppressing and being oppressed all at the same time, whether they're on the top or the bottom. You need deliverance from the whole mess. And none of you can see it. Instead, you want to play your petty games of one on top of the other. And you're going to do a revolution and you're going to change it. But the new boss is just like the old boss. And the new revolutionary government brings the old style government in. And this is the story of the world around and around. How can you stop it? I'll show you. You'll crucify me. You'll take away my clothing. You'll cast lots for the only thing of value I own. My friends will forsake me. My father himself will turn my back. There'll be no angel to intervene between Abraham and Isaac this time. I will die for you. If anyone's blood is going to be shed, it's going to be mine. And then you will know that I am the Lord. And so Jesus is prophet, exposing Egypt for what she is. Jesus is priest, the final sacrifice for the thing we are unable and unwilling to pay. And Jesus is king, ruler who gives a rich, contextual place that heals. This week I finished up a book that I very much loved. A book about J.R.R. Tolkien and C.S. Lewis, two of my favorite authors. And the milieu out of which they wrote. And this author goes into a little bit of social history about what was happening in the world after World War I. World War I just gutted socially, spiritually, emotionally, economically, all of Europe. Eric Remarque predicted a generation of men broken, burned out, rootless, without hope. And truth be told, we're not after a terrible war. We're after years of successive little wars. And we're in the midst of plenty. And we're in the midst of the peak of American empire. And we have power and we have technology and we have all of this. And we're surrounded by men and women and children who are broken and desperate. And we have no answers for them. Oh, go construct yourself. Yeah. Did humanity make humanity? I don't think so. After returning to England from the front, Tolkien and Lewis might easily have joined the ranks of the rootless and disbelieving. Instead, they became convinced there was only one truth, one singular event that could help the weary and brokenhearted find their way home. The return of the king. This king is stronger than that hideous strength that roams Narnia and Middle Earth looking for victims to devour. He is the archetype of the heroic in every culture, in every age. He is the source of all goodness and courage, the desire of the nations. He comes to restore the lost long days of freedom. The king knows the way to the blessed realm that lies beyond the sea. The light is already growing stronger, wrote Lewis in the last battle. Lucy saw that a great series of many colored cliffs led up in front of them like a giant staircase. And then she forgot everything else because Aslan himself was coming, leaping down from cliff to cliff like a living cataract of power and beauty. This king comes with power and beauty as the voice of conscience and the source of consolation as the lion and the lamb. Here perhaps is the lingering influence of George McDonald. Loving kindness beamed from every line of his face. He wrote the noble kings. He wrote of the noble knight of fantasties. Even so, the knight's face grew stern and determined. All but fierce as his eyes burned like a holy sacrifice, uplifted on a granite rock. What Lewis discovered and came to embrace in McDonald's vision was the union of tenderness and severity. I'm a minister of the, I'm a servant of Jesus Christ. And that is the king that I await. I await the return of the king because only this king came. And when Jews and Romans were looking to cut each other's throats and when an oppressor and repressed were looking to somehow equalize the world at the expense of the other, Jesus came and said, if there's any blood to be shed, it's my blood. And I give it to you. I give it to you freely. Take, drink, drink my blood. Eat my body. I will be a sacrifice for you. And in three days, I will rise again. And in my resurrected body, the new age will begin.