https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=cEQ6aRSXLvo

 Paul, did you want to? He's calling me. Jacob's talking to me. Rick's motioning to me. Everything's going on at once. What were you going to ask Jacob? I was going to ask if you watched Sir Roger Penrose on Unbelievable. Was he on recently or is that an older one? It's an old one. I might have watched it. It was a couple of years ago, wasn't it? Yeah, it's just surprising to me that it's not bigger news in this corner of the internet. Why? Because what he's talking about is like, oh, here I am, the most prominent physicist in the world. And yeah, William Lane Craig is the only person who has a viable idea for how this world could be what it is. I'll have to re-watch it. Well, as you can see, we are now live. And on my desk there, I see I'm still on Unbelievably's premiere. So I don't know if that makes any sense or any difference or anything like that. But here we are this morning. We are doing our weekly Discord conversation. We'll do this this week and next week. And the first week of March, I won't be here. I have to travel to the United States. I have to travel to the United States. I have to travel to Salt Lake City to do a church thing. Not a Mormon church thing, a Christian Reformed Church thing. But I actually have to spend the night in Salt Lake City Thursday night. So depending on my airfare, anybody wants to get together in Salt Lake City, let me know. And maybe do a little meetup in Salt Lake City. Oh, how many questions do we have? I don't know. Not too many. Looks like we've got a stump the chump question down there about a particular biblical passage. But we'll get to that when I get that. Christian Golden from Pine Bush, New York asks, is love possible without worship? How do you differentiate between love and worship? Was Christ's sacrifice an act of worship from God to man? Hmm. Part of the difficulty with questions like these is that they're so abstract. And somebody said, oh, you should comment on Rationality Rules' latest video, where he basically kicked sand at Jordan Peterson's comments on Joe Rogan about the Bible and Western civilization. And there's always a point to be made. What is Western civilization? And is there, when we're talking about something like Western civilization, we're talking about an arena, and an arena is made up of so much. One easy way to point this out is noting the difference between, let's say, Anglo-America, which would be the US and Canada, and Latin America, which is everything south of the American-Mexican border. Are both civilizations Western civilization? Yeah. Are there a lot of differences between them? Yeah. So define Western civilization. It's really hard. So maybe terms like Western civilization get meaningless. And in some ways, they do. And that's when we try to say a little bit more. But the problem is that you can't live without big terms like Western civilization, or love, or worship. So is love possible without worship? Depends so much on what you mean by both of the terms. And again, on one hand, when you use words that are so big, it's very easy to make anything mean anything. So I'd like the, I'm going to, looks like I'm going to duck on most of the questions this week. What a crappy Q&A we're going to have. So yeah. What's the relationship between love and worship? Clearly, there's a relationship between love and worship. You worship what you love. You love what you worship. But love and worship are both hugely vague terms. Rick might be in danger of worshiping the motorcycle that has yet to be delivered. He's buying matching outfits. He's buying gadgetry. He was really frustrated that he couldn't get all the gadgetry to exactly match the particular shade of orange on his motorcycle that's coming. He's waving it at me right now. So is that worship? Is that love? Kind of, yeah. We use the words that way. But when we're talking about worshiping God and loving our neighbor or loving God, those particular examples seem sort of small. Is there a difference between love and worship? Sure. Love is, again, part of the problem is, let's say in English we use one word love for, as C.S. Lewis mentioned, for four words in Greek, at least four words, storge, phileo, agape, and eros, all of which means different things. And within English, the lexical range includes all of them and even includes more, like Rick's love of his little Samsung gadget he showed me this morning. But Rick loves his dog much more than he loves his Samsung gadget. So he says, yeah, even if I said he should put the little Samsung gadget on his dog. But that's the difficulty. Was Christ's sacrifice an act of worship from God to man? Part of how theological ecosystems work is that there are rules. And so having God worship man would sort of be a violation of those rules. So we wouldn't use language in that way. But Christ's sacrifice as an act of love from God to man is certainly a very common thing in many Christian theological traditions. And so just sort of using syllogisms and swapping the words in and out won't necessarily serve the purpose of illuminating rather than confusing. And sometimes you can gain a degree of illumination by confusion. That's sort of a shamanic approach to looking for insight. But in this case, I don't think it, I don't think the last statement serves. So, PK Josh, hi Paul. I've been finding a lot of wisdom in vervechies meaning being mode versus having mode. Rick and I were playing too long beforehand. I didn't set up everything like I wanted it here. There we go. It reminds me of a Christian goal of being in the world versus, of being in the world versus being of the world. In your opinion, do we need some sort of dog, dogma, non-negotiables as Christians? I can't judge righteous judgment. If I judge, if I judge, lest you not be judged, how do I approach that paradox? It sort of gets into some of the similar things I was noting before. You can do a lot of playing with words. Obviously any religious ecosystem has certain dogmatic non-negotiables because without those non-negotiables, the ecosystem falls apart. And I, you know, vervechies having mode versus being mode, this has, both Christians and non-Christians have been playing with this kind of language for quite a while. And the distinction I think is implicit in a lot of, in a lot of other contexts. So, judge, judge righteous judgment. Yeah, if I judge, not lest you be judged. A lot of that too has to do with judgment versus discernment. And sometimes we gain insight by swapping words in and out, as I just illustrated before. Sometimes that can confuse, sometimes it can gain insight. For example, if you look at what I've been doing in the Gospel of John and my rough drafts, most of the English translate, most of the contemporary English translations of the Gospel of John will render pistis or pisteo as believe, which is a perfectly legitimate translation. And I'll often swap it in for trust. And part of the reason I'm doing that is it puts it over into the three Ps, the perspectival, the participatory, and the procedural more than the propositional. And with judgment, that's a similar thing. So, we always struggle to use words to relay a world more complex than we can really apprehend fully. So, we play with words to try to gain illumination. And that's part of the game. Andromeda, hi Paul, thank you for sharing your story of your son's birth at Clinica Abreu in the Dominican Republic, brought back a lot of memories. How long were you in the DR? And from what year to what year? I went to the DR in 1990 as an intern and I left the DR in January of 97. So, that's when we were there. I lived in, no, I lived in the capital, Santo Domingo. My first year I was there and then about a few months into the second year and then I moved to Barona, which is a city in the southwest area of the country and I lived there for the remainder of my time in the Dominican Republic. A lot of those countries have sort of one big main city. So, the Dominican Republic has Santo Domingo, which is the capital of the country. Santo Domingo, which is the capital. Santiago, which is up north, a beautiful city. We had missionary friends who lived there too, so we'd visit there sometimes. But I very much enjoyed living in a much smaller city in the Dominican Republic like Barona. You just get closer to everything and a little bit further from the expats. We had a little expat group of friends in Barona, which was, you become friends in sort of a context like that and they really become lifelong friends. So, yeah, a lot of fond memories from the DR. Oscar. I always found the hard and fast dichotomizing between self-will and God's will to be utterly nonsensical. And I still have absolutely no idea what people mean when they say, to quote Lewis, there are only two kinds of people in the end, those who say to God, thy will be done and those who say to God, thy will be done. And those to whom God says, thy will be done. For this statement to make sense, one must believe that God is something ultimately external to oneself and that my own essential nature is utterly corrupt. If our will is anything essential to us, then it must be proper to our nature. And unless one wants to claim that our nature is essentially corrupted, then God's will and our will must ultimately coincide. A free will is a will free to choose God. If our will and God's will are something in competition, then God is reduced to a being among beings and thus not the God of Christianity. If I will to obey God's will, it is still me willing to do so. And so it is still, I will. What do Christians mean then exactly, practically and metaphysically, when they see self will and God's will as an absolute either or? Well, first of all, again, a lot of what I've said to the previous questions is true here. We're using language to try to get a handle on a reality that is too large and too complex for us to fully discern or comprehend. So in that case, we should have a little bit of, we should have a little bit of charity with respect to language like this, that even though you can challenge and push this language, beyond what it can bear, there might still be utility to the language. I think one of the classic Christian statements about this comes in Romans chapter seven, where the apostle Paul says, "'The good that I would do, I don't do, "'and the evil that I don't want to do, I do.'" I don't think this gets into the whole God number one, God number two thing, because even, that the problem that you point to is even deeper than you recognize here, and it's implicit already in your answer with the first one letter words you begin the question with. I always found the hard and fast dichotomy between self will and God's will to be utterly nonsensical. What are you? You in some ways are a construct that is a center of volition, a center of apprehension, and a meaningful subject that acts within an arena. Now, after spending a week beating up on old poor Sam Harris about no selfness, perhaps I should be fair enough to say that the matter of our self is in some ways more fungible than Western individualism would like to imagine. I can't help but live in a world where I understand myself as a distinct agent from a myriad of agencies that are in fact working through me. So when I believe that the best form of government is one where myself and all of my fellow citizens go down to a local public school and cast votes for someone rather than another, is that me speaking or is that the spirit of American democracy speaking through me? And in some ways that illustration relates to your question of my will and God's will. Does Paul VanderKlay believe in Western democracy or does the spirit of Western democracy colonize and possess this individual? In that sense, I disappear. And it's just the spirit of Western democracy that is acting through me. And someone may very well point out that many, many Christians throughout history have been monarchical and ideas of democracy aren't easily found in the Bible at all to give rationality rules his due about Western civilization and democracy. Many have noted that a lot of democratic ideas come up through the Protestant Reformation and some deep conceptualizations of the Reformation really contribute to democracy. And for a period in Europe when, until really fairly recently, historically speaking, where most European countries were effectively ruled by monarchs, this transition has been quite recent. So the problem that you point to is in some ways deeper than even the question of self-will versus God's will. In my argument with John Vervecky a few years ago, I basically made the assertion that Pascal's observation about a spirit of geometry and a spirit of finesse is sort of a way in which we approach the world in terms of things very large and complex. When I sit down and have a conversation with Rick, I have a conversation with all sorts of spirits that are speaking through him. He looks down at himself. There's a spirit of motorcycle loving. I won't talk in public about just how fast he drives on Northern California roads and why he wants a radar detector for his brand new bike that certainly hasn't come yet. Rick's like, I'm telling the pastor way too many of my secrets. Isn't the pastor supposed to keep my secrets private? Now he's revealing them on YouTube. So what am I talking to when I talk to Rick? Well, Rick puts up his hand so I don't know. And what is Rick talking to when he talks to me? So you're right in exploring the essence of a human being. And will because of how we operate in this world at a very common sense level is a pretty good indicator of how to manage individual human beings. If I somehow have a medical emergency while I'm driving and my car careens into a group of Canadian protesters, the court is going to look at the circumstance and either perform an autopsy because I'm killed or the paramedics come and they find me passed out in the front seat and they hook up my heart to a machine and they say, oh, Paul VanderKlay had a cardiac arrest while he was driving by these Canadian protesters. And because he had a cardiac arrest, he plowed into and hurt some of these Canadian protesters. Well, then when I wake up, I'm gonna feel horrible about it and my license is gonna be taken away, but I will likely not be put in prison. If in fact, however, I drive my car into a bunch of Canadian protesters and someone goes to my Facebook page and finds all sorts of hateful venomous postings about how much I hate Canadian protesters, well, then suddenly when they pull me out of my wrecked car in the middle of this Canadian protest and they go to my Facebook page, they'll say it was Paul's will to harm Canadian protesters. That will is significant in terms of our relationships with one another. I don't think that, so with getting back to my God number one and God number two, one of the things that it seems to me historically people have wrestled with is how to essentialize an arena. You get that in Greek mythology with these strange gods called the fates. And I think in some ways the fates are an attempt to personalize the metadivine realm that held sway over the other Greek gods. Oh, someone gave a super chat. Oh, Rick did some art here. Let's see how we'll go with this camera. There we go. Pray for my gains. Work hard there, ABC. Get those gains. What a crazy world I live in. The super chats, the super chats come on yellow lined paper. Now there's a super chat. Oh, my God. And you find that all throughout the Greek mythology, Nike for example, victory. What kind of a God is victory? Well, by definition, Nike always wins sort of. And so Greek mythology clearly is a way to try to come to terms with the agentic aspect of a race. The agentic realities. And I think in all likelihood, the proper mode of participation towards, gosh, I talk like this, I think I'm Mark and Manuel here. They're probably gonna start complaining about me now. The proper way to approach these agentic realities I think is the spirit of finesse. And it's for that reason that when I approach Rick, I always approach Rick with like the spirit of finesse. And I deal with Rick in a very different way than I deal with the lens cap of my nice Sigma 16 lens. That's giving us this really nice sharp focus right here. Come on, you can do it. You can do it. There we go. Well, this is gonna be one of the worst question and answers of all time. He's ducking questions. He's being obtuse. He's putting stuff in front of himself. This one $5 super chat gets not one, not two, but three appearances on the channel. He's distracting himself so bad. All of this to say that Christianity obviously following Judaism has a fully integrated tradition of personalizing the arenic. It makes the Greek attempts look pretty kludgy. Once you personalize the arenic, I fully expect Jacob and Sam the Unitarian and Muslims to say, how can God have one will when he has three persons? And then of course you can point back to Trinitarian theology, which of course treated this in terms of God having a unitary will and Jesus pointing that out in the gospel of John, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So that's how we conceptualize God's will. And it gets even more complex because there's the, there's sort of the divine passive that you'll find used in the Bible where in some ways if something happened, it was God's will that's built into the little speech of Joseph given to his brothers with respect to them selling him into slavery. So one might say that flying in an airplane is resisting God's will at a certain level because you're defying the law of gravity. But obviously that's a deeply cross pressured statement to imagine that flying in an airplane is a violation of God's will. Well, you might say it's a violation of natural law. Say, oh, but natural law also has air currents and lift from wings and propulsion. And so flying in an airplane is not a violation of natural law or physical laws. So all of this language is an attempt to get at the idea that our proper duty is to live in alignment and in agreement and in harmony. And there's a lot of different other words I could throw at it with the will of God. And the idea that living against the will of God leads to destruction. I just went to the doctor this morning and I haven't watched my diet very well for the last few months and haven't been exercising. And so I knew this was gonna happen. You get to the doctor's office and a few too many pounds overweight. My blood pressure is just a little bit too high and it's like, oh, accountability really sucks because what I knew the whole time I should be doing over the last few months, do I really need that little ice cream treat at night when I'm sitting on my butt watching TV? Do I really need to do that? No. Do I like doing it? Yeah. Am I gonna pay a price for it? Yeah. Am I avoiding the price to pay for it? Yeah. Am I going to avoid the price to be paid for it? No. And so right there, there's a little piece inside of me that really loves to sit down. Here's a free product placement with that Tillamook ice cream. Boy, that Tillamook ice cream is good. And I love to get a couple of waffles, put that ice cream between the waffles. And boy, it's just a few minutes of real pleasure eating that ice cream. Rick's on a diet, so I'm just, he knows what I'm talking about too. But am I violating God's law? Am I taking care of my body? Do I know that a man of my age should be a little bit careful with how much weight he carries? Yeah. So do I want to eat that ice cream? Yes. So there we have it. Now, am I going to burn in hell for eating that ice cream? Probably not, but I might get to my eternal judgment and reward a little sooner if I don't put a few breaks on that. So as with many of the questions I've addressed before, you can play games with words and you can make words meaningless and you can push concepts and ideas beyond what they can bear. But at the same time, language is a real gift to us. And the ability to conceptualize is a real gift to us. And the gift should be used to bring us into alignment, into love and into worship with our creator. Because yeah, even though I think ice cream is a gift from God, it's a gift I very much enjoy. My love of ice cream should probably not be out of order with my love of God expressed in taking care of this other gift that he's given me, which is this body. So there's my answer to that. Anyone in the room want to confess love for disordered loves that you might have? Or any comments on any of these three questions about language? I think the word person is sadly abused by Trinitarians. Well, there we go. And so out of character for you, Jacob, to complain about Trinitarian theology here in the Discord. Jesus said there was a first commandment which he thought was important. I just thought I should remind you of what Jesus said. I just thought I should remind you of what Jesus said. I just thought I should remind you of what Jesus said. Thank you, Jacob. I appreciate you looking out for my obedience to the will of God. All right, Elena, what is the difference between John Verbecky's mindfulness versus Sam Harris's mindlessness? You know, I would love, here's, okay, let me back this up. So a number of vocal people in our little community, whenever I talk about Sam Harris, will complain to me that I'm theoretically will complain to me that I'm theoretically holding Sam Harris's feet to the fire and giving John Verbecky a pass. I would love to see a meaningful conversation between John Verbecky and Sam Harris. I think that could be interesting. I would also, this is where language is funny, I would also hate to see that because given what I've seen from Sam Harris in terms of his conversations with Jordan Peterson and Bret Weinstein, I don't know that it would illuminate anything. So at the time that Sam Harris and Bret Weinstein talked, they were on pretty good terms. They seem to have had a falling out of some sort more recently over COVID, which again, I think, I should probably just shoot David Fuller a note and see if, I'd love to talk to somebody about sort of the ungluing of the IDW. Peterson seems to have been able to maintain relationships with a lot of the people that he spoke with earlier, but it's interesting how a number of the others have sort of fallen out with each other. Oh, we have another super chat. Oh, a little love from Australia. Austria, oh, thank you, thank you. That's where KTMs are made. The bike that Rick loves, which still hasn't come. He ordered the thing months ago and every Sunday morning when we get in and he's got a picture, you got a YouTube of someone driving motorcycles and it's just been all motorcycles all the time. He wants to get me to ride with him, but now I'm distracted, Ricky. Oh yeah, yeah. So that conversation between Sam Harris and Bret Weinstein is worthwhile listening to in terms of asking yourself, about the capacity for Sam Harris to have a satisfying conversation on topics that he enjoys. As is the case of many of you who have left comments on my video about him, I find Sam Harris both sometimes interesting but also enormously frustrating. Now, I'm sure I frustrate lots of people, not as many people Sam Harris because far few people know who I am. But part of all of this stuff that goes on is the other three Ps as well. So when Strahd first pointed me to John Vervecky's stuff, if you go back and I haven't taken any videos down, so you can go back and listen to me say stuff that I'd probably want to delete later on, but I was probably not sufficiently generous with John Vervecky or perhaps I'm overly generous with John Vervecky and perhaps my own affection for him as someone that I like and converse with has clouded my objectivity with respect to his systems. That could be. And perhaps his affection towards me has clouded the sharpness of his critique against my systems. If you listen to John talk about how he engages and what his project is though, you will notice that he intentionally tries not to jump on all sorts of gotchas or differences and that sort of thing. And those of you who, I smell something Rick. That smells like smoke. Yeah, you wanna go see if anybody's burning the church down? It's probably a homeless person lit a fire out there. Or Rick just wants, I'm gonna walk away too because I'd like not to burn in here. Hang on. Hey, buddy. Hey, buddy. I just felt some smoke. Oh, did you heat it up or you just brought it here? Oh, okay. But it's too close to the door though. All right. I was smelling something, I was wondering. I just didn't want to burn down in the church. I should move over here though, huh? Yeah, you're all right. Now at least I know what it is. Okay. I'm not gonna burn that thing up. All right. We figured it out, homeless guy right by my door has this little package of steaks that he got from the supermarket. And he's had a lighter and he's heating up the little steaks. Probably, I think on this plastic thing it started to smell it. And I thought, yeah. So we're not, Rick and I are under no mortal danger. No one needs to call the Sacramento Fire Department. We're okay. Where was I? Yeah. Short story, I don't know. I'd love to see John Vervecki talk to Sam Harris. I don't know if it would get anywhere. And so many conversations on the internet are like that. And I, part of what I've wanted for my channel and the conversations around my channel is for us to have more productive conversations. And I actually had some back and forth with rationality rules as to whether or not to do a conversation. I told him I'd be happy to. He hasn't expressed enough interest for us to put anything on a calendar. But I saw Jonathan Peugeot's attempts at conversations with Adam Frendit and rationality rules. And both of those seem to lead to end in frustration. And I certainly have had many frustrating conversations in my life. But I think having a sense of satisfaction is a helpful sign of the quality of a conversation. And I just don't know how, and this is amazing for Sam Harris because he does tons of podcasts and lots of people listen to them. And I've heard him engage in some conversations that seemed beneficial, but usually not about anything near his religion. He just seems so darn dogmatic. Which is an ironic thing to say about an atheist. Whereas John Vervecky, he's been fun to watch. And I think if you look at the kinds of things that John was talking about three years ago, he was a little bit late to this corner party, came after Jonathan and I. His recent interest in neoplatonism, I see John Vervecky as someone who is willing to publicly move and change and agree. And that makes for an interesting person to follow and to watch. And Sam Harris just seems mired in dogmatism. Now, someone might say, that's me too. And I've read plenty of comments on my channel. Well, if only Paul could let go of X, then he would Y. And Jacob might say, if only Paul would let go of his dogmatic embrace of the Trinity, then he could, well, I'm not exactly where I would go then, Jacob. I guess I'd have to, would I join Sam and Jacob in the company of the heretics? But one person's heretic is another person's loyalist. So yeah, I'd love to see a closer examination of John's ideas versus Sam's ideas. But I think I saw enough of that between, in some ways, Bret Weinstein and Sam Harris, because Sam Harris seems to be basically the kind of naturalist that C.S. Lewis writes about in miracles. It's locked in. So, okay, that's what you believe. So, yeah. Pastor Paul, have you ever gone over any of David Foster Wallace's work? I've watched his, that little video, What is Water? And everybody's seen that thing. It's a good address. When I was talking to Dr. Jim, he, I guess it didn't come up. Did it come up in the chat online or did it come up in emails afterwards? I don't know. He recommended David Foster Wallace. I do, in fact, now have a copy of Infinite Jest and I've started listening to the audio book, but it's a big project. There's a, I've seen some other things of him and around him and he's an interesting figure and he very much did get into the meaning crisis in the 90s. I think that's true, but I haven't really done a deep dive into him. Can you look at 1 Peter 3, 13 to 17 and 21? I'm especially curious to hear more about the word translated conscience in verse 16. That looks like I'm gonna have to open up the, open up the real. Part of, if you're trying to understand something in the Bible, context is really very important because if you want to get some understanding of what's on the author's mind, look at the context. So 1 Peter 3, then verse 8. Finally, all of you be like-minded, be sympathetic, love one another, be compassionate and humble. Do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult. On the contrary, repay evil with blessing because to this, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a blessing. For whoever would love life and see good days must keep their tongue from evil and their lips from deceitful speech. They must turn from evil and do good. They must seek peace and pursue it. For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous and his ears are attentive to their prayers, but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil. Who is going to harm you if you are eager to do good? But even if you should suffer for what is right, you are blessed. Do not fear their threats, do not be frightened, but in your heart, revere Christ as Lord. Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give a reason for the hope you have, but do this with gentleness and respect. Keep a clear conscience so that those who speak maliciously against your good behavior in Christ may be ashamed of their slander. For it is better if it is God's will to suffer for doing good than for doing evil. For Christ also suffered once for sins, righteous for the unrighteous to bring you to God. He was put to death in the body, but made alive in the spirit. After being made alive, he went and made proclamation to the imprisoned spirits, to those who were disobedient long ago when God waited patiently in the days of Noah while the ark was being built. In it, only a few people, eight in all, were saved through water. And this water symbolizes baptism and that now saves you also. Not the removal of dirt from your bodies, but the pledge of a clear conscience towards God. It saves you by the resurrection of Jesus Christ who has gone into heaven and is at God's right hand with angels, authorities, and powers in submission to him. Great, great passage. All right, what's the question? Does Peter's epistle here line up with Jordan Peterson's rules to keep a clean room, a clean conscience to listen to Jiminy Cricket to tell the truth or at least not lie and pursue what is meaningful? Yeah. If I said do good, that sort of lines up with it too. So, what's at the heart of Peter's admonition here? The book of 1 Peter says a lot about persecution. In the very early church, there was a lot of tension between Christians and both the dominant Greco-Roman culture around them and between Christians and the Jewish communities that did not believe that Jesus rose from the dead or that he was the promised Messiah sent to save his people. And let's be fair to both of these critics. First to the Jews, belief that Jesus rose from the dead and I think the total renovation of the conceptualization of the kind of deliverance that Jesus had of the kind of deliverance that the God of Israel would bring to his people is a really big thing. So, I can understand why other Jews either in Jerusalem, Galilee or the diaspora saw Christians as dangerous heretics and so went after them. Pagan Romans, I think, had an even tougher time trying to understand what these Christians were about. In some places, they, well, aren't they Jews who, these Jews are talking about this Jesus, that's weird. But there's a pretty significant disconnect from them too. And so, for the first few hundred years of Christianity and persecutions have endured, I've been getting letters from someone who'd like to come on the channel and talk about persecution of Christians in India. Christians were having a hard time for their faith. Now, this can scale. If you're a Christian in a family full of atheists, you might have a hard time. If you're an atheist in a family full of Christians, you might have a hard time. People don't always do well with difference. So, what Peter is saying is that, hey, look, if you're being, if you're getting a hard time from people because you're being an evildoer, now when he's talking about evil, he's talking about sort of common sense evil. You know, if you're having sex with your neighbor's wife, if you're swindling money from your boss, if you're doing all sorts of things that just about everyone around you would say, if you're lying or cheating or stealing, everyone around you is gonna say, that's reprehensible behavior, this person is not virtuous. If you get mistreatment from your neighbors for that, you have it coming. And so, what Peter is saying, and again, if you go back and you read, that's why it's important to start, this is really sort of getting towards the conclusion of the letter. Finally, all of you, be like-minded, be sympathetic, love one another, be compassionate and humble, do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult, on the contrary, repay evil with blessings. If Christians did this more, they would have an easier time with their adversaries of other religions or of atheism. That, Peter is saying, is the way Christians should behave, turn the other cheek, love your neighbor all the way up to and including your enemy. And if you do this, and if you continue to be persecuted, in big ways and small ways, while the people around you, by the people around you, then be of good cheer, because there is a God in heaven who sees what you are doing and you will be vindicated on the last day. And it is this kind of message, a belief in the resurrection, a belief in the justice of God that gives Christians hope when they suffer wrongly. And so Peter is simply saying, do that. Now, when Jordan Peterson, just recently, when I put together my substack this week, I found a really nice video with over 2 million views, which is sort of a nice treatment of Jordan Peterson dealing with his clean your room type meme. And that comes out of the fact that Jordan was a clinical psychologist and he worked with a number of patients who were having difficulty managing the complexity of their lives. And so Jordan Peterson basically said, hey, look, the world is really big. This happens in the, in the Rav Aron conversation that I started to treat a little bit. I wanna come back to that. I wanna go back to the Joe Rogan thing too. I hope I don't distract myself beyond these things. But basically, Peterson was saying, look, these big religious questions are really big and really hard to wrestle with. And he's talking to people that need help right now. And so he's saying, basically, if you want to do better, start picking up small goals. So try picking up your room and bringing order to that. Try telling the truth or at least not lying. Now, Jordan Peterson's admonitions are by no means unique to Christianity. You can find similar admonitions in Judaism and the classical pagan world. Scholars have noted that many of the virtue lists that you can find in the Pauline epistles are very similar to many of the virtue lists that you can find in Greco-Roman world. Christianity and Stoicism have a fair degree of overlap with respect to ideas of virtue. And most people don't like to have their things stolen. Most people don't like to receive poor treatment. And so these things are fairly generic. So there certainly is some commonality between that section in Peter and what Jordan Peterson is recommending of people. But we would sort of expect to find that. It's helpful to note that there in 1 Peter, the specific context is, as Jesus said, it's the law of reciprocity is pretty common. So if someone treats you nicely, it's pretty common to treat them nicely back. And most of us, when we look at someone who is, let's say misusing a kind parent or grandparent, we look ill on that because we think they owe that parent or grandparent a debt of kindness because that parent or grandparent brought them into this world and treated them kindly. Peter is saying, even when people treat you poorly, treat them well. Now that sort of rubs against the law of reciprocity a bit because you might say, now, wait a minute. If you always return good for evil, then where's the natural consequence against evil that is built into the law of reciprocity? And fair enough. It is not the case if you read Jesus carefully that Jesus never said an unkind, uncritical thing. In our men's Bible study this week, we just read through Matthew 23, seven woes. They're pretty harsh against Jesus' critics. So all of this requires a high degree of nuance, especially in terms of application. But Peter's admonition is, out there in the world, Christians are a tiny minority that doesn't care that believe something that sounds absolutely crazy to the majority of people around them, Jew and Gentile alike. When you're being poorly treated, don't get bitter and be generous and kind and forgiving. That's good advice. And I think that advice and early Christian's ability to practice that had a great deal to do with the expansion of the faith in the early years. Is it connected to, listen to your conscience? Sure. But Jordan Peterson's admonitions are very common to the standard virtue that we've seen throughout history. So Chad the alcoholic, who's a bigger quack? Dark wing duck, Daffy duck, Donald duck, or Emilio Estevez from the Mighty Ducks. Also, what's duck sauce made of? Can it be loved and worshiped? What does it tell us? Thanks Paul. There you go, Chad the alcoholic. Dear Paul, both Sam Harris and John Vervecky are very open to practices that today are usually associated with Eastern religion and philosophy. The other route towards faith that has been quite regularly debated in this corner of the internet has been the use of psychedelics. What might be the similarities between Eastern practices and psychedelics and why do they both ultimately lead to Christ in the end nonetheless? A lot of these definitions have a degree of contextuality about them. Part of the reason we associate things like meditation and really what are a lot of monastic ascetic practices that in fact have been in the West for a very long time is that here in the United States and in Northwestern Europe, the UK, the Netherlands, Germany, we are all in deeply Protestant land. Roman Catholics have, when John Vervecky talks about Lectio Divina, he's talking about something that has been common practice in the Roman Catholic Church for a very long time. So on one hand, the reintroduction of monastic practices into the conversation isn't something alien to Christianity. It's been a little outside of Protestantism, but when I was in college, I read Richard Foster's Celebration of Disciplines. If you read Dallas Willard's, the biography of Dallas Willard, you'll note that Richard Foster and Dallas Willard go way back. And so not too long on the heels of Richard Foster's work was the work of Dallas Willard, which, Renovare, which attempted to bring a lot of these practices into Protestant Christianity as well. And so when I was in college, these were, Don Postmo was a CRC pastor from Ann Arbor, Michigan, wrote a book put out by CRC Press that was even bringing some of these practices and ideas of classical Christian meditation, Lectio Divina, quietness, stillness, into even the Christian Reformed Church back in the 1980s. So when it comes to practice, these things have been around in Christianity all the way from the beginning. And Protestants who want to promote these kinds of practices among Protestants will point to passages in the Gospels where Jesus goes up onto a mountain to pray all night long. Oh, we've got another super chat. Mason Bradford, thank you Mason. There's a question posted, okay. If someone could copy and paste that into the, what's that? Oh, it's already done, cool. Now I've said all of that about Christian practice. There are lots in the, all the way back to the British conquest of India. Ideas and practices, so when the British went to India and via the East India Company, it's a funny thing that happens when you conquer an ancient civilization. Suddenly you discover, oh my goodness, there's an entirely new way of approaching life that we've been completely ignorant of. And so since the 19th century, there's been a lot of fascination, kind of a drip, drip, drip, drip, drip of ideas from India, from China, from Japan, from the Islamic world. And now with higher levels of immigration, many of those ideas have been coming into lands that had been predominantly Protestant. That we've been completely ignorant of. Thanks Rick. Right now you'll see yoga studios in a place like Sacramento all over the place. If I drive down to Stockton and use the crossover from I-5 to 99, there's a big Buddhist church right next to the highway. And every time I see that, I sort of snicker because church, you've just appropriated the Christian word to try to explain what y'all are doing in that building. And probably what a lot of them were doing in that building wasn't terribly related historically to Buddhism. I've mentioned a number of times in my Sam Harris commentaries this week that you will certainly get a good whiff of Buddhism listening to Sam Harris. Now many who know Eastern Buddhism will complain that this Western Buddhism is a cheap facsimile and a poor imitation of what's out East. It's something that's been divorced from its roots. My shallow understanding of the family, you might call it Brahmanism, Hinduism, Buddhism, this family of religions that are from the East. And again, once even as I define them as religions, I'm doing so in a very secular Protestant way. My understanding of these religions is mostly built from a smattering of some reading from them, reading sort of classical works like Houston Smith's The World Religion, reading various biographies of the Buddha, et cetera, et cetera. I by no means am an expert on these religions. What it seems is that many of the one element of these religious traditions tends to emphasize the illusory nature of reality, what we call reality, this manifest image. That seems to be what some people have when they take psychedelics, that the world looks differently. Everything is one. I mean, I've watched plenty of those videos and discussions. Everything is one. Okay, that's not an idea that's completely new to Western philosophical and theological traditions. You can hear Bishop Merrin talk about the continual question of the one versus the many. When I had way back early on the channel, I had Dr. Jim Frazi from our local meetup on to talk about psychedelics. One of the things that sort of puzzles me is that all of these Western materialists who have a pretty materialistic conceptualization of what drugs do and how consciousness is dependent upon the functions of our brain know full well the types of areas in our brain that psychedelic drugs mess with. It's sort of like saying, wow, my hand has this magical property to make the world go dark, but I can still hear myself. Well, yeah, that's what happens when I cover my eyes. To some degree or another, the kinds of experiences that people have when they take psychedelic drugs are the kinds of experiences that you would expect them to have. Similarly, the kinds I remember there was when I was serving on the board of home missions in the CRC, there's a very interesting guy I became friends with. I'd love to reconnect with him. He's a super fun guy. He's a brilliant man. He was a biochemist, yet he was one of these guys that had all kinds of advanced degrees and was also a businessman and was just super smart and super successful. And I just got talking to him about drugs one day and he could just go through for me all these classes of drugs and exactly what they do in the brain and exactly what they do in the body. And I mean, he just knew all this stuff. So on one hand, psychedelics aren't that mysterious in terms of how, especially if you're a materialist, how they disrupt the brain. Now, what tends to be mysterious is how people interpret them and how they play out in people's lives. Part of my video I wanna keep making, churches and religious traditions, and this is a point that John Vervecky has made many times. He put me in contact with Rick Reilly, he put me in contact with Rick Repetti, so I'll be having a conversation with him at some point too. Religious traditions of many sorts have been disrupting the manifest image, sort of this pattern of human cognition that we assume is common to all of us. We've been disrupting these things by psycho technologies for a very long time. And interpretations are the pictures of reality that we attempt to derive, some of which basically say, just listen, I grew up listening to Kansas, dust in the wind, all we are is dust in the wind. Kansas of course had its psychedelic Eastern spirituality phase until they finally went into their Christian phase. And some of their better music comes before the Christian phase. What does that have to say? So, I lost my place here. I don't know, so could it be that certain practices have led to interpretations that parallel, interpretations that people get when they take these drugs that in fact, just like let's say, I can take a pill to slow my heart or I can practice deep breathing and quieting myself and that will also slow my heart or drugs, I can take drugs to make my heartbeat faster or I can run down the street, that'll make my heartbeat faster. So, part of why this is so mysterious to us is again, this issue of Cartesian dualism and trying to wrap our minds around mind, body, unity. A lot of the fascination with Eastern practices and spiritualities is because they're novel and because they have a certain degree of cache in the culture. When Richard Gere or Hollywood celebrities fall all over the Dalai Lama, oh, that's what it's cool to do. And so, everybody else does it. You can find a sermon on my old blog about why put boot in, should you put a boot in the bathroom? In one of the things that's funny to watch here in Northern California is that you find people using Eastern statuary for all sorts of things. And I find the most avaricious Western consumers falling all over the Buddha. And even a cursory reading says, I thought the desire for acquisition is counterproductive to the seeking of your happiness through detachment. I don't need to know a lot about Buddhism. I can learn from it, from reading Wikipedia to say, if you're spending your life looking for a better house or a better car or a better job or better sex, you're not really in alignment with at least the fourfold path and the eight noble truths. So, but hey, people are like that. So, now ultimately lead to Christ in the end, nonetheless, depends what you mean by that. I know lots of people who are pursuing that and they don't seem to be any getting any closer to Christianity. And I know other people that pursued it and have wound up as Christians, like, you know, the band Kansas. So, yeah. Are Mormons Christian? Or are they're at least as Christian as Sam Harris? That's where, you know, these conversations get funny. My take on Mormonism is that, Rick's friend, are you shaking your head? No, said, Paul, don't go here. Is that what you're saying? I got Rick in a little screen, but I can't hear him and he won't talk. A lot of Mormonism seems very much connected with a lot of the Christian ideas that were floating around upstate New York and the time that Joseph Smith arose to prominence. A lot of Christian ideas arose in Jerusalem and Judea with some of the ideas that were floating around that place. Some of Paul's ideas were floating around the broader Roman Empire. Now, part of how Christians doctrinally try to define themselves are by these creeds and confessions. If you're a faithful member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, certain elements of the Apostles' Creed won't fit very well. The Mormon Church has a rather large and complex narrative about, that differs, I think, pretty significantly from, I think, the small, low, Orthodox Christian tradition with respect to the divinity of Christ, the nature of God, et cetera, et cetera. I think that's a little higher definition answer to hopefully illuminate the question. The answer to the question depends on what do you mean by Christian? So rationality rules is a little upset that Jordan Peterson says that Sam Harris, and by extension, Stephen Woodford, are somehow within Christendom. I think Jordan Peterson's right. But all of that depends on, as we started talking about initially, the nature of language and what do you mean by a Christian. I regularly have people say, well, John Vervecki mentioned it, some people say, John Vervecki, he's a better Christian than Christians. Okay, well, what on earth do they mean by that language? Should John Vervecki be insulted by that? No, he's a reasonable, generous man, and he says, even though I don't identify as a Christian per se, at least not like Paul Van Der Kley and Jonathan Peugeot do, when you tell me that, you're trying to pay me a compliment, so thank you. I had a little go-round with someone over the question, when Christians tell atheists that they're going to pray for them, should atheists be offended? I think if a Muslim or if a Buddhist, if a Buddhist or a Sikh, and I've had more of this with Sikh, if a Sikh tells me that they're going to pray for me, or that, let's say, someone from another tradition said that they're thankful for my work, and so that they have made a sacrifice on my behalf in their temple, I can get all upset at the fact that I may not believe in their religious tradition, or I can understand the gesture as something generous towards me, and simply thank them, instead of stumbling all over ourselves. And if, to bring in back the 1 Peter section, if we should be generous and kind and loving towards those who persecute us, how much easier should it be to be generous and kind and loving with those who disagree with us about a variety of things? Dasein, Robert, do you know Sam Harris's mother was a Hollywood producer? Yes, I do. She created Golden Girls and a few other well-known shows. I find a lot of people are surprised to learn this. No, it's true. The world is a pretty amazing place. Oh! Is that one cent? $10? Oh, $10. Well, thank you. How are you? Volvo Dynia. Thank you very much. All right. Yeah. You know, again, I, so Jordan did his conversation with Sam. I was really excited to hear it because of what Jordan had said at the Cambridge Union about how he was less combative with Sam, and that made it a lot better conversation. He felt he understood Sam better. And I think that's true of that conversation. I don't know that it was as entertaining as some of his earlier ones, at least for the goals I wanted to get out of it. But I, so then I listened to Sam Harris and I get frustrated and then I mocked him. And then Nate got all upset with me and people getting upset with me doesn't bother me. But then Nate said something like, well, Sam Harris is more Christian than Jordan Peterson. And I thought, well, that's interesting. Why would he say that? And that drove me to think more about this secular mysticism that Nate is, that not Nate, but that Sam Harris is selling through his app. So I found that more interesting. So I did more videos. So yeah, what will become of Sam Harris? I, there are many people that I would far rather talk to than Sam Harris, just because I think they, I don't, Sam doesn't, Sam's conversations with Jordan Peterson don't seem to go very far. And I think it's Sam's fault. It was Valentine's Day last week and it's not us. And it's not super big in the UK, heathens. What do you have against love, England? But I know it's super big in the United States. Yeah, the commercial industrial complex. It's like the, let's see, Christmas is number one. Halloween is number two. Valentine's Day might be number three in terms of ways that the American commercial, the American commercial universe has been able to take a Christian Holloway and turn it into a cash grab. I was given the extreme privilege of listening to some friends, a married couple, one from Britain and one from Malaysia and how they met their experience of being married and maneuvering marriage as Christians. This got me thinking, how did you meet your wife? Do you do things for Valentine's Day? What do you think of Valentine's Day? Many thanks. I met my wife at college. I met my wife at Calvin College and I saw her before she saw me. And I, in case you haven't noticed, well, memory is different for everyone, but there are certain kinds of things that I'm really good at remembering. Like if someone says something in a video, I can sort of remember what video it is and about how far it is in it. And especially if there's a transcript, I can go find that sucker. And when I'm making videos, I'll often just have a memory of something and I can pretty quickly find the video. So I saw the woman that would be my wife and I remembered what dorm she was in. I was a security guard for years on the campus. And so I, so one night I was going through dorms and she was in the, she was studying with a guy and I popped in and I did what I do. I made conversation, introduced myself because I was a security guard. Where they were, they didn't have to leave, but I was just going through checking. My wife actually had a bad, my wife had a bad, she didn't like security guards because part of our job was putting tickets on parked cars at Calvin college. A lot of people didn't like security guards for that reason, but hey, I'll tell you something. If we didn't enforce parking on Calvin's campus, it wouldn't have been very nice to live on. So we enforced parking and the tickets weren't that much money. But anyway, so we met that night and I remembered her and I remembered a bunch of things, but she forgot me. And then the next year she moved into same apartment building that I was living in. And of course I remembered her. And so this actually, my wife doesn't like this about me. I always had sort of a running list of women that I had seen and was attracted to and might be interested in and should sort of keep them all in my mind. And when opportunity availed myself to get them and get to know them a little better, I would. And after getting to know them a little better, either they kept my interest or they didn't. And so I would just kind of do that. Wasn't much of a dater. I was too cowardly for that. I could, at college it was very convenient to just get to know people without actually having to stick your neck out and ask them for a date where you could be all awkward and scared and everything. It was much easier to do simple things like, you know, you meet a girl and you get chatting with her and hopefully there's enough chemistry. And then being a security guard, I just basically walk around campus for hours at night. And so I would just, you know, I might say, hey, you wanna, I'm starting my shift at 10. Let's see, the 10 to two shift would be going through academic buildings, just checking, making sure doors were closed and checking through buildings, making sure everything was okay. So I'd say, hey, I'm going on my shift at 10. You wanna walk through empty, quiet buildings with me? And if there was enough interest on her part, she'd say, sure. And so a lot of my dating was walking through quiet, empty buildings on campus. And I found that to be really a nice way to date because going to a movie, you don't really get a chance to know the other person very well, but going on long walks where nobody else was around really gave a nice opportunity to have a lot of conversations. And when you're walking through these buildings where you're going to class or walking by professors' offices, et cetera, et cetera, you'd have plenty of little things to just pick up ideas of, you know, I had a class in that room once and the professor was good or the professor was bad and get the storytelling. And of course, falling in love is about, you know, mutual disclosure. So this was, these were my dating practices. And so my wife to this day still continues to complain that we never dated. And in fact, she would ask me out on dates because she wanted to go do things. And the cheap jerk that I was, I would just always take her to work with me. But one thing led to another. And eventually, eventually we got married and had five kids. And so we've been married for 34 years now. So did you do things for Valentine's Day? I always dread Valentine's Day for the basic reason that I'm not a terribly romantic guy, as is evident from my dating history. Now, one of my daughters has a boyfriend right now who is making all of us look bad. This dude, boy, he brings flowers to my daughter. He's a chef, he cooks her meals. One day, in fact, he got these beautiful flowers for her. So he walked to her job in the rain and stood outside and called her. And there he is standing in the rain, holding this beautiful bouquet of flowers. It's like, dude, you're making all the rest of us look bad. But he's a super nice young man and we'll see where that goes. But I'm just not that kind of guy to my poor wife's disappointment. So we usually, for Valentine's Day, we'll usually go out and have a dinner out or something. And so actually this Valentine's Day, one of the things that my wife and I did a lot of during the pandemic, because you couldn't do a lot of things, is we bought cars actually fairly early into the pandemic, new cars, because our cars were getting quite old and I'd sell them off to my kids and such. And so we'd just drive around Northern California. And so actually this Valentine's Day, we just made a big loop, drove up to Tahoe. And the Tahoe was gorgeous. The traffic wasn't that bad on Monday. And we just had a lovely day. And then on the way back, stopped at a, it wasn't a real nice restaurant, it was a decent restaurant. We sort of both know the kinds of things we like now after all of these years. And I knew that that would be a restaurant that she could get a bunch of comfort food that she'd enjoy. And so we had a lovely meal at that restaurant and we had a lovely day in the car together. So then in the car, we could talk about all sorts of things. And so in a lot of ways, it's a continuation of the idea that a lot of marital happiness is built on companionship and learning to communicate well and enjoy each other's company. So that's how we spent Valentine's Day. What do you think of Valentine's Day? I think I would probably have a different opinion of it if I were more of, if I were a Roman Catholic or Orthodox and had a better connection with the history of the church. And I think perhaps if I were embedded in a community that celebrated holy days in a better way, it would be more. American culture has tended to divinize romantic love. John Vervecky's comments about rom-coms in the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis series made me laugh. You can find a posting on my blog about from denial of death, shoot, Becker, the book that Peterson often talks about where basically what we've done in our culture is made the object of our romantic interest a God and no other human being can serve that way. And Americans regularly pay a heavy price for divinizing romantic love. And so I think that's a good point. I think that's a good point, that we pay a heavy price for divinizing romantic love. Romantic love is a wonderful thing. It's a powerful thing, but it is not God. And if you make your romantic partner your God, you will destroy your partner, you will destroy yourself, and you will destroy the love because human beings can't bear all of that weight, and the love for your first and the love for your spouse or your romantic partner should be a function of your love of God, not the other way around. Swag like Caillou. Hi, Paul. Oh, this is from the, this is the Super Chat. Hi, Paul, have you heard Robert Alter's translation? Do you think its approach is a good mix between the historical grammatical and the literary symbolic interpretation? Yeah, I use Robert Alter's translations fairly often. So when I was, yeah, Nate, I do catch your video sometime. Nate was casting some shade on my Romans class, and partly because I use, one of the things I do in my adult Sunday school class is try to give people a sense of the Bible that they hold in their hand. One of the elements of the Reformation was Protestant clergy should, as best they can, study the language, study the Bible in its original languages. That's part of the Renaissance back to the sources. I think if you're going to use Robert Alter's translation, you should pay very close attention to his introduction to the translation, because he does a nice job in sort of laying out why he does what he does. Translations that are done by committee are done by committee, and they look like they're done by committee, and there are strengths to them and weaknesses to them. So in my adult Sunday school class, I now incorporate four different English translations and three individual translations. So I use a translation from David Bentley Hart, I use the translation from N.T. Wright, and I use the translation or the paraphrase from Eugene Peterson. And it's a lot of fun to lay all these texts next to each other, because when you do so, things begin to emerge, somewhat about the text, but more so about the translator. So I enjoy Robert Alter's translation, but you should definitely read the introduction to understand what he's trying to do with it, because some elements of it are brilliant and some elements of it are weird or idiosyncratic, and that is almost always the case about a translation done by an individual. David Bentley Hart's translation included, N.T. Wright's translation included, certainly true of Eugene Peterson's paraphrase. What a translation by committee does is sort of smooth out the individual idiosyncrasies, and gives you much more of a generic translation. This business about speaking to ancient people through their writings, part of what the monarchical vision of modernity and our approach to these texts have done is disenchant our view of the past, and disenchant the voices of ancient texts. In my recent video where I pointed out the story from Don't Sleep, There Are Snakes, where the entire village sees the god across the river on the opposing beach, and the western missionary can't see the god, nor can that missionary's children, but all of the children of the village do see the god. What's going on there? When we read Plato, thousands of years later, there's a degree of anachronism which is unavoidable, but also distorting. So, yeah, does it fit well in Peugeot's, let's you Peugeot's book? I don't know. I would, again, read the introduction to Robert Alter's translation carefully. He's a terrific scholar, and he tells you exactly what he's doing in it. And there's some brilliance in it, but there's some idiosyncrasy in it as well. Hi, Paul. I think you have been deep diving into the French Revolution. I was, I should get back into it. Do you think Methodism may be unfair to single out, but the wider faithfulness in England, Scotland, and Wales prevent a similar breakdown? We are very mysterious to ourselves. And it seems to me that, it's just hard to know how ideas and cultures and events all lead up to themselves, which is why the work of historians never ends. It's the thesis, did the French Revolution happen because France managed to deny aspects of the French Revolution? France managed to deny aspects of the Protestant Reformation. They, of course, persecuted and kicked off, kicked out the Huguenots. Jansenism was eventually suppressed, and they had the French Revolution. And a certain brand of secularity, which is distinct from American secularity, continues today with interesting ramifications, and that spills into the history of Quebec and the Quiet Revolution. But then look at, let's say, Spain and Latin America, another approach as well. And look at Italy. Well, Italy was never as successful as France or Spain in terms of the colonial enterprise. Italy, of course, came to nationalism late, as did Germany, and so never really had a chance to, they missed the wave when it came to colonizations. So, Methodism, we're probably not paying enough attention to Methodism in the conversations in this little corner of the internet, because when you look at Methodism, it was very much a Reformation movement that emphasized practice and will. Now, 100 years ago in the Christian Reformed Church, you will find endless admonitions to resist the Methodism in broader American culture. Methodism was the great enemy, as were the Roman Catholics 100 years ago in the Christian Reformed Church. Aspects of Methodism are pretty clearly reactions to modernist appropriations of Calvinism, even though there's a deep modernity in Calvinism. So, there's a lot of these issues that we deal with and talk about get played out in Methodism in a very modern way. But Methodism was a huge movement in its day, but it doesn't have the power it once had. And I don't know if we're gonna see a revival of it or not. It's deeply wed to the Enlightenment as is, you see Calvinism comes before and Methodism comes after. So, it's a good thing. Roger Marshall, just listen to your conversation on Unbelievable. Do you think that any enduring dynamic form of Christianity will necessarily involve some kind of merger with the main three Christian traditions? Or are they going to continue to be in all or nothing competition with each other? Well, I think both and. What kinds of degrees of cross pollination or co-belligerence can we expect? I mentioned before Richard Foster, Renovare, Dallas Willard. I've often pointed out Richard Foster's book, Streams of Living Water. This is in some ways Richard Foster's attempt to get at C.S. Lewis's mere Christianity. And my channel, I think, and some of the communities around here, I think are expressing the understanding that in this globalized world, Christians are going to have to come to terms with their history. Roman Catholics persecuted Lutherans, persecuted Calvinists. Calvinists and Lutherans and Roman Catholics persecuted Anabaptists. Calvinists persecuted dissenters of different kinds, Quakers. They've done a lot of hurt, done a lot of hurting of each other. Orthodox and Catholic clearly haven't gotten along. Christ prays that his followers would be one. What does that look like? At the same time, anytime there's innovation and renovation, new things emerge. Look at renewal movements within the Catholic Church. I would expect that this wave of former Protestants coming into the Orthodox Church, as that goes through time, how will that change? How will the American Orthodox Church differ from the Russian Orthodox Church in Russia, the Greek Orthodox Church, Orthodox churches throughout the old world, just like the American Roman Catholic Church is very different from the Roman Catholic Church in Latin America, is different from the Roman Catholic Church in Spain or France or Italy. The Church is huge. Protestants in some ways have to continue to deal with atheism. I think, again, when I look at Sam Harris, not only is he Christian, he's a Protestant. As is Steven Woodford. Let's find ways to have better conversations about these things. And a little bit of belligerence might be helpful in terms of catalyzing conversations. A little bit of heat draws our interest. Let's have enough heat to have it interesting, but not too much heat that things boil over. Bruce Bruce, maybe we can chalk much of these distinctions and divisions across denominations or traditions as symptoms of the weaker brother. Yeah, that's an interesting theme in Paul's writing, where it's basically an admonition of those who feel confident in their position to be generous to those outside their position. And again, if you look at 1 Peter 3, if we can be generous towards our persecutors, maybe we should be generous towards our rivals as well. The $10 super chat. Volvo Dynea has been day trading. Is it true that the market cap of God Inc. would go up if Jesus would step down from CEO of God Inc.? Some are questioning if God is ever viable as a lifestyle brand. I have no idea how to answer that. It's clever though. Let's see, end of questions. Oh, who's sinned? Sam Harris or his parents? He was born blind. Matthias, Paul, in your first video of Peugeot-Verbecky from a few years ago, they talked about mindfulness meditation and silent prayer. I think the Zen self, our autobiographical narrative self, which Harris calls an illusion, is what Peugeot would call the garment of skin after the fall. And Moses having to undress, put off his shoes, to climb the mountain means to become naked, selfless, in order to receive what God has to tell him. Instead of Verbecky talking to Harris, John should talk to Jonathan and you about this. Any thoughts? Always happy to talk to those two guys. And that's where, to what degree is Sam Harris's, what's the relationship between Sam's Harris's there is no self to Christian mortification? They're different. But you can find parallels in selflessness, which is sometimes a good thing to deny ourselves, take up our cross and follow him, to love our neighbor as ourselves, to put others before us. So, yeah. See, this is where I go with Sam Harris, because I get so frustrated because he seems like such a, doesn't seem like a very helpful conversation partner to talk about his religious productions and promotions in contrast with other traditions. In other words, he can't play nice with other kids in the religious marketplace. Yeah, a lot of people, I mean, just the fact that Tammy Peterson is both talking rosary with Jonathan Peugeot and doing Sam Harris's, doing the Sam Harris Meditation app daily. That story is really important for those of us within the church to remember when we think about the kinds of conversations we're going to have with people inside and outside the church. I guess I should download Sam Harris's app and see what's going on. Part of my problem is as I confess to Nate Heil, I'm a little bit of a mocker sometimes. I see things and I just, the troll in me, is that a good troll or a bad troll? I don't know. Is it an integrated troll? Is my shadow troll integrated? I don't know. But maybe I'll have to download Sam's app. I know it'll give me more ideas, but how many more videos do I want to make about Sam Harris? I mean, I don't want to make a lot of videos about Sam Harris. There's so many other interesting people to talk about. So I don't know, I don't know. But Paul? Yeah? Nate was going to make a response video at some time and he has technical reasons and specifics and facts and history and all that stuff that I don't have of why you're getting aspects of your criticism of Sam Harris wrong. But I think my big thing would be, I just, I mean, part of it is like, you're not going to have a conversation with Sam probably, so that's part of it. And so we're using superficial kind of identitarian labels and granted Sam plays the modernist rhetoric, tribal, religious, anti-religious game. But I think when you're truly participating in a dialogos, and if you can even manage to do that in a thinking way where you're critiquing someone who you may not actively be able to have a long form face to face or live conversation with, it doesn't feed into the culture war non-tense. And I think it plays into a dynamic of equating who is in, who is out on the basis of self identity, which I would argue is a huge part, it's a huge symptom of the whole disease to begin with. I think that's a good point. The difficulty is once you, the problem with the whole who is in, who is out and calling that out is, once you call that out, you reinstate it. There are those who play the who is in, who is out game and those who don't, then you have a who is in and who is out. So no, point taken. And that's why I, I mean, what have I done with my channel? In some ways I have used public figures who I will likely never talk to, at least I imagined I would likely never talk to most of these people in order to provoke a conversation about the material that they're putting out into the world. And that I think is not a bad strategy because to one degree or another, if you're putting out content on the internet, it's fodder for public discussion. So what Sam Harris puts out, I should try to get to critique fair. And so that's why I'm open to correction with respect to it. But you know, and then. I think the reason your channel has grown is the rando stuff and the genuine community. And it's not that you don't make good monologue videos that are strictly about intellectual content. Like that's all good and fine. But mainly I think that plays at a culture war dynamic that is superficial at best. And the thing that I struggle with at the Sam Harris conversation is that when he's not playing his rhetoric game and when he's talking about these kinds of mystical experiences, I think he's getting at something that's valid. And we're all trying to learn to talk about that stuff. I mean, at his best, he's talking about the one in the many in ways that a lot of Christians don't talk about it very well at all, because that's kind of the hardest metaphysical stuff to talk about as far as I'm concerned. And a lot of Christians don't do it very well, but you don't go after them with the same kind of mockery. And I think we should, I don't know, I self-identify as a Christian. I'm gonna be a lot more charitable to Sam Harris than I am to someone else. Like I've come after you after Calvinist ontology, and we don't go, and I could mock you about some of that because I think it's ridiculous and doesn't hold water. But that's not gonna get us anywhere. You mocked me on that. But here's the thing, like even when you talk about all your Calvinism and your Calvinism videos, every time you talk about that, it's not about the specifics of the Calvinist ontology. You would just say things like, God is sovereign, I trust him. Me too, but I'm not a Calvinist. Armenians too, but they're not Calvinists. You're a Calvinist, you just don't admit it, just like Sam Harris is a Christian. No, because here's the thing, and this is where I push back on you with even saying, because you just did it with, it gets into non-dualism stuff. But you just did this with saying, what did you just say? Normally the thing you'll say is in regard to dogmatism. You'll say, people are anti-dogmatists, but then when you say I'm anti-dogmatist, what have you done? You've created a dogma, ha ha ha, gotcha. And I think that's silly, and where I would pressure you is to go into the Ian McGill-Chris, the non-dualism, past the dualism of dualism and non-dualism. Like if you haven't watched his Ralston lecture, you really should, because that's, to me, until you get to the place where you can see past the representations in an iconic way during intellectual conversations, we are just in the realm of Renee Girard and the Mimetic rivalry over representations, and we're not saving the appearances to bring in Barfield. And I know that's like, there's a lot packed in there, but that's predominantly the intellectual conversational problem of talking heads in the West. That's why. It's a competition hierarchy, no matter how well or poorly you're doing that, and it's a waste of time. Isn't Sam Harris worse at that than basically any other major talking head in this space? Maybe, but he doesn't self-identify as a Christian. So I give him a pass. Hold on, what does that mean? You give him a pass because he doesn't identify as a Christian, so anybody who's not a Christian is an idiot who shouldn't be criticized? No, I think I should criticize the people who are most in my group, and I think that limits infighting. Come on, that's ridiculous. Sam Harris is a public intellectual, and he deserves to be criticized. Yeah, but that criticism, see, this is part of the issue though, Jacob, is like, I understand, like, you've put things out publicly, you can get public criticism. I mean, on one hand, that's fine, but the problem is that feeds into depersonalized competition hierarchies about ideas that are- What you are doing is depersonalizing him. You are dehumanizing him because he's not a Christian. How so? No, I'm just saying I'm not gonna- You said you wouldn't criticize him because he's not a Christian, therefore he's not human. Well, let me clarify then. I won't criticize him because I don't know him. I will criticize Paul more about this stuff because I have some semblance of a relationship with him. You don't know John Calvin either, you criticize him all the time. Well, fair point. Criticize Calvinism, things downstream of him. I mean, what, I don't know Calvin, you're right. I just wanted to pop in real quick and just to go back before it's missed, I wanted to defend my Calvinist brother, Paul. Sorry. I don't know if there are other Calvinists in here, but I'm just gonna take the torch for a second. The issue that you're having with God's sovereign nature and that we're intellectualizing or coming up with the reflections of people's understanding, it seems to me that you're doing the same thing. You're asking people to watch McGilchrist, you're making arguments from authority. I mean, I'm not trying to throw up at the statue or anything, but I'm just saying, you are doing some similar things when you're accusing or at least commenting on what Paul is doing. That's my only criticism there. I mean, we can't go into, but this is where these things get hard because if we're gonna have back and forths about the specifics of disagreements about whatever it would be, it takes a long time. So I mean, I'm just throwing those things out without being able to go into them in depth. And the whole Calvinism conversation, I mean, whatever, I'd be open to doing that sometime down the road. I've tried to do it on Randall's conversations and things. I've tried to talk to Colton about it. Ultimately, in order, well, I don't wanna go into it. Okay. Go ahead, Julian, sorry. I just wanted to make a comment. This is something I've been thinking of for a while. Luke, you just said you like to criticize people who are in your own tribe before you criticize people outside of it or something to that fact. And I think if it's easier for you to criticize someone, that means by default that they're not your tribe anymore. Like I've been noticing this with regards to certain evangelical critics of evangelicalism and they'll make a big deal about the fact that they're very critical of their own tribe. And I think that just shows that they're not very much invested in the group anymore. So yeah, I mean, the person who you have a hard time critiquing, I think that would be closer to your tribe. Right? So it's sort of a subconscious rather than a conscious thing. Yeah. Potentially, I mean, I've always, yeah. I mean, personally, the closer you get to me, the harder I am on you. So like I would say I'm like, I'm really hard on myself. That's why like when I, I've talked to you about this, Julian, when I was going through this self-compassion notebook, like I can't even hardly do it. Or like when I go to a men's group and it's like, say something from the last week that you're like proud of yourself for. Like I basically can't do it. This is all like residual stuff that I call whatever, divided man, POS theology. And so whether or not criticism in general is a good thing, I don't know. The Hidden Life is one of my favorite films of all time. What that whole movie is about is about like having your convictions and critiquing no one else. Like that's pretty much what that movie is about. But I don't do that all the time. I mean, these are aspirational things. I mean, I don't, when the student is ready, the teacher will appear is something that I believe. And so in that sense, there's no point criticizing anyone because they won't be able to see it until they're ready to see it anyhow. So even if I'm right, it doesn't matter. So. I think there's a fair point in what you said there. I mean, that's. I send all my comments. Continue, continue critiquing Sam Harris. Oh, don't, don't, don't leave like that. Luke, it's okay. I don't know. No, I'm not upset. I don't, I think actually the, the back and forth is good. And if I didn't critique Sam Harris, you wouldn't critique me. And I listened to your critique and I grew from it. So I don't, I don't think that's a bad thing. And is there, is there a degree of, is there a degree of unfairness in me critiquing Sam Harris because he doesn't have a chance to respond to my devastating videos where I defeat him with facts and logic. I don't really think so because he's got a far bigger stage than I do. And if he and I in fact did have a conversation, the status difference would be enormous and his clapping fans would drown out, you know, the little sullen corner of the internet after he defeated me with facts and logic. So I understand, I understand the qualms about the game, but if I thought that the game wasn't in some ways profitable, I wouldn't, I wouldn't play it. But I think the critique of, I think your critique of the game is fair, but I, and I, and I wrestle with it, you know, and part of what makes, part of what is much more fun is when I get to have a conversation, a good faith conversation with, you know, people that I've critiqued, I've critiqued John Vervecky. And then when, you know, John sent me notes and said, let's have a conversation. And we did, I mean, that's, that's blossomed into a beautiful thing. I mean, it could be that if Sam Harris had any interest or really any reason to pay me any attention, Sam Harris and I could become wonderful friends. That could happen. I have a great idea. I have a great idea, Paul. See, here's the thing. Your conversations with John are always like, you're so great, I love you, you're so great. Like we think, you know, it's fantastic. It's like when I used to go to young wrestlers from reform churches and you just praise everybody for five minutes before you'd switch speakers. And I do like it. You guys are, you are wonderful, he's wonderful, everyone's so wonderful and nice to each other. But you should talk to Vervecky about where you think Sam is correct about certain religious and philosophical things. And then in conjunction with that, you could just ask John outright, like what are some of his biggest problems with Christianity and certain aspects of it and not to hold back and just tie that all together. Because sometimes it's just a little back patty, you know? No, I know that. And there are times sometimes when, you know, John has, and he said this, he said this aloud a number of times in a number of our conversations that he is pursuing the dialogos in a very particular way to not necessarily engage some of these aspects. Now, some of the conversations that we've done recently, you know, the next one that he and I and Sam will probably have together, they're very much are issues that we want to talk about and differences. And we definitely do talk differences. And if you listen to John's conversations with myself, with Jonathan Pigeot, with Sam, with Paul Anleitner, plenty of differences are noted. And I think part of the, I think it's, I think we shouldn't confuse some of the positivity and expressed appreciation for softness. I think some of that is to try to encourage each other and encourage each other and to continue to believe that we can have differences and still maintain a container of commonality and goodwill and good faith and all those words that we tend to throw at this. Because- So why is that not with Sam? What's that? But why don't we do that with Sam? Well, because there's no point, because he's not listening. And actually- So if it's personal, if it's, I don't know, I'm almost like the opposite of that, you know, switch, I guess. I could see that. But part of what I've often done, is I'll poke at someone a little bit and make some comments. And then it's sort of a bidding in terms of play. And think about kids on a playground, little boys and little girls on a playground. And the little boys might have a crush on the girl. So he goes and gives her a little shove. Now, is that kind of, is that, and the girl will be like, why are you pushing me? That's so mean. But if you understand what the boy is doing, the boy is saying, hey, let's play. Let's play. Let's go further in the conversation. And so there's a certain degree of bidding. And it's also the case that sometimes showing differences is an invitation to, okay, let's explore these differences. Maybe you're all wet. And so it's remarkably difficult to actually get a good faith conversation going about differences. And I think part of this dance that we do that includes mockery and sometimes cheap shotting and characterization is all in some ways a bidding to involve us in conversation. No, Nate Orman, for example, would, he did a video basically, saying things about me and Peugeot and Neil, he'll poke at me on Twitter sometimes. And then, usually if someone pokes at me enough, I'll, hey, let's talk because I love talking to people with whom I have differences. But then once we start, I mean, I think, my relationship with Jacob, I think is one of the great examples of this because on almost every level, I am doing everything wrong according to Jacob, except I'm also doing some things right. And Jacob and I disagree on all sorts of things, but I love that Jacob just tells me what he disagrees with to me, to my face. And he'll say things about the apostle Paul that make a lot of other people angry. It doesn't make me angry, I love it. And that's part of me too. So in some ways, I'm doing to Sam Harris what I wouldn't have any problem with Sam Harris doing to me. If he did this to me, I would probably say, okay, Sam, let's have a conversation about it. And in the process of the conversation, it would probably be hoping to build more of a relationship that we could have ongoing sustained relationships, such as let's say what Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris are doing. And I think this is part of the reason why the breakup, let's say, between Sam Harris and Brett Weinstein is so telling because someone in that conversation could not maintain a relationship beyond approaches to Ivermectin or to COVID or to such and such a thing. Right, and that's kind of a symptom. I have one quick thing, and Julian, I'll shut up. But I think, okay, but there's, I think the worst version of what I'm afraid of any particular Christian falling into, because I think it's just antithetical to everything Christianity is about, is like the talking heads within politics, like within American politics. So like you could make an argument that like, I'm just being really critical of their views. And you know, it's all public and we're going back and forth. How's that going? Like it's not going well. And I don't think that is going to, I don't think that's gonna contribute to anyone figuring anything out and coming to any greater understandings. It's borderline all out war. I think this is just, I think participating in criticism publicly of that kind, especially divorced from a personal relationship, is on the spectrum of that kind of thing, which in the end is like physical violence. I guess that's my thing. I think the real disagreement, if there's a disagreement here, is not like at the level of how we should be relating to people, where if I'm going to sort of characterize sort of in a stupid way, sort of essentially Lucas saying, we need to dialogue with Sam Harris. And Paul isn't saying this, but that sort of implication of the argument is that, no one needs to kind of very strongly critique Sam Harris or something like that. So I don't think it's a problem of relationship. It's a problem of, Luke seems to think there is more room for dialogue. There's more room for common ground. There's more room for, so I think this shows a difference in how Paul and Luke think. And if you sort of take our political disagreements, in some cases, the two tribes are sort of so estranged from each other that dialogue is just impossible. You can't talk with someone who is in a different universe than you are. But if your position has moved closer to where they are, so that you have some points of contact and they can see some shared reality that they're talking about, then dialogue is possible. So the more interesting question to me is, what is the disagreement in outlook and thinking, like where do you see room for dialogue that Paul doesn't, Luke? Or is that an unfair? Yeah, do you think there is something to what I just said and whatever? Yeah, no, I think so. Something I've been saying in this like whatever audio box or group recently is like, and I don't, I think Paul would agree with this, but you see what you love. And I think when it comes to salience, and there's some great examples of this. Like when we were, Nate and I were talking about certain videos of Paul's and we would just, in our box, we would just, I would be listening to it and I would screenshot it and I'd timestamp it and I'd go off for like 15 minutes about why it annoyed me of something you said. And I would just think like, if suspicion often creates what it suspects, but that works the same way with vision. Like once you get into a mode, certain principalities, they just start to take hold and then all you'll see, and then it's about unity and difference, right? Unity and particularity. If you wanna hyper focus on the particulars and hyper analytically break them down and destruct them, you'll miss the forest. You'll miss the forest for the trees and unity will be lost. I guess that's my point. There is unity to be found with Sam Harris because he's a human being made in the image of God. And if you can't see it, the fault lies with you. It's like when Jordan Peterson says, if someone's boring, it's your fault. You don't have eyes to see. I guess that's what I'm saying. There's definitely bridges to be made. And I don't think it's made through just like dunking on him, I guess. Paul isn't just dunking on him. He's actually engaging with him. Sam Harris doesn't listen. That's just true. Even if he's not listening, even if he's somehow dunking on Sam Harris, the fruit from the conversations that are had outside of the conversation that is even taking place, I think, are ripe. And I find it to be quality content that's largely in good faith. I think that they're doing a good job and they're putting the conversation out there in the public for people to consume and discuss at the proverbial water cooler. And Paul has a lot of people listening to his water cooler convo as he discusses the entertainment of the night before with Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris. I talked to Jeff yesterday, Jeff Pace, and I made the comment to him that I look at, Doug Wilson made a couple little videos commenting on Jordan Peterson and Joe Rogan. I look at what a lot of people do. I look at what a lot of pastors do on the internet, sort of just Sam Harris. And then I look at what the, sort of the whole cadre of Christian apologists and anti-theist apologists do and go back and forth. And I wish, I'd love to, I don't know if I'd watch it or not, but I'd love to see when Doug Wilson, he's a conservative reformed pastor from Moscow, Idaho. When he treats Jordan Peterson, Jordan Peterson says, oh, the Bible is the foundation of Western civilization. Doug Wilson says, yay. And when Jordan Peterson says that, Nate Ormond and rationality rules say, no. And they might go into a little bit more depth, but not much. And so, you know, I, on one hand, Luke, I agree with you that the fruit I feel most gratified by in terms of my work is the relationships. I think it's astounding that now four years later, I mean, Luke and Julian, you two were some of the first that started watching my videos and contacted me. And we talked and we had Rando's conversations and Rando's United started and Bridges of Meaning started. And we're still talking together four years ago. And unfortunately, we haven't had the opportunity for me to be in your home or you to be in my home or, you know, we haven't had that level of fellowship, but we're still talking with each other with a degree of friendship and interest four years later. And Luke, you feel comfortable enough, which I'm glad to come on the question and answer and basically say, Paul, what you're doing, Sam Harris is unchristian. And, you know, to me, the reality of those relationships is, you know, I'm not gonna push them beyond what they are. That's the fruit of this. And so when you say, you know, it's the Rando's conversations and the relationships, they're the real thing. I agree with you 100%. But I'd love to say something here, if it's okay, about something I see, I really appreciate you doing, Paul. And I feel compelled to in certain ways, I actually feel a little bit of this when I listen to Mark LeFavor. There's a sort of a strategy or a technique that Sam Harris uses, which feels a little bit to me like it's sort of demeaning or bullying. Like the way that they structure their arguments, it sort of just doesn't leave you a way out. And so I feel in a way that you're coming to the defense of those who might fall prey to that and say, oh, well, I guess there's no other answer than the answer they're providing. And so I just appreciate that somebody is kind of saying, hey, this isn't an open and closed case. There are questions here that are actually sort of being waved away as though they don't even exist. And so I like that somebody, I think this is part of the reason why people appreciate some of the Jordan Peterson approach to things is they see somebody taking not an aggressive stance, but a position of almost as a defender for those who may not know how or may not have the demeanor to say, I don't agree or I don't understand. I don't have the sort of intellectual firepower to present another solution. So anyway, take that for what it's worth. So my one thing with that though would be like, if someone is, if someone, and I'm air quoting, leaves Christianity because of Sam Harris, they probably needed to. And they were probably under delusions within Christianity if for the reasons they left Christianity is stuff that Sam Harris says. I'm on the fence that there are legitimate deconstructions where people are, if people have a faith that is capable of deconstruction, it needs to deconstruct. You know, I- There's a point to that, which I understand, Luke, but as a pastor, I also have watched people who have deconstructed, whether or not they're listening to Sam Harris, I don't know, because a lot of this stuff is out there and Sam is one example, but I've also seen them leave Christianity and pay a heavy price. And for that reason, I do want to engage some of his arguments because I don't think some of his arguments are very good. And so I want to actually go through that and say, now you're all talking about the Bible in this way. Is this really what Christians think? And then they're like, yeah, I can point to all of these churches where Christians are making all of those noises that Sam Harris is basically throwing under the bus. And in many cases, what those Christians are saying that Sam Harris is throwing under the bus deserves to be thrown under the bus. And then I want to say, and for this reason, I mean, the whole debate about the existence of God is a great example of that because God is not a super thing in the sky, but there is a relational way that we relate to God, which I think is appropriate. But to draw out that kind of nuance takes time and probably won't be understood in the first round. And my articulation of those things will also be subject to critique and there'll be plenty of flaws and error in them too. But the process of exploring, and again, on one hand, I love the conversations that we do, the Rando's conversations, those are great. But I also look at the analytics and I have reason to believe that there is a relationship between the monologues and the conversations that I do that is actually helpful. And so that's part of the reason I keep doing both. And again, I've always said my monologues and my commentaries, I do them for me because on one hand, I'm listening to this stuff and what you get when I get it, when I do a monologue or a monologue is that a monologue or a commentary video is pretty much what I'm doing without you. But actually by recording it and sharing it and getting your pushback, it's just a whole lot better than watching video by myself. I appreciate you taking, somebody in my opinion needs to tear down the straw man that's being built by atheists or even other Christians. And I think it's doing a great service. And as a pastor, leading his flock in a situation like that is vital and people are subjected to the internet all the time and all of these straw men are built. Unfair caricature of what they might consider to be Christianity in some of these discussions. And it's an unfair caricature. But it was a breakdown of a conversation and that Sam Harris was nowhere on display in the conversation that Paul was analyzing. So I don't really care about Sam Harris's feelings at all. I'm not particularly a fan of Sam Harris. All the things that people are accusing him of, I've absolutely seen him do, it's true. But I think maybe Paul was guilty a little bit of doing a little bit of perhaps what Julian and I did a little bit in our conversation around the Peugeot conversation with Paul where it's like we have all this stuff about Peugeot that we have in our heads that we brought to that conversation that weren't necessarily on display in the conversation that you're trying to comment about. And I wonder if that's what happened. I also felt that like mysticism, like wholesale in any form was straw men and the way Paul was talking about it. Yeah, I know that's the part you reacted to. I think, and even this is where that the Seeker of Unity videos are really interesting because when we talk about mysticism as such, boy, that's a complex thing to talk about because we don't know the framing of mysticism as such. It's sort of like talking about romance as such when I've been married for 34 years. There's layers of construction in there that it would be interesting to begin to poke around in. And part of at least in this little corner of the internet, mysticism as such isn't kind of a bull market. Everybody wants to be a mystic and that's partly because of Peugeot and that's partly because of Reiki. And I'm probably the least mystic of the three. Right, well, you can also see some of those different understandings that people have of mysticism. And so let's take the video you did after that where you're commenting on Peterson. And Peterson is linking mysticism to psychedelics and Dionysian ecstasy, which is completely the opposite of what Sam Harris, which is more of an ascetic, traditional, really aligned with more traditional Buddhist and Christian mystical practices, as opposed to what Peterson is advocating. I don't think that what Peterson is advocating is properly called mysticism at all. I don't think that's what it is. I think it's a very fair point. But again, notice where we're gleaning some of these insights and learnings, it's from conflict. But yet here, at least in this little corner of the internet and this little estuary, I think our conflict is productive. 110%. Yeah, without a doubt. I would say that one of the thing about this estuary though is the conflict often seems to be able to happen in such a congenial way. I know I've had a lot of conversations with Yosef lately, and we have significant areas of disagreement, obviously, but those have been some of the most productive conversations I've ever had with anyone. Yeah, Yosef has been the best ad to the Boxer group, probably. He's so great. And also, it's faithful to the whims of a friend though. Like if you think someone's against you, you're not gonna listen. I mean, you're just not. I mean, it's impossible. Well, but that's on you. I mean, that's a mark of maturity. Is it? Yeah, if you think someone's against you and you can still benefit from their critiques, they might be, in fact, be against you. But if you can still benefit from their critiques, that's a mark of maturity and wisdom. Maybe that's true, but that also doesn't prevent you from trying to make that as possible as you can. No, absolutely, I agree. Hey, Paul, I have sort of a question and a take on the Sam Harris thing. Let me ask something a minute. Rick, you don't have to go to work now, do you? He shrugs. Don't tell, don't tell his boss. He says, keep going, keep going. Okay, we should land the plane soon, but go ahead, Sam. All right, I'll be brief. When I was watching your commentary on the Sam Harris stuff, it seemed to me like you were kind of talking with your atheist member of your consciousness congress and that this was represented by Sam Harris, but you weren't actually talking to Sam Harris for all the reasons we've already said you don't actually expect to have a conversation, nor would I think it would be a very good one anyway. But it was sort of like, I don't know, like Smeagol casting out Gollum or something like that, saying that the Sam Harris member of your consciousness congress, who may be at various times has had varying levels of sway, doesn't seem to have anything to contribute anymore. And that that was something like what was going on. And I don't know, I really don't mean to mischaracterize you. I'm curious what you think of that. I think it's probably quite true. And this weird thing that I do in terms of making these videos, I think about that a lot because this is very strange. And I'm not always so sure it's a great idea, but I haven't stopped because it seems to produce fruit. And I get regular comments from people that thank me and say it's helpful. And it's like, okay. But no, I think you're right, Sam. But no, I think you're right, Sam. I'm certainly working out things in myself. And yeah, yeah, I think it's a good point. It's a good point. Paul, I was curious, quickly. I can't hear you. You're gonna have to get closer to the mic, Bruce. Sorry, sorry, is that any better? I was curious, have you heard of Carl Truman's Rise and Triumph of the Modern Self book? Carl Truman's? Yeah, the theologian. Yeah, yeah. It's one of the books on the very large pile. Yeah, yeah, sure. I don't wanna recommend it if you've heard of it. I'd love to hear you take that one day. Yeah, and how things, gosh, you know, part of this whole thing is enormously humbling because I know what a mess I am. And for that reason, I stay a Calvinist. And yeah, maybe I'm not the Calvinist I should be. But I look at myself and I'm disorganized. I'm haphazard. I don't follow through. I don't finish sentences. I don't finish thoughts. I don't finish video themes. And kind of a mess. And so sometimes I make videos and it's like, boy, I'm glad only, I'm glad this video only got 2,000 views instead of 20,000 views. And maybe I should take it down. But then part of me thinks, no, if I'm gonna be a mess, here's the record of the mess. And so, I don't know. Well, and obviously, Paul, I wanna say that I'm a fan. I mean, I'm still here. I like you. I mean, that's one of the, I don't do anything else online. Like, this is all I do when I do it because I am busy doing other things. And so you're one of the best people that's out there, but it's just, I don't know. I mean, I just heard you talk about Sam Harris that I came on here. I thought about just reaching out to you privately, but I just did, so. Now you and I are gonna have our own little love fest online, huh, Luke? And it's true. I mean, I like you too. And I like, there's a lot of, there's very few people I don't like. I do like people. I'm a very happy guy. You compliment me and then you just pull the rug right out. That's the way I love. And if you talk to my wife, she'll just be like, yeah, he does that. And it's horrible. He should stop. But she's still married to me for 34 years. So it's true. It's how I love. So. I love you, Paul. Pookie, pookie. And that's again why the most gratifying thing about this is you're still here. And many people aren't. And that's fine too. There's such a thing as churn and not every community, but I mean, you can go on Voxer and tell everybody that I'm being an idiot. And if someone would come up to me and say, oh, you got to listen to this Voxer. Luke said, you're an idiot. I'd say, of course he did. He tells me that to my face. I love that. But that's how real relationships are. Yeah, I agree. I love that you said you're a mess and that's why you're a Calvinist. That's exactly. I resonate with that. And it reminds me of a Spurgeon quote that says, like, if any man speaks ill of you, don't be angry with him for you're far worse than he thinks you are. It's true. It's true. Well, I suppose we should land the plane. We're only a half hour. Oh, I should finish the questions. They're not long. Interested in your discussion of Kansas. Yeah. Gosh, I listen to a lot of Kansas. As a youth in the seventies, I had an almost spiritual connection with some non-religious music. Absolutely. Oh, me too. One was Jackson Brown's Late for the Sky. Were there other non-religious bands or albums you respond to spiritually? Where's the line around spiritual in our lives? I love Grim Grizz's comment about regularly scheduled programming. So shoot, when I was a teenager and listened to all that music, I was being programmed by that music. And so is that spiritual? Yeah. But there we are. I mean, I, Boston, Kansas, I mean, all the music that was popular in my demographic group and my weird little subculture in Northern New Jersey. And Rick gave me a thumbs up for, yeah, all right. Rick has far broader musical tastes. He's 10 years younger than I am. And he's always introducing me to new bands. He's like, you've never heard of these people? Like, no. And so that's, but that's what friendship is. That's what friendship is for. What are your favorite summer and winter drink? I am, in some ways, an enormously boring person. Most of what I drink, I am such a rough person. I have two water bottles that I fill with ice and water. And that's most of what I drink. I mean, when I sit down for a meal, I'll often just grab my water bottle and drink out of that so there's one less glass to wash. I am a deeply strange person. I mean, there's something deeply strange about me. And although when my kids were young and we'd go on trips, my kids would always drink from my water bottle because they'd always say, well, dad's water just tastes better. That's because I was rather neurotic about always making sure the water was filled with ice and it was cold and it was refreshing. So my favorite summer and winter drink is ice water. All right. Oh, Rick just got out of the chair. I don't know what that means. Maybe he's heading over here with it. No, there he is. Are we gonna be able to end transmission soon, Rick? He's back in his chair. Okay, so thank you all for joining and thank you. I mean, this last little bit over the last half hour, this is exactly why I love doing this question and answer here so that Luke can come on and say, Paul, you're full of shit and you're treating Sam Harris wrong. And as a Christian man, you should stop it. And Nate Hile will come and have some really smart thinky esoteric reason why I should rethink some things. And because I at least know you all a little bit, a little bit more than I would know someone from just one random comment somewhere or a Twitter interchange, I can listen and I can grow and I can understand what Nate says and I can understand what Luke says. And again, for me, this is all part of someday, I'm gonna get up to Washington and be able to sit and have lunch with Nate. And one of these days, I'll get a chance to hang out with Luke in person. And I think that is what Christian Fellowship is for because it's sort of a chance to get a jumpstart on eternity. So someday when I go to the UK, I'll get to meet Anselman and Vixen Dixon. And that's because all of our little interchanges are like first fruits of far greater fellowship and enjoyment of each other and growing together from now into eternity. That's the vision of Christian community. And why do I love it so much? I don't think there's anything better. And in this age of decay where, and when atheists say, no, at death, that's all there is, I say, I'm not gonna believe that. I'm gonna keep believing that even people that I've only had one or two exchanges with on this crazy little channel, I believe in the hope that one day we will be able to spend hours in a new heaven and a new earth exploring God's glory together and the glory of his handy work and his fullness that he spills out onto the world. And we will enjoy that fellowship with each other. And it will be even greater than anything we've tasted here. So that's why I do this. So, all right, Rick, very good. You can end transmission.