https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=791KZryHf70

 also this this element of like, well, what do you choose the other person for? You know, what's the telos? That often goes unstated people will have a desire for someone but it's almost like the, the dog chasing the car, right? And when I, I, and I talked to, I've talked to many men who are like that, and sort of in the therapist role where they're like, I don't know what they want to do, they're just kind of like chasing. And with, I guess it goes to the autobiographical bit here, I was in a relationship for more about a year and a half with someone who was was really wonderful in many ways. And part of why the relationship didn't work was, you know, the the telos we each of us had in mind was, it wasn't that interesting to me, from being just really frank, not that it was a bad one, there was nothing immoral about it, it was, it was fine, but it was divergent. And with Catherine, one of the things that struck me right away was, oh, she has, I mean, it didn't end up with the plan didn't end up happening. But she had one of she wanted to go to medical school. And the idea was she wanted to step into a place of service towards others. And for me, it was like, oh, there's alignment in values, like, there's a, there's a mission, there's an endpoint. And so I knew I wanted that to I grew up in a home where purpose was talked about a lot. And when my parents would talk about their marriage, they would talk about what is the marriage for. And my dad's always been deeply involved in in the community in the region, he was mayor for seven years in Dryden here. And so that was always at the forefront, that there's a larger purpose. And for me with Catherine, it was like, she, she wants to serve other people. The the goal of medicine is outward focused. And there was a practical nature to that. And that I could agree that helping people that way is good. And then there was, you know, as a Christian as well, you know, a larger picture, as well that I thought, this is really exciting. I like this. And if I'm going to join my life with her and hers with mine, there's there's a shared endpoint that's beyond us, which, you know, for, you know, almost, almost 18 years now, I mean, as really careless, it's looked different than we anticipated rather than being a medical goal. It's been through, you know, therapy and counseling and, and that kind of thing. But that, that really bound us together. And for me was a yeah, I'm, I'm on board, we can talk about a shared vision. And the marriage was a vehicle for more than just, hey, we really like each other, even though we really do enjoy being with one another. And that's shaped us over time as well, where the decisions we've made, there's disagreements about how and when, but big picture, where we're aiming at generally the same things. And that gives the the relationship. Not that's not only a binding agent, but it propels it forward as well. It's not a marriage agreement, you'll look at each other and go, Oh, well, okay, so we're together. So I guess we'll watch Netflix again tonight. And that's kind of it. That's what we do, right? It's and we do enjoy watching Netflix together. Don't get me wrong. But there's there's fuel, it's it's headed somewhere. And you know, this is like riding a bike, if you have some momentum, it's it's easier to stay upright, and to keep moving forward, then if any you have to be headed somewhere, right? And what do they say when you're, you're learning to ride a motorcycle? Well, the first thing they say is, wherever you're looking, that's where you're going to go. So don't look down at your feet. Don't look at the things you don't want to hit. Or else you're going to trash this motorcycle, look to where you want to go. And if you're looking in the same direction, broadly speaking, especially far down the road, that keeps you balanced. And that keeps you keeps you from wiping out. And that's been a major theme and in our relationship. And I, it's hard to, for me to think of that, the marriage crisis in the West, and and decouple that from the moral relativism that's out there and the death of a grand narrative within the culture itself. So I'm not saying that's impossible. But I think it ups the degree of difficulty when you don't have those, those overarching values directed at something. When you pull that away, it's it's difficult. And, and people that have good marriages that are not Christians that I know. I have found every time, I'm not saying they don't exist, but every time they have had shared big picture goals together. And that's that's kept them bound together when you move beyond the, hey, you look really hot stage of the relationship.