https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aSRgS1sGA74

 I'll start recording so I don't lose anything. I started working out. What's that? Can I record to. Oh yeah. Let me fix that. Okay, you should have the power. Anybody else need it. I'm in the game. Okay. All right. I just started working on commenting on the Peterson Rogan conversation, but if you put up video YouTube blocks it. So people are saying, Oh, you should do puppets. I have a Kermit puppet and I get a little monkey for Joe Rogan, but I don't know if I'll do puppets or not. Definitely do it. That's hilarious. That'd be good. That's what we need. I just did a little, I just did a little video right now on the section about music and I connected it with the Silmarillion and the Louvatar song. So anyway, I'll post that tomorrow. And I also this morning get a great conversation with Catherine and her husband, Eamon, and that'll come out too. So I'm lots of good stuff today. So, but you guys are in charge today. What are we going to talk about? Okay, I have kind of an idea. We kind of like, we were like very, I guess we're very like, we like to get really like explorative, like just kind of try to like reach as far as we can in our thoughts and like, just kind of just like, just ask hard questions and try to see if like, because oftentimes that's where like that dialogue goes starts flowing. And who knows what can happen right. But like, so like I woke up at like 2am this morning and something came together for me. Me and Caleb had done a podcast and we were talking about like a lot of what's going on in this corner of the internet. And we were, we were talking off of the the Piaget study, where all the kids, you, you, you, you interview them separately after they've played the game and you interrupt and they all have different ideas of what the rules were. So we seem to have this, and so you can kind of look at like, there's very much that type of phenomenon you can kind of see happening like, you know, in this corner of the internet of different people, not all with the same agenda or the exact same goals or even with the same beliefs to what the rules of the game even are, and yet yet participating in something that seems to be a lot bigger than themselves, which is the game. So then you tie that idea together with the Egregore concept, which is basically the exact same thing right with this Egregore is this hive mind, this, this, this compilation of, of mind and will and whatever. And then we also like, like that's like from the materialist perspective, but then we also have like, it seems as though the game also has a guiding factor, and then from a theological perspective, a will of its own. And so like, I guess like, I wanted to like throw it to everybody but like, what do you guys think in terms of that? What do you guys think in terms of like a lot of what we're even doing in this corner of the internet is like, some type of organic participation in the forming of, of another, of another Egregore, especially like another thing I've been thinking a lot about is like the spirit of the father, and I feel like there's also that aspect of it too. Like, I just want to like throw that in and see if that makes connection for anybody. But like I think like, we're trying to like, we're, and like, it's different than like a church community to me like a lot of what's happening here like you're finding different people who are who like, I don't know seem to like they're, everybody seems to like be, be participating in ways that you wouldn't normally see in a church community. You've also made the comment that you can't really have community like you would normally have on the internet. So there, it's a different function. I don't think it can be called the same thing. So like, yeah, what do you guys think of that? You guys. Go ahead. He said go. I said, I was going to let you guys go first because I don't know how to answer this question. It's like, too broad and in a way I'd say that, like my first response would be like the IDW, like, it fell apart because of like inherent tensions inside of it. I would say that it's very difficult to form something like to be conscious of yourself forming something like you're generally going in some direction. And it's something else that's pulling you and you don't know, like, like what you said the other time, Chris about not knowing where the next step is going to be. You're just climbing the stairs and like your faith, like leads you. But at the same time, it doesn't let you on into the secret of what you're getting into. So, so I don't know where where this is going. I really like one of the conversations I want to have I actually was thinking of reaching out to David Fuller for this, because I think I think there is a lot to learn in the unraveling of what I thought many people hoped for from the IDW and why it never took. So, on one hand, we're paying a lot of attention to sort of the emergence of these agregores, but we should probably pay as much attention to the, to the, I don't even the dissipation of them. Because I think most of us, when we start a conversation or when we start a project, we, we have a vision for what could happen and what it could become. And then it doesn't. Why, and, you know, again, I think our, our, our, our modern business secular thinking tries to deal with that well how to bring a plan to completion, but it's true, especially in a collaborative thing here, where we want something to emerge from among us. And I remember right away when I said estuary was sort of like saying a magic word, people sort of clomped on to it. And then they were expecting me to start estuary, Inc. And I said no I'm not going to do that. And that was a little controversial with some people because, well unless you start it and run it and run it like a modern corporation. You know that's the word we use a body. Unless you run it like that, it'll never come and so you have to be at the head of it for us to trust it and I still get that message from a certain number of people. And I am much more interested in doing something that is quite a bit more. The work of a spirit is what we're talking about, because these spirits will in fact, determine where things go and what happens. And we can use Peugeot's language, an angel, that these will, they will have their way, because any human being, they might achieve certain things on their list, but it's always goes in unexpected ways. And I think this is part of in Christian circles. What we're used to because we say okay we're going to plant a church, we're going to start this movement, we're going to have this effort. But then we go into prayer and we say okay Holy Spirit. You direct this. And I'd have to say that so much of what has happened around my playing with this stuff for the last four years is way beyond what I could have imagined. I didn't think about an art group, I didn't think about half of these things. And if I had if it had been about me about PVK Inc. I wouldn't, I would have messed it up. And, you know, maybe other things haven't happened but I don't know. So I think this is a good question. And so looking at let's say the dissolution of the vision that was the IDW. I think is instructive in this. I think it's like the reason things are falling apart right now is almost for that exact reason of people trying to spearhead and guide groups into what they're doing. And and and set a vision and a corporate structure for everything. And there's there's sort of no room for any emergence. So there's kind of there's kind of a repressed build up of creativity and energy. And so many people try to find places and institutions to to direct that energy. And then it's, it's, it's stifled almost immediately by the structure. And with what you're doing, it's so it's so emergent that it's it's shocking how much energy there is but maybe like that's exactly what's happened is nobody realized how much energy was being stifled and wasted. And so that's just bringing forward and when me and Chris were talking about this, I'm not really interested in trying to figure out what we're doing and predict what we're doing, because I think that stepping over your own foot. But as you're talking about like an angel and a guiding spirit and these sorts of things. It's just interesting to suddenly realize how much attention and energy. So many people have been giving to something that, as of right now like on paper, still amounts to nothing. But we're so engaged we're so plugged in we're so ready to put so much time and attention into this. So it seems like that something must already be guiding us. I disagree. And the reason I disagree is, I don't. First of all, I would put it in, I would put that guiding spirit and name I would say, you're aiming for for God, you're aiming like for God to guide you and not some other lower spirit. But, but I'd also say like, there was an interesting point when when when you had your conversation Paul with a with a partial the last one when partial like he's very slight he he he he he said something that really struck he was, he said something like, I want to help, like, secular people and Christians from other denominations because you're going to, you know, get run over. And that was that was him basically saying very politely, you are weak, the walk will will destroy you you need and he's right about that. I think he's right to end. Go ahead, go ahead, Chris. Well, no, I mean, I was just, it just came out of me. I mean, I just think he's right. If you had more to say, say it but I kind of want to go a little different direction. Well, the last thing is, I don't know if it's something that is emerging so much as it's us aligning ourselves to God calling us calling some first and then others, and the people who like hear it first they hear it first, but it's for for everyone in a sense like, I think that some people are more attuned to it, but the rest will eventually follow suit. And I'm not saying because I was right in terms of that you have to be or you're going to you're going to be weak if you're not orthodox perhaps, perhaps there's things to learn from orthodoxy that could make that true but what I, what more of what what I mean by he's right is that I think that there's, there is, there is a strength that we need that, that I guess this is like a lot of what even I'm talking about with this like this, this idea of like, a sim assembling or whatever is, is this the strength that can be found. I guess I felt like it was important to like also bring into context, like, with everything that we're talking about that like, it's like the materialists are walking on water. And what I mean by that is like they're talking about agribores were rebel wisdom is acknowledging that we're in this post secular stage. And, you know, there, there's these, there's these notions that were ready and primed to, to, to go out of materialism. And then okay like me and one had this big argument about the mass formation psychosis, because one was like well just just call it what it is like this like submitting to the devil, basically, which like and I was like oh well you know what honestly as long as we're talking about it. That's all that really matters to me and actually in a 21st century I think we need maybe more materialist ways of trying to explain these things than a more traditional way or whatever like we can't go back we gotta go for it at least that's how I feel. But the next day you came out with the aggregate video, which married the two right it married and it took the mass formations psychosis and the mass formation and just built upon it of like all that all that all that that angst that's forming amongst the people is is is turning into something spiritual that a materialist can understand if you if you watch that video. So I feel like that connects. One of the, one of the things that came. So after my conversation with Jonathan, Nate, and Julian, and the guy that's moving to Sacramento. I can't I think it was name. I haven't met him yet. That's why. They got into, they got into Antichrist language. And it's very interesting to study the first, the first epistle of john which kind of isn't an epistle there's a lot of debate as to what exactly that book is, because I'd like most of the Pauline epistles that are real epistles letters that that lot of some people think I think that book was an addendum to, to the gospel of john to sort of counter some proto Gnostic elements of the community. But the, the language of, of part of our difficulty of talking about spirits in this way is I just think we're so bad at it. Yeah, that there's there's so much unknown and in that vacuum comes. It just comes a lot of clumsiness. And part of that is because of, so I've used the centered set and the bounded set stuff that's from a missiologist named Paul Hibert. And Paul Hibert also wrote quite a bit about the West and the excluded middle. And obviously and very old, relatively intact forms of Christianity such as orthodoxy. There's a fair amount of, and in Catholicism to a degree. There's a fair amount of healthy engagement with the middle spiritual realm and Protestantism really went after that pretty hard at the time of the reformation I think partly because the Protestant reformers who were almost all, you know, priests and churchmen And I think that's the thing about that is that there's just way too much crap going on with this we're praying to, we're praying to this spirit and that spirit and this thing that same and, and it's, it's causing chaos. And what happens then with the Protestant Reformation is the middle gets hollowed out. And it's the Holy Trinity, and us here below and nothing in between, and angels and demons are sort of, we don't know what to do with that and then of course, in the late 80s And then in the early 90s, this present darkness and Frank Peretti and Pentecostalism came forward and so the danger of, and then Peugeot ran into this when he started talking about the angel of a conversation. And I, this conversation that we're having right now has a spirit. There's this, and if we use language a certain way everyone's okay with it. Well there's the spirit of this conversation. And that's taken in sort of a disciplined modernist materialist metaphorical way, people say oh yeah yeah it's the spirit of that conversation but they can sense it because I had a conversation earlier this morning. And already this has it this conversation as a very different spirit. And I'm not saying it's better or worse, but you two are different than than Catherine and amen, and all of your spirits are coming into this place. And we together this is where I use the school spirit analogy, we together are creating a spirit and then to show calls it an angel, but then once that hits our imaginations. It, you know, it goes all these different ways and it's like, oh, that's that's just going to be problematic so we, we, we, we get away from it. When I think of why the spirit of the IDW died. There's a lot of reasons for that, some of which are these guys don't know how to deal spiritually with each other. And even for all the hollowed out middle Christians have a fair amount of practice. And a lot of the kinds of issues that the IDW was dealing with. And I think that's the reason why we're dealing with confessional matters across lines. I mean, none of you are members of the Christian Reformed Church to the best of my knowledge. I don't know anything about it. I think that the Christians and Christians have been dealing with spirits in this way for a very long time and I think part of part of what. I think we need to have a radical view and say, okay, we mean to like the, like the first, like, first john does, we need to be apart from the spirit of this world. Yes. And also, we need to engage with the people of this world, because we battle not against flesh and blood, and the New Testament always has, you're not going to get rid of the antithesis. It's got to remain. And we also have to understand what you know the other thing that isn't the antithesis, and that has to remain too. And so navigating these two things is really takes a lot of finesse, and usually experience, because we can't even articulate what we're doing, but yet we've, it's been encoded into us, and we practice it. I think that the, the same spirit that that could put Sam Harris and Peterson in a room, or put you in for vacay in a room, or even the way we can even already do this conversation is is very much like a spirit of generosity. And I think so much of what seems to be happening with all of this is a lot of generosity that even if I don't know what you're saying that you do, or even if you don't that that you're on to something. And like because like, and like it, you said like talking about it, we're talking about it so badly. And, and yet we and then yet we have to, I think, and like, and, and I think that like we can, I think it's that generosity that that is like, a lot of what I think I find that to be the common denominator. Like when I taught when I most since I've kind of started doing this like a lot of the topics that I've even brought up and stuff like that. I even show some of the most controversial ones that I could think of just to like, get the rock thrown at me so I could know like, this is not like this isn't as good. It's too good to be true like, like the, there's, we're not we're not ready to have these because like, based off my experience I never was certain we were ready, but we're, it seems like there's so much generosity and desire among people to to make sense of these things ask hard questions go there. And I just think that that like that. Yeah, that's, I just feel like that's part of like part of it. I think you're right. And part of why there's more Christianity and Sam Harris than Sam Harris wants to admit. That's a big issue with the, with the present discourse that's one thing that Peterson said to him directly, you know if you really were an atheist. You know, you couldn't be having this conversation. And of course that completely infuriated Sam Harris, but I think Peterson was right. And and part of, you know, Tom Holland's work has been noting that the spirit of Christ has so deeply penetrated us spiritually, that even when people don't recognize Christ. He has spiritually. He has gotten into the world. He has reaped where he has not sown and continues to do so. And, and that's a big piece of this and so part of my agenda was always Christians need to stop. They need to stop acting weak, because actually, this defensiveness miserliness is a is a response of poverty, not generosity is a response of security and bounty. Go ahead and say what you will about me, because again, finally, my, my, my reputation with God is a far more consequence than my reputation anywhere here below. And if that is the case, this is what we see with Jesus I was, you know, reading the Sermon on the Mount, not too long ago and thinking about. We don't take Jesus seriously enough with respect to our own reputations, we're always sort of trying to keep them in good standing and Jesus is kind of like, if everyone thinks well of you, you're probably not doing it right. Yeah, there's, there's something about the that poverty response that's really interesting to me. Because it like like you're saying with Tom Holland's work and and Harrison everything, I think we're, we all, no matter what we say we all believe in God a lot more than we think we do culturally, like we really just have a thin layer of nonsense And we're all sort of, we're all sort of affected over a culture that is very defined by Christianity very very deeply defined by Christianity and we're all sort of pretending will not each individual but as a culture we're sort of pretending that we're not that. Like a lot of people don't even know that they would like to be more expressive about God or they would even like to participate in a belief in God like deep within them. But there's no room to explore. So they never actually try to get down to what they feel is missing in them, what they're what they're wanting to search out. And that's that that response that I've so often got from Christians before of just, well, we need to make sure we're Christian. And in order to do that we really need to stop you at every point that you step out of line with what we think. So we can't really have these conversations, and that really does it's also going back to your point of the balance that you have to, to walk with the New Testament of accepting all of that, accepting all of that mess, not participating in it yourself but not having a problem seeing it and hearing it and questioning it and having discussions about it. In some sense it makes it seem like what really went wrong was that spirit was lost in the church and then a lot of the cultural problems cancel culture and all of this actually seems to spiral right out of that. I have an alternate theory about that. I think, like, this may come from a different like cultural background because I think that the US is profoundly more Christian than Argentina. Argentina just had a thin layer of of Catholicism, and then a very thick layer of modernism. And I'd say that, like, Freemasons did what they wanted with this country, and now they're, they're having like a backlash from people who want to, like, recover something of the native culture. And while it's all a sham, and it's like a political narrative. You can also see how those deep native cultures are still like present there so I would say that maybe in the US is different. But here in Argentina, I can see a lot of the other like pagan, pagan culture still alive. And I'd say that I think that the problem is that the West has tried to reconcile the enlightenment with Christianity, and I don't think they are compatible. So, and since the enlightenment has brought us so many goodies, we don't want to throw it away. But it's killing us. I didn't I didn't know where, where you're. We haven't had many South Americans in this little corner of the internet. And yeah, Argentina. I mean, Latin America is a is a complex complex place. The layers of, of culture and, you know, the world is so big. I mean just this. And Spain is different from France is different from England is different from Germany in deep and profound ways and then the way that the colonial periods went. And then how we haven't talked. We often talk about Protestantism. And the relationship between Protestantism and modernity. And I think that France has its own relationship with modernity, which is, you know, the French Revolution. And then what happened in let's say the Spanish world. Again, I mean, Argentina, Chile. It's totally different histories with respect to the enlightenment and, and I think in some ways, because Germany was such a forerunner and a lot of these things with France you sort of had this compression effect where, even though the philosophes, you know, when I first came out of France. I don't even begin to know the dynamics of the history with with Spain because of course you know early in the 20th century they, you know, you have Franco, you have this history of of fascism in South America. And these things matter. These things really matter when it comes to stuff as nuanced as the church. And so, and again it's it's, I mean, the Catholic the Roman Catholic Church is one of the most amazing stories in the world. Because here's this institution that has sort of maintained institutional cohesion. You know, all this time now Luther called it Antichrist so there's a there's a viable option. And in North America the reliant the relationships with Roman Catholics are right now between Catholics and Protestants very compatible, but I'll tell you what I deal in central and South America with respect to Protestant Catholic relations, it's a whole different show. It's a whole different show. And so like the word Antichrist has come up twice and and like and then in the conversation with you he called woke woke is Antichrist and and like, it's an interesting word like like you couldn't possibly say that all Catholics were Antichrist. You couldn't possibly say that like, you know, like that, that everything that it would have been what they believed or their tribal markers you maybe you could like try to say something about like the institution and where it was being guided, or you could say that it was the Antichrist, but like, I think that like a lot of like, what's happening now is Antichrist, and I think what we're talking about with like, agregores and stuff like this like, I think that that's a way to conceive of it. But, but like, like, for example, let's say the likes, let's just go like say like the Catholic Church was Antichrist. But what would what would your response be as a, as a Catholic, like I would think it'd be to stay and to pray and to be a good Catholic within within that system, wouldn't it? And like, and like, I feel like that's a lot of where we're at. And like, also, like, I think, I think part of what an Antichrist system is, is a totalizing system. And everything we just said about culture and all the differences. They are starting to dissolve. We're all starting to kind of like, I was saying to Caleb like I felt like in 2020 like kind of like the Tower of Babel like the languages got confused and there was such a massive disruption. But then at the same time, it all happened that together. And we all had that we all have this common experience and this common thing that seemed that in this common fight, and this common wrestle with like, culture, war and all this type of stuff, trying to understand it together. And so it's also like there's this totalizing system. There's also like this like sense that we're in this together trying to sense make it together. And like, I don't know. So like, I'm trying to, I don't like I guess I don't know. I don't know. I can I can like, I don't, I guess like, well, what would you think? What would you say like the word Antichrist even means? Because it can't, it couldn't be like a static thing like, like in terms of like, that, like I could point. But then at the same time, you have to be able to point at something and call it evil, otherwise evil doesn't exist. If you read, if you read First John, go ahead, Ivan, I've talked too much. No, go ahead, Paul, if you want, I was going to say something very brief, I think it's very easy to paint a picture of what Antichrist is at least in Pajolian language because I speak Pajolian now. He, he, he referred to like the Judas movement, the, the, the selling the perfume to keep the money. And it's like saying that you're doing it for a good cause but then it's a selfish cause in the end and that's basically the parasite within Christianity that it's the possibility of the other person betraying you. If you read, you can actually find on my church channel some studies that I did in First John before the pandemic. Basically, the First John says, any spirit that does not acknowledge that Jesus Christ came in the flesh is Antichrist. What does that mean? Why would, why would that issue be highlighted by that book. And this is why some scholars believe that the book is an addendum to the Gospel of John, because the Gospel of John was read in a rather Gnostic way. What do I mean by that? It was read in a way that said, Jesus was always and only a spirit, never an instantiation in the ancient world to say that Jesus was a man was harder for them to believe than Jesus was a God. Okay. It's reversed in our world today. Many people say well Jesus was a fine teacher and he's a human being etc etc but to say Jesus was God? But it was reversed. And so that is the reference in First John. Now, this takes on, when I hear Jonathan Peugeot use that term, he's not generally using it in the same specific way that I hear in the first epistle of John. I hear him more using it in a much more generic way, as in opposite of Christ, because he has a, he has a structured schema in, in which there's Christ, and there is the opposite of Christ. And so in that way, these other things could be anti Christ because they are against, but that's different from First John. First, and you can, I think you can get to Peugeot from First John, but it's not a direct mapping, and it would take some articulation. Because the idea to go back to Matthew's book let's say is, well, Christ connects heaven and earth. Christ is God made flesh. I mean, Christ, Christ is the Christ is how this whole thing works. And so anything that's dismembering the body is anti Christ. Yeah. Have you have you read the gospel of Judas. No, not the whole thing. Because I used to be a gnostic. When I, when I before becoming a Christian, because I didn't understand things, gnosticism, like was more approachable in an intellectual sense because it's more new platonic. Basically neo-pladonism, but so with my modern thinking, like categories. And it was easier for me to believe that Jesus was like a nice teacher, like he was enlightened, and that he came to teach us that, I don't know, that reality was just a sham in a sense that we're merely trying to transcend this broken world that will never be fixed. And then at some point I started believing, but I think that we're in that position because the enlightenment is inherently gnostic. And I'd say that we are in like, even if I love that you want to find the Christianity within the culture you're in. But I think that it's really more gnostic than Christian at this point. So. I had this thought the other day that the notion of objective reality is gnostic. It's the, it's the, it's this idea that to that objective reality means that I can stand outside of it and say what it is. And so all I have to do is escape where I am and view the objective reality if they would just listen to the science, right? If they would just listen to the science. If they would just look at the objective reality, if they would just leave the earth. It's the same thing. Or maybe I don't know it's just a pattern I put together. I don't want to say that so objectively. I think there, I think there is this, this tendency towards towards gnosticism in the enlightenment, and this this gets into a lot of what Vervecki talks about in terms of nominalism, that the, the categories aren't real. And the relations aren't real. And that, you know, Paul Kings North over the weekend released or at least put into his public substack a pretty long piece on on this and this has become for certain groups, Orthodox, Catholic, some Protestant sort of the, the main pushback now that we're really pushing back against nominalism and nominalism then sits at the heart of the Reformation. And it's sort of like the trick of, it's sort of like the trick that I see often done with pantheism, that pantheism is really wonderful until I make it my tool. I mean, is the force, is the force my instrument, or am I the instrument of the force. If I am the instrument of the force that I'm losing agency, but in almost all of those movies at the critical moment, the hero takes possession of the force and makes it his instrument. And it's like, oh, you just threw away your pantheism. You just threw it away. Avatar that the movie goes all the way up and then there's this one line that I forget that they're the deity's name it's like, she's fighting for us and it's like she just lost her femininity, and she just gained her agency. You just threw your pantheism away, but the whole movie making it. So, okay. It's really interesting to me that both that idea of how you just described pantheism and like the failing right at the end that it does. How you were describing anti Christ and first john as anything that does not acknowledge Christ as coming in the flesh, because when I was trying to get back to Christianity, without learn losing everything I learned outside of Christianity. And that was, I had a really hard time moving towards Christianity, without falling into universalism, because that was such a tightrope act. And the image that I, I mapped for myself mentally that helped me navigate some of that was basically two lotuses, or two lotuses with with incredible amount of complexity. And the only difference between the two really was that at the center there's a gap in one of them. And the other one has a core. And that helped me to move away from certain things and towards something else and then when I threw Peugeot and the priests who do Lord of Spirits. When I saw that there was a form of Christianity that completely mapped to that structure that I was looking for, then it all And then it became easy to acknowledge when something was falling into blank universalism because it always tries to take Christ and shift him onto a pedal and make him not the center. And they look, they look almost identical and that's really the only change and it sounds like with what you're describing. It's like in order to tell these narratives of pantheism and not lose the audience. You have to do the whole structure and then right at the last minute secretly shifted back into place so it feels right and then hope the audience doesn't notice it or you don't notice it. Right. And I and that you, you'll find it once you see that trick you find it again and again and again. And, you know, use the force Luke, Luke is the hero, the force isn't the hero. And then later on in the prequels they completely muddy up the force. But they're, they're, they're not theologians. Why do you say that because when I when I did my obligatory rewriting of the sequel trilogy that was actually my story core was getting down to the fact that the force is actually the, the protagonist of all the stories. And like, and like I think that like that's kind of even what I think that that that notion of PSA is like game that we that we all seem to be participating in, not fully understanding it's the force right it's that it's that thing that seems to seems to guide like, I think part of it, I think part of it is like the, also the communion between, between each of us like we're all, we're all feeling feeling the spirit of the conversation, wanting to be wanting wanting both to participate in it, not, not violate it not like, not even without without without rules even being defined but but wanting to make sure that they're, they're being followed. And, and then wanting to like, yeah, and then and then and like, this is what's very interesting about like these, these ideas of game be like, like, it seems like we don't know how to talk about game be without talking about communism, but like the idea that of an infinite game where, where, where, where the point of the game is just to keep it going is like, is something as simple as like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they're like, they this conversation I just, I would, I want to, I want to give what I can to the conversation to help it help it keep going and become more and keep that game going like another example game be would be the church is not driven by a financial incentive. It's actually people sacrificing finances to keep that game playing. So, like, I want to I don't know if I can be, but like, but like, I guess my point is, is like, like, is, is like, is the important thing then to like, not as much focus on, on this corner of the internet, what this corner of the internet's about, and just, and I guess that's why I was like even thinking about like the spirit of the father like, is the more important thing to just, to just focus on the spirit focus, acknowledge, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that, acknowledge that How do you say this? Acknowledge the, acknowledge the game that we are all playing and, and, and participate in it with as much honesty and generosity and, and, and impurity as possible. It's not coming out the way I want it to. What do you guys think? Does that make sense? Yeah. There's, you know, it's because this game in this little corner of the internet is so broad. So, what does Peugeot want out of this? And so in my conversation with him on vocation, you know, I really wanted to get, you know, see what, see what would come out of him with respect to that, because part of what happens is, you wind up, you have the symbolic world, you know, he's in many ways, a, an apologist for orthodoxy in North America. I mean, he's doing, he's doing a lot. Okay, well what is that? What are his goals? Where does he want to see this thing go? And so just between the three of us, myself, Verveki and Peugeot, I mean, I'm, I want to see a, I want to see a revival of Christianity and so Peugeot and I are, you know, closer, Peugeot's, the Christian Reformed Church is too small a thing that, whereas I'd love to see the Christian Reformed Church revived, it's, that's not going to happen, you know, around me. And Verveki, a religion that's not a religion. And then, well, where exactly is this corner? You've got Sevilla who coined the term, you know, working on perse and value. And so now you've got your little art group, and they're trying to develop the arts. And then Donk is developing all of his estuary groups and conversation corners. And Peterson is, you know, trying to save Western civilization by pulling the individual out of the depths of nihilism and by the way, at two and a half minutes, and, you know, telling the, the conservative Canadian to get their heads out of their butt and seize the moment. The trekkers are there. This is your coronation, you know. Trudeau is hiding, seize the day. So, and, and by the South North Korean suit. So, it is a good question, because this is diffused. And along the way there are other instrumental things that are happening, but, you know, what did the IDW want to do? You know, stop, stop woke ism to a degree. That's sort of what held them together for a little bit. Raise the bar of intellectual discourse, afford free speech and better interchange of ideas that would lead to more truth. That seemed to be what the, what the IDW wanted but, you know, and even, and even so so. And so, you know, Eric Weinstein coins the term, Barry Weiss publishes an article of it in the New York Times, and almost the moment she does so, it ends, because if it's an intellectual dark web, once you shine light on to it, it's gone and that lends itself to argument, which I think he's right that anything that's rebel or dark, you, you need, it's too, it's too Gnostic, you need a structure. And that's, and that time has come. The challenge for the, the, the Catholic and the Orthodox hierarchies is to figure out, okay, what do we do with structure. And that was a big part of Protestantism where Protestantism structure was always instrumental, whereas with Catholicism, it was much more. It's a loss. And I really don't understand the relationship between orthodoxy and structure so yeah this this little corner, there's, there's some spirit going on here, but I think most of us have a sense of. We don't quite know where it's going it's not. So, even just between Jonathan and I, there's difference between what we're doing. So, I don't know. Can I can I explain it, I don't know how much time we have. I think, like, when I when I picture what you're doing. It's basically I imagine like a central European or an Eastern European going. Welcome to the circus. Welcome to wonder clay. And the crowd goes nuts and they, they started cheer. Thank Chad Pope. Part Well, actually, part of my answer, even to the structure is that perhaps we took it too serious like that's part of like my argument would make Chad Pope. I don't know corner, the corner Pope. No, the actual Catholic Church. I, I, I, I think you've really got a point there, because I. This in some ways grew out of some of my desire for my own denomination because I, I've not seen my denomination have the kinds of conversation, it needs to have to stop the self destruction that is happening now. And what I was able to do was sort of fan into flame, far broader conversations. And, but my denomination, I mean, some of the conservatives see what I'm doing are like oh, the conservatives have become the much more open community than the progressives the progressives have kind of shrunken and got ossified. No, you're right. And so I want to see this open up, and I want to see it get more productive because I think part of what has happened with a lot of Protestant evangelicals is they just, they've just paint themselves into a narrow little corner and go there to die. And that seems pointless. And so when I put this image in it. I think that Protestantism was a way to reach people like it was like something. First of all, it's more accessible. Second of all, it's like it's far, it's more far reaching but it's like a way that eventually has to come back. That's my interpretation and I hadn't understood what what Pajero meant for when he said that the story of the West was the story of the grail. And, like, the story gets told, the grail starts becoming like harder to reach, and the grail is a standing for a lot of things it's standing for, like, like, I don't know common love and like ordinary love among among people, it's a standing for the feminine is the standing for martyrdom is the standing for like the body being held together in communion and and like giving itself. And I think the way Pajero interprets it is that something happened in the Middle Ages, where, like, there was the sacramental things started to lose their, I don't know their, their, their own, their power their theological like underpinnings. So, naturally that started to create. I don't know, like fishers in the structure. But I think that Protestantism is still the best way to reach people who are from without the church. But I think the idea is to eventually flow back. I would agree with that because, again, Protestantism is one of those rebel things that Pajero talks about. And I talked about regular at some point the protest has to end. You can't now could take 500 or 1000 years yeah, but at some point it has to end because it is not the tell us and Protestantism itself hasn't been able to sort of cohere in the way in some of the ways that the older traditions have been able to maintain. But that that that dynamic within Christianity has been present way before Protestantism. You had, you know, you had the Aryans you have the historians you had, I mean you had all kinds of different groups out there but at some point, they do have to come back and of course it has to be Christ at the center and Protestants will agree with that. At least most of them. I like. I just keep, I don't know, I was, I just keep coming back to this PHA thing like part of that, that, that coming in the the protest ending to me would be like, would be like if if if we can't even if the kids all playing the game can't all even fully articulate the rules, then, then that means that it doesn't mean there's no rules, but it has, it has to mean that it has to mean that all the rules and propositions. Eventually have to just be subjected back to the game. Be subject back to God be subject back to, to, to, to, we don't know what to do but our eyes are on you. So there's, you know, it was interesting to watch Peugeot and Peterson tweet about the truckers and because here in America, not a lot of news sources have picked up on the Canadian news, but neither of the Canadian news sources for the record. Real, I would imagine this would be huge. Getting buried man that's getting buried. Wow. Because you know, all those truckers going to Ottawa. They're not going to become MPs, their truckers. It's a protest. They're saying something is wrong with the system. The center has lost sight of the little bit of its world that our truckers, and the bigger part of their world that is the connectedness of goods and services in Canada. So, that's what a protest is the pen and Peugeot talks about that very well. The Jesus and Jesus lays all this out, the, the highest in the hierarchy is the servant of all. Jesus is always doing that kind of thing. And so when the truckers all show up in Ottawa and say, something is really broken here. The center should listen. And it's the job of the center to figure out what is broken because the truckers aren't all right. And so we're going to take our trucker I mean like well as of course was that is before your time but he was that ship shipyard worker in Poland who eventually became, you know, head of the country, because he rallied solidarity and the protest and, you know, over through the communists and, but the point of it is to have the hierarchy functioning as it should. Hmm. Yeah, there's something, there's something with that I think that's really crucial to like what's happening and then I also, I also feel like the hierarchy has to naturally emerge at the same time. We have to like submit to the higher, or we have to like fall into hierarchy, and then the hierarchy has to naturally emerge. Like for example like something like the, like, like the protest sending or the church consolidating or trying to create, or like, or even trying to talk about like an aggregate or something like that. Like the only way any of that can happen is the way those kids play that game. It all just has to match, it has to be natural like there can't be like you. And part of what you said at the beginning is like, well, like, it's not like, why did the IDW fail and what were the agendas there and like, it's weird because like it's not no agenda. I think the answer is like a whole bunch of different conflicting agendas, but us wanting the game to still go on. Well, it's, it's difficult for people to. Well, what do you want. Well, I want, and you almost always what we want is the end of a negative thing to actually articulate the goodness. That's really hard. You know, we use, you know, we use these three beauty, truth and goodness, but to articulate that I mean Chesterton pointed this out. That's really hard. Because we, we have so much difficulty conceptualizing it. We can say, yeah, it's, it's the, it's, it's not the pain. It's not the suffering. It's not the oppression, but freedom. But just, just, just pure open endedness. That's actually the clip that I dealt with with Rogan and Peterson today. Now that's let's play a game. You know what's next you're waiting for someone to give the constraint and as you said, with PSA, none of the kids know what the game is, but you play it long enough and enough tensions occur and it's like playing monopoly as a kid. You know, I don't know about you guys but everybody's house had different different monopoly rules. And so the first thing you do when you sit down to play a monopoly is you negotiate the rule same with risk. Yeah, I think you see you struck a very good point there because I think that's the main difference between the orthodox and the Protestants. I think that the Protestants like think well, the rules of the game will naturally emerge eventually, which is true, which is like, we all have inside of us, like the seed, like the divine spark within us that if we eventually play all the games we can play, we will eventually reach God through that, but it will be through so many trials and errors that it will be, it will be like It will be like hell, most of the time, and we have like this tradition that that that tells us, you don't have to invent the wheel like Jesus came he, he told us, these are the goods. And we've been trying to live this out, come check, check it out. Check how we see the world game this orthodox don't seem that different. They don't seem that different. Like they're different like in small ways but like the main thrust of the message seems pretty same to me, like, and I don't mean that in a bad way like it's all really good like, and I like all the different perspectives and everything but I don't like, if okay if it's not reinvent the wheel you already got the wheel, can you explain what the wheel is, other than just join the orthodox church, like, because that's what it is. That's just, that seems like a tribal thing. Yeah, to me is, is, is the perspective of, like the, the truth of God being living inside people, instead of inside ideas, because in a way like, I learned that in Bible school at a charismatic church. I don't know man. I get it like, I mean, I think that I think I don't, I don't, I don't know like, I think that like the Bible and like this, these, these, these things should be taken seriously and, and that this, and that not, it's not just like post modern type of structure like there has to be a structure. And I think that, that, that Christianity is providing the best map but, but I don't see how I, I, like, I like, I honestly the biggest reason I think we should all go orthodox is for tribal reasons. But like, that's not really the game we wanted to play in the first place. I think that the, at least what attracts me to the orthodox is that they have a theology that, that accounts for very subtle, very subtle like psychological and spiritual things. And that's what, like, for example, when, when I first, when I first entered into the, into the, into the discord, into the bridges of meaning discord, somebody asked me a question and they asked me, what is the relationship between the soul and the, and the spirit, and I didn't know it. And it was such a good question. And then I started, I started like researching, and that, that thing that we've been arguing about, and we've been talking about, and that that I think that maybe Protestants know how to do but at least the Protestants, I met don't know how to answer And this is already answered in the way that the orthodox speak about how you know the world. Like the orthodox think that you apprehend the world from something that is inherently intuitive. So it's basically presupposing divine, like, guidance. It's basically presupposing that God is showing you the way in a way that you cannot control it. I don't know how it's, and, and there's a there's a there's like room for the soul to not be imperfect alignment with the spirit. So, what I hear in the in the West is mostly speaking about the duality between like the soul and the body, but the orthodox think of the soul as the body in And the spirit is like this, like more intangible thing, but it's also like the pinnacle of consciousness. So, like the most like rational and the best part of you is your spirit. And then you have your soul which would be like your psyche which would be like your drives and whatever that has to submit to that spirit. So, it's like constant like interplay between both of them, but you don't need like perfect, like joining all the time. That's why Jesus is there to bridge that gap where your soul is not in alignment with the Spirit of God. I think that's the I think that's the argument in a, in a different way that might, might be at least a useful picture. You, when you're fighting from a team, and you're already engaging in tribalism to some extent. And the other team just looks like the opponent, but it might be that some some some teams actually have more going for them than others. And I'm not trying to make an argument for orthodoxy because I really don't like for me I don't care if anybody goes orthodoxy. I think it's incredibly useful. And the reason I find it incredibly useful is it's like trying as as an exploration of Christianity, it's like trying to go to the deeper parts of the Christian brain and trying to cut off some of the noise to get closer to the experience. And you can look at that and be like, well, that's, that's just another team, but it's actually, there's a tactic that's involved there of trying to get deeper into it get past some of the cognition and rationality and, and categories and try and go just a little bit deeper. But it's the solution. I don't think there's just there is one really positive trade off to I actually do like a lot of stuff about orthodoxy. I like like there seems to be a flexibility within it. That's what I find. That's like if I was to say one thing that I noticed. But I also like like I like to see like I like the clown show. Like I think it's awesome. Like I like like like I think like, like, and like I think that's part of like America's story. And like I think like is is like, just celebrating the, the, I don't know. I mean, Peugeot doesn't like he doesn't like he uses the word idiosyncrasy in a negative way, and I don't understand it like, like, I get like, I get like your own idiosyncrasy can be narcissistic, but there's an aspect of your own idiosyncrasy that's exactly what God made you. And I think that very much like expressed, you know, in, in, in, in, in, you know, in Western art, there's that, you know, people say it's too individualistic or whatever. But like, I think, I don't know, I think you got to go where the beauty goes and you see that in Western art. I'm seeing it. I'm seeing it in in the cestuary. Well, that's the hidden thing. Like what if loving the idiosyncrasy is the hidden thing? Like, I'd say that if you're if your lover loves you, they love your, they love your idiosyncrasies too. But they also love how those idiosyncrasies can serve like a higher purpose. Like, for example, you, Chris, you're very funny. Like, I'm sure that that that that you're that your wife like appreciates that. And that becomes something like higher. But if you were a funny guy that never like, never actually, I don't know, manned up and use the use the humor to deflect from responsibilities, then that idiosyncrasy would go too far. And I think that the problem of the West and especially the US is that they forgot about the center and it's all about the idiosyncrasy. And you have to love me because that's who I am. And you have to recognize me. And if you don't love me, I'm going to kill you because you're a fool. I agree with that. Don't love me, I'm going to kill you. Well, that's extreme. That last part. They don't say it, but they acted out. I'm going to, I'm going to cancel you. I'm going to call the manager. I like, I like, I don't know, I really like like, I don't know, I like this, like, it's like a messy conversation. Like, I like it because I like it because it's like, angel. Yeah, it's a messy angel. Right. That might be a title. But like, yeah, I don't know, I think you got to make a bigger mess to clean, clean, before you clean it up and like, I guess I'm just like interested in in understanding like, in this in this realm of participation exactly how it all works like, in this realm of like, like, because I think I think that I think that there's something bigger happening than, than the sum of the parts, and I think there's something bigger happening that any everybody's individual agenda. And so, I don't know, I guess maybe it doesn't even have to be fully understood, but yeah, it's interesting. It's interesting like what, what, what nerves get pushed and why they get pushed and it's yeah. Yeah, because like what I like about, I also liked about Peterson and I liked about all of that type of stuff was, was all that was the intellectual courage, and, and like a lot of like the intellectual dark web was about exploring these dark spaces and shining lights and asked, looking under these rocks and finding out what's there. And I, and that seems to be crucial, especially like in the moment of crisis that we're in to be looking under those rocks. I think the IDW I don't think it was well named, because I think actually a lot of its function was to, in fact, shine a light on some of what had been happening. And it was that light that attracted people to it. So, and it certainly was intellectual. Its webness kind of fell apart. So, it was, I think it was, it was quite poorly named. It wound up being sort of a cluster of the semi canceled, not fully canceled because the ones that we see, obviously have a large degree of visibility often on social media, they're they're really exiled from the, from the blue church. And in a lot of ways that's who the IDW was blue church exiles, because, you know, except Ben Shapiro always was a conservative but most of them had been progressives for whom they basically had said hey, you know this is this is getting out of hand, and nope, you're out. And that's, that's what we've seen and that's what the pushback has been. And a lot of it goes to Peterson's question you know, how do we know when the left goes too far. Where's that boundary. We have an idea of the boundary on the right. Where's the boundary on the left, and how dare you ask that question. And off they went. So, maybe, maybe a, a re reconstituting of, of that, of that spirit would be to actually name it better than the name that Eric Weinstein gave it. Because in retrospect, amateur light web. Well, I think, I think they were, they didn't co here. They were exiles and exiles can sometimes co here, because they've lost their, you know, they've been. It's, you know, for baking talks about domicide. They were, they were excommunicated from the blue church, but yet it's interesting because the, the power of the blue church gave them visibility. I mean Peterson, the irony of much of this was even though the, the media did a hit job on Peterson's reputation. They also vaulted him. Do you, do you feel like the blue church had the same, same dynamic play out from the Christian church, especially in the 60s. It seemed like the entire counterculture movement that came from, from that and now this blue church that's formed and, and kind of feels like the, the new dominant religion, you know, like Christianity is at 49% attendance in America for the first time. Like, that seems to have been like it only could have emerged from, from that. Like, now, now we've got this, this, like, you know, this atmosphere, this atmosphere of, like you said, need to name it better but intellectual dark web emerging as a resistance to this. Is this just the nature of things? Like, like, how, how, how does this, how does this work like, like, I can't help but look at the seeds of the blue church to be something that started off with good intentions, but now feel, I'll just speak for myself feel oppressive. And, and, and what, what do you think about that? I think that's right. I think my voice recently did a conversation with, I forget her name now. I put some clips on the Vander clips channel. Some of the, you know, some people like Patrick Dean and, and some of the Roman Catholics and to a degree Peugeot too, on this reactionary side are basically saying liberalism has played itself out. And even those who are protesting liberalism, which is what a lot of conservatism is, they're just liberalism 10 minutes ago. Yeah, that's why the left always seems to be. That's why we're always seem to be drifting left, and the conservatives are just following along. And I think that's a, I think that's a valid critique. And this is why I think partly that Peugeot gets so much traction, because he's looking to far larger older structures. And the reason Peterson got visibility is because Peterson gave those structures plausibility in a way that many people hadn't. That doesn't mean that the issues with those structures are resolved. And that's sort of where, you know, verveky and I, we can't go back to Constantinople. We can't go back to Rome. Because Constantinople and Rome are not what they used to be. And so, it's it's a weird place where we're post structural, knowing we need a structure, and knowing that we're going to have to find that structure to a degree and it's, it's, we're going to have to become. We're going to have to see the perennial structure, but a lot of what has happened in the last 500 years has to be integrated into that structure. And that's the challenge. That's, that's really big and hard. What would that look like to you, could you imagine what that would look like. I don't know. Yeah, that's, you know, because I, so then Rome says no it looks like us and orthodoxy says we've had it all along, and the Protestants say. So that's kind of where we're at. But it's, it's definitely more sacramental than the Protestants have been at. It's second it's definitely more perennial and that gives strength to the Catholics and the Orthodox. And so what I see with a lot of Protestants is they're sort of making their way back there and making their way back to a lot of the older liturgies and the older forms, but all of this stuff has to, we have to figure out how to integrate it, because a lot of new stuff has developed in the last 500 years. And orthodoxy isn't the Orthodox aren't Amish. They didn't just put up a wall and say, we're going to live without the internet, I see orthodox on the internet all the time. Okay. That's got to be integrated into the, into the structure. How is part of what it looks like. Um, because it seems like like especially in this corner that most people are willing to accept the idea that the ideas of the Enlightenment. Do not do not belong at the top of the hierarchy need to be integrated but but but belong on a lower level that that that this part of post secularism is also post rationality or all that kind of stuff like, like, an understanding that that that the idea that that that trying to figure this whole thing out from an intellectual perspective is folly like that does seem to be where we're all willing to like that's that seems to be a big flag everybody's, which is hilarious because this is an intellectual world what that word, and we're all agreeing that it's not really intellectual what we're after. I agree with it but the what we're looking after is now taboo, because we're looking after dogma and dogma is now a forbidden word. After the enlightenment, you cannot have dogma dogma just means opinion. You know what the enlightenment did was promise the individual to free him. And it crushed him. So, that that's what I mean to say when, when I don't see a way to integrate the enlightenment back into the, because it's like a parasite, it takes the best of a Christian idea, and it subverts it, and it, and it, and it dominates it, and it, and it makes it like a hollow shell of what it used to be. And it's so similar to the real thing that you sometimes mistake it for it. I know Peterson does it all the time, he wants to look to free speech to save us. And that's another enlightenment ideal that doesn't pan out. So in that sense, we don't even know how much of that we have in our minds that we have to like purge. And I'm not saying we have to like erase history or forget history or go back to the past, because it's impossible to go back to the past, but I think that what Peugeot is trying to do is exactly the right thing trying to recover beauty that was lost. And, and that's what I'm what I mean to say when, when I look to the Orthodox Church for answers. Beauty that's been lost. When one of my favorite parts of, I didn't remember which series it was where there's maps of meaning or personality. When, when Peterson asked the question what is a car. Is the car, a way to get to the supermarket. Is the car, a way to change the atmosphere of the planet. Is a car, a way to redesign the cities of the world. The system. When before that. Think about before the Protestant Reformation, the Protestant Reformation comes right on the heels of the Colombian exchange what is the Colombian experience changes when Columbus finds you know, he's making his way to China and boop. There's a big thing in the way called North and South America. And that changes the world. And in the heels of that, the world has changed dramatically in the light last 500 years in ways that could not have been anticipated in the thousands of years of civilization before that. The question of what a car is, is not incidental to the question of Christianity. In a sense, saying that it is, is a very Protestant thing. Although Protestant sort of run the gamut because the Amish say no it's very, you know, they understand what cars are and they're not going there. Other Protestants are way at the other end to say but as long as I have my personal relationship with Jesus. I can use a car. The car has to be integrated now maybe the car is going to go away. We don't know. But so much stuff has been kicked up in the last 500 years that it's going to have to be integrated, but we've only had the car for 100 years. And we're probably still not adequately coming to terms with it. And it goes to civilizations that were running at a far slower clock speed. I mean with the fall of Rome. Well now, the fall of Rome only fell in the west well then you have the monasteries and then you have the hierarchy and I mean all of that took a long time but the the changes in technology happened very slowly. So now we have the internet car, we haven't been able to integrate the car. We probably haven't really been able to integrate the printing press. Now we have the internet. So, you know, I think part of what I think the Protestant Protestants are about is an attempt to integrate Protestantism is sort of this experimental workshop out on the fringe. And if you would agree the Orthodox and the Catholic just watch and they let the Protestants die so they don't have to just like ideas, you know. Well that's one way not to do church, who don't do it that way, but I do it that way. So I. And when you say that is how they talk about people hiring openness have to live a more high risk high reward lifestyle. And so it could I mean but that that would come down to a personality difference in it and just a like a what yeah yeah just like literally like that's not. That's just literally just different strategies. It's not a small difference. And that too gets. So, in Protestantism you have different churches that in some ways manifest different personalities, as such. And the Amish are, you know, hyper conservative there are people in the Amish community that are high and openness for the pretty clamped down on, you know, they're going out for their rump spring and never come back. So that's why Protestants are sort of this fringe of the church that are playing with things. And that's part of how I see the church that it's, it's deeply connected. And even doctrinally. So you have these creeds that are sort of, you know, so Protestant Catholic and Orthodox at least magisterial Protestants share certain creeds with the Catholics and the Orthodox, and then so the filial clause well there, you've got a division and it just goes out from there. But we're trying to, we are seeking integration. And that, that, it seems to map almost directly on to what Brett Weinstein and Heather Hein were saying recently I think in conversation with Jordan Peterson about how much we as humans have changed our natural environment so much that we don't know how it's affecting us. And that seems to be the same problem on just a different, a different level. And it's really interesting because it's like, well, yeah, we can't go back. But we have to find a way to take all the new adaptations and make them part of the whole, but not constantly shooting off. And it's also for the benefit of those things on the fringe because if they keep launching out further and further destruction waits for all of them. And so it's finding a way to go at a pace that is benefiting all the personality types and all the structure. And it's, it's such a difficult problem that for me it's very easy to just jump to the like, well that's not going to happen until Christ comes back and shows us. Okay, you've gotten all these tools and you've really made a mess of it so let me remind you what the structure is all over again. I can't find it but it does seem that that process is what we should be focusing on to some extent because it's, it's benefiting everyone and it's not a structure that you're forcing on the system. It's like trying to find the balance of our environment again, both spiritually and physically. I would say that what comes in me is like a big sympathy for fundamentalists, like, when they when they become afraid of the Darwinism and because I have no problem with Darwinism I think I think it's a neat theory, but the problem with that is believing that your genes are the same as your passions so that your passions in a way get are adapting constantly to a changing environment. And the way I see it, and I may be wrong, but the environment is always the same because the passions are always primarily in relationship to each other. So in a way, the human being is not evolving spiritually. He is like constantly getting nearer to God in a way or developing his own internal relationships, according to a preset model that is Jesus. So, so Jesus in a way would be the perfect integration of all those different passions. If, if what you're saying is correct, then Jesus wouldn't be one thing. He would be many different things. And he would be like impossible to grasp. And that's, that's what my problem with for example, Jay Dyer, because Jay Dyer has a very fundamentalist position when he denies like evolution, and I don't think you have to discard evolution. What I think is that evolution provides a very similar framework that then gets like, I don't know, it's like a virus that goes into then the neuroscience of who you are. I don't think that you can like make that jump. Maybe like evolution is totally correct, but it doesn't mean that your spirituality evolves as some mythical difference in environment creates a pressure to be I don't know more aggressive or more caring or more whatever. I think that the human being was is always subjected to those same pressures, and maybe like a like a period of time may try to select for one thing, but the fact that those passions are in constant clash with each other, and there's so many makes it like a stable So no matter if you're in a society filled with barbarians, you're still going to need that like counterbalance that is found in Christ, because if not then the society collapses under its own weight under its own contradictions, like the frictions between each passion would be like the, the thing that would make the building collapse. At least that's what comes like in me when you say that. I don't think I disagree with any of that I do think those two ideas are more connected than we might see yet, but I don't disagree with anything that you said. Going back a little bit to like the Enlightenment like it is it seems it seems like a big part of like, like, and this seems to be the only way that like you can have like materialist start talking about agregores is if like, as a culture we're acknowledging that the aspect of the Enlightenment that isn't working. Is this, is this idea that everything can just be explained rationally and we can all just like fall into this like, like we can all like all we need to do is think rationally and then in the world, it'll all make sense and it'll all be gravy like we're having like the exact seems like we're having the exact opposite experience. And like, it seems like it seems like the way forward is, is somehow acknowledging that and then, and then from, and then from there like also putting the pieces together like I get I get what you're saying, Ivan I think your arguments fair enough that like there's something not quite right about it just naturally emerging like something not quite right about that. But at the same time like, what else can it be if it's if it's irrational. Right, like, like, what else can it be. And so, I'm trying to just put those together. It's a miracle man. Yeah, exactly. That's where we agree it has to be a miracle. As a good place to end it. It's going to take a miracle to save the world. It's a Christian belief. I believe in miracles. Thank you for taking time Paul. What's that. Thanks for taking time with us. Yeah, it's my pleasure. It's great to it's great to meet with you guys and to check in again. And yeah, I forgot that I'm hosting this so when I hit that end button you all go away. We're still in your heart. You're still in my heart. All right, gentlemen, it was very good connecting with you guys. Bye. All right. Bye bye.