https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-gVubIg6fkw

 We talk all the time. I know we talk all the time, but this is for real. We're going to share this with the world. So this is Paul, and I have a very special guest with me today, Jacob. And I have gotten to know Jacob now over the last little while on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. As I continue to do whatever on earth I am doing, one of the things that I reflect a lot on what I do and the kinds of things that it brings up. The Bridges of Meaning Discord server is kind of a place to get to know people better. And for me, that's really important because I now know lots more people than I knew three years ago. But to get to know them in this internet way is sort of like internet famous. And I like getting to know people in a little deeper way. And of course, there's only 24 hours in a day. I can only have so much time to get to know people. And one of my real treats has been getting to know Jacob because Jacob has taught me a lot. And we had a conversation before. There are all kinds of technical issues. And so I didn't share it publicly. Maybe we still will. I don't know. But there are all kinds of issues. And so I thought he commented to somebody. He says, well, Paul didn't want to share the first conversation. And I thought, well, we've got to do this right. So Jacob, this is our chance because I got something. This is all tangled up here now. I want the world to know Jacob a little bit better. And he's taught me a lot. So let's have at it. We're going to start with your story. My story. Your story. And Jacob said, my life's an open book. So I thought, oh, boy, here we go. Open book awaits. So Jacob, where were you born and who were you born to? Ah, so I was born on the seventh of Tehr. I don't actually know the year. I was born in Iran. So the calendar is different. So Tehr is the month of cancer, I believe. And the year is like 1300 something in Iran. It's the Muslim calendar. Anyway, in Tehran clinic. So I was born in Tehran. My parents are my parents. I don't know what to tell you. I mean, we ended up coming to the United States. I originally came here with political asylum. I don't want to get too much into everything that happened during the war. I mean, there was a war in Iran and everything. And my parents have a lot of undeserved shame and guilt about all of that. Here, I wanted to tell you this story. This is a beautiful story. I'm going to tell you two stories. So my earliest memory was, I don't know if you've been to a traditional Jewish service, but prayer service. But for everybody who hasn't, the main prayer part is silent. And you would be excused for watching one and thinking that Jews worship the Torah scroll. Because the scroll, it's reading, it has a very prominent position. And my earliest memory is my father actually holding me. And there's a part of the prayer service where they lift the scroll, open scroll for everyone to see. And the tradition is you take the fringes of your prayer shawl and you point towards it and you say, Zot HaTorah Asher Sam Moshe Lefnei B'Ei Yisrael Torah Tzibala Neu Moshe Marasha Keilat Yaakov. You'll recognize the word Yaakov at the end of that. So my father teaching me to say those words, this is the Torah that Moses taught us. Moses taught us Torah as an inheritance for the congregation of Jacob. And my Hebrew name was Jacob. I had a Persian name as well. When I came here, I changed. So that's the first story. The second story, my dad told me years later when I was in Yeshiva, he told me this story. When we left Iran, when we tried to leave the second time, my dad had to, because the first time he had gotten caught, he had gone to prison. So he had to walk across the border. And he told me ever since he was a little kid, during the evening prayers, we say a Psalm of a sense, I raise my eyes, you know that Psalm. You know that Psalm. He said ever since he was a little kid, he was always bothered by the line. It says, the sun shall not harm you at day and the moon at night. And he was always bothered by that line. What does that mean for the moon to hurt you at night? So while he was trying to sneak across the border, they were sleeping during the day and they were walking. He walked about three days across the hilly part border of Iran and Turkey. They were walking at night and the night they got, they were on top of a hill and they got to basically the valley where the border is. And he had to get across to the other hill. And it was a full moon. And out in the middle of nowhere. And he said it felt like it was a full day. And he literally said he raised his eyes to the mountains. Where is my help going to come? And that line which had bothered him from the evening prayers ever since he was a little kid, always bothered him. And it all came together. Yeah, so that's where I come from. That's great. That's great. So you grew up obviously in a household that was observant. And okay, well, say more about that. I mean, he obviously knew, he obviously knew the Psalms. He, I mean, he brought you to participate in the religion of your people. And so you came to America. Did all that keep going? Or what happened in America? So this is America does stuff funny things to religious people. Well, it wasn't, it's not just America. You have to realize my father, when he left Iran and went to Israel to study in the 60s. And he got his bachelor's degree in engineering in Israel. And one more story he told me when I was in Yeshiva, and I was far more religious, and I continue to be far more religious than my parents are comfortable with. In fact, so is my sister. But at the time, I was definitely a lot more observant than my parents. My parents were not happy with my level of observance. And I spent a year in Yeshiva in Israel, and my parents came to visit. And my dad told me that when he came to the United States, one of these orthodox schools offered me free tuition, so that he wouldn't put me in the public school. And he said he went to visit the school and he saw all the kids running around with their yarmulkes and tzitzit hanging out. And he decided that's not what I want for my son. And he was telling me in Jerusalem while I was studying in Yeshiva with a yarmulke and tzitzit. Right. So my dad, he, because he knew Hebrew well, he was, and he's the oldest son, he's always been like the rabbi of the family. Like everyone asks him to say the prayers and stuff. But he never wanted me to be more religious than he is. And so when I was briefly the youth rabbi at a synagogue, my parents wouldn't even come to my synagogue. Wow. So why did you wind up more religious than your father? You know, I was one, so I don't have much patience with hypocrisy. If you believe it, you believe it. If you don't believe it, you don't believe it. Right. And I was talking to Richard and telling him about my childhood. And it suddenly dawned on me. I read Crime and Punishment when I was 12. And I don't even remember it. But I loved it so much, I immediately read Brothers Karamazov and The Prince and Anna Karenina. And I started on this whole Russian literature kick. That's pretty young for that literature. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I don't really remember it. Now that, I mean, Jordan Peterson talks so much about it, especially Dostoevsky. Yeah. I wonder if that's why I never bought into the nihilism. I remember reading Camus in school. And I always found it to be completely worthless. I really did. It was like, if, so I don't believe in atheists. I don't. And when Jordan Peterson said, like, there are lots of people who say they're atheists, but they don't act like it. Right. I've agreed with him about that forever. Right. And maybe that is like, that's been ingrained in me all the way back from like, when I was 12 and Dostoevsky. But yeah, I don't believe in atheists. And like, the whole concept, okay, you're going to tell me there's no God of any sort. Then why do I get out of bed in the morning? Like, what does it matter? Like, why does anything matter? Just wasn't my thing. Like, and so I remember, I actually remember this vividly because I was a freshman in college and I was at the computer labs. And I was typing an email to my friends. And I, I like, did a decision tree, right? Do I believe in God? Yes or no? Yes. Do I believe in an intelligent God? Yes. Do I believe that God wants certain things from me? Yes. Do I know what that is? Not really. But I figured God must have, if God wants me to know him, then he must have given me clues. And so that memory of my father teaching me, this is the Torah that Moses, and now that I understand the whole ceremony behind it, right, every single Saturday and actually every three days in a synagogue, two people stand up and they read the, of the Torah and they say, this is the Torah that Moses taught us. And it is a testimony for generations. And that is the testimony of my father. So I, everything else has been a, um, everything else I learned, right? Anything else about God has, that's the, that's the measuring stick, right? The, the five books of Moses, the Torah, that is the measuring stick. If, if it, if it goes along with that, then yes, I will accept it. And if it doesn't, bye, goodbye. No way. That's, and that's been the foundation of my religious, religious journey my whole life, I guess. So how'd, how'd you wind up in Israel and Yeshiva? How did that, what happened there? You obviously weren't pushed there by your father. No, I mean, so I guess, I guess I, this is where I start talking about the Rebbe. So Rebbe is, is Yiddish for Rabbi, but it's, it's more familiar. And Hasidim, so in Hasidic, there's always a leader, oftentimes translated as the grand rabbi, which is kind of weird because you're translating what is, you know, a familiar term, Rebbe. It's, it's, Rebbe is less, is more familiar than rabbi, right? But you translate it as grand rabbi. So the Rebbe of Chabad, the seventh Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, he revolutionized Judaism during his, I mean, he's, he has almost single-handedly, certainly a continuation of things that previous Hasidic rabbis, like Hasidism, people don't realize Hasidism is only 300 years old. And it's, it's been a revivalist movement that started with Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov 300 years ago. And it has caught fire to the point where now it's kind of funny, but like people think, okay, you hear Hasidic Jew, you think these are the most orthodox, you know, these, these are the people who are keeping everything exactly as it was a thousand years ago. And it's like, yes and no, it's, it's, it's a revivalist movement, which certainly bases itself on tradition. But at the same time, and this is, I mean, it's kind of funny. In a way, it's not, I mean, it's, yes, it seeks to revivify Judaism, and it has to a great extent. And honestly, I mean, after World War II, a lot of people thought Orthodox Judaism was dead. And Orthodox Judaism today is the only really living part of, you know, the only, well, it's not, it's not a very good denomination as a denomination. But it's the only one that's that's, that I would say has a fire to it. That's a lie. It's interesting that we've seen this in Christianity, you know, with, with what we'd call fundamentalism in the United States. We've seen it in Islam. I remember, you know, after the First World War, a lot of people thought Islam was, had had it, but these very conservative movements in, and, you know, we use this word conservative. Probably these, what word to use these very energetic movements that are looking back to bring the back into the present. It's not reactionary. That's, that's the important part. This is why I use the term revivalist, right? A revivification is not a reactionary. We're not seeking to go back. I'm not seeking to go back. I think this is where the, the reactionaries get everything wrong, right? I'll tell you another story. So I asked my grandmother, she died a year or two ago. Now my grandmother, she spoke Aramaic. That was her first language. It was Aramaic. And, you know, I asked her about her life growing up. And she grew up literally on the, on the rivers of Babylon, literally. Like her brother, when he, he's living in Jerusalem, he feels that that song has been his life, because they literally went from living in a small little village on the rivers of Babylon to Jerusalem. And my grandmother told me when she was a kid, what she and all the women folk did all day was cook and take the dishes down to the river to wash them and bring them back. Sew and take the clothes down to the river and wash them and bring it, bring them back. And when she moved, she finally moved to a place where there was soap and running hot water and a kitchen and electricity. She told me she felt like it was like the world had completely changed for her. And because of that, when people told her that a lot of the old ways, you know, these are ancient ways, like keeping separate meat and milk dishes. She's like, well, I mean, we're washing them in hot water. That's kind of like koshering them in between. Right. So for her, she just felt like she was in such a different world that she just left all the old ways behind. And I don't, I'm not seeking to go back and live like the Amish, you know, on the rivers of Babylon. I'm looking forward, as you know, to the Messiah. And that is a better world than my grandmother lived in. Not, not, I'm not looking to go back to like a thousand years ago or two thousand years ago. I'm looking forward to the Messiah and the Messianic age. And honestly, nothing would be more heaven for me than to be able to live a life like I did that year. I was in Yeshiva where morning I get up in the morning, I go to prayers, I can pray, I can spend the whole day on Talmud. When we were in Yeshiva, we used to joke like Talmud, like breaking your head on a piece of Talmud, we used to joke it's like a smack habit. Like that's, that was the sign we had for, let's go back to Talmud. It was, right? Because that's what it feels like to break your head on a piece of Talmud. Right? If I could do that for the sake of the Lord, I would be able to If I could do that for the rest of my life and nothing else, heaven, gishmak, you know, in Yiddish, gishmak, right? It's, it's, I've never done drugs, but I, that's, that's what I imagine. Like when, like, I, not, no other intellectual, you know, thing I've ever done has been like this, where like, there's this text, and you're trying to understand it, and there's thousands of years of commentaries, right? There's Rashi and there's and there's Maimonides and there's, and you're just trying to understand like this one line, we would spend 30, 40 hours on like 10 words, right? And it's partner learning. So you're sitting there, you're arguing it like, it means this, it means that, but Rashi says this and Tosvod says that, and then you're like, oh, I'm going to do this, and then you're like, oh, I'm going to do this, and then Tosvod says that, and then, and then it breaks like ice breaking, and heaven. So yeah, so when the Messiah comes, you know, that's, that's what I imagine heaven's going to do. Well, you're, you're, you're not doing that now. What happened? I mean, an open book, I'm not getting a lot of open book here. I get, I love the stories, but you know, you, you somehow got from being raised in a family that your father didn't want you to be too orthodox, all the way over into Yeshiva, and then, and then now you're sitting in this office and I meet you on a, on a Discord. Hang on, someone just came to the door. I'm going to pause the video. Who knows what's going on? All right, here we go. All right, sorry. So you have all these transitions and, and, and you told us what you want to do, and you know, here we are today. I didn't meet you because I traveled to Israel and you were, you know, living the, you were living the dream. So you got to fill, got to fill me in on some stuff here. It's not about what I want to do. Oh, it's getting even more interesting. Honestly, like if, if God wanted me to sit there studying Talmud all day, then he would have created me sitting there. You know, it's, it's funny. Brett Weinstein on his, he had a Facebook group that he was a little active on. And once he wrote a comment, like, I feel like my whole life has been a preparation for this moment. You know, like it's, it's all prepared him and he's like, it's strangely prepared me for the, for what happened at Evergreen. And, and my response was, how do atheists say such things? Jordan Peterson should be laughing his head off when they say such things. I know, I know, I know. And honestly, I mean, there were several places where I could have taken a very different turn and I would likely be in a very different place. But at any one time, I have the knowledge that I have and God has given me the capacities that I have. And I have to put all of them to the best use in making the world, right? God's kingdom down on earth as it is in heaven. Well, I want to, I want to connect some dots here because I, you know, we're, we're, we're leaving the, we're leaving the listeners and, and you're, you're, we don't see any, we don't see any of this. What happened? You, you, do you, did you leave that community? Do you, are you a, are you a, I mean, what's going on? I mean, I, I even ask these just for my own, because I've, you know, gotten pieces of your story, but you mean, what do you believe now? Why aren't you, I assume you're not a, a regular member of that community. What communities are you a regular member of? How can we locate you on the map right now? Who are you? I am not a regular member. Although, like, if you were to ask me who my rabbi is, it's still Rabbi Wagner, who is the, the rabbes emissary to USC, which is where I went to college. And he is still, you know, I, I, it's funny. He, he certainly disagrees with me on a lot of stuff, but it's, it's hard to, look, I know Rabbi Wagner. I have lived with him, kind of, like, I, I know him, and I know, I have seen miracles I'm not joking, miracles, holy, holy person. Um, but ultimately, that wasn't the life that God wanted for me. Um, it's, uh, so many different things happened, and some of them I can't explain, some of them are very personal, but I never lost the idea that the reason why I'm sitting here in this chair is because ultimately that was God's decision, that I be sitting here within this chair and using this computer as opposed to the other one that has a camera that doesn't work. And that camera doesn't work because that's what God wants. You sound very Calvinist. Um, so this, this, this was actually the big fight between the Hasidim and their opponents 300 years ago was, uh, what's called Hashkah Pratit, uh, whether divine providence is at the level of what mouse is sitting here. Wow, 300 years ago, huh? Well, that was the fight. Yeah, that's very interesting. The fight got really ugly. The fight got really, really ugly. Yeah, the Senate of Dort didn't, didn't get unugly either. So, and that was about 400 years ago. So it's very interesting. It's very interesting to me. So, okay. It's God's will that you be here, but again, the, we don't have a lot of people like you in the Bridges of Meaning Discord. We've got a, we've got a bunch of people who, um, are really interested in, um, in orthodoxy and not Jewish orthodoxy. Eastern orthodoxy, which I have to say, and I say this on, on the, uh, servo a lot, like a lot of things I thought was Christianity, original sin, right? Um, the, the egalitarian Trinity, um, the, there, there have been many things like this, like I, uh, penal substitutionary atonement. Like, I thought that was Christianity and I find out it's Western Christianity. The Eastern orthodox don't believe in original sin. They believe in ancestral sin, which I think is still wrong, but not as wrong. Um, they, they believe in a monarchical Trinity, which it's still wrong, but not as wrong. Um, and they believe in a different, like they have a different concept of, of Jesus's atonement, which again, they're wrong, but not as wrong. Um, so, I mean, I ended up on, on your server because, um, Jordan Peterson was somebody who was helping me clean up my life. Um, so I, you know, I consider myself a devotee of Jordan Peterson and Eric Weinstein and you, um, in a very similar manner as I consider myself a devotee of, uh, the Lubavitcher Rebbe and Rabbi Wagner and other people who I feel are actually making the world a better place. And it becomes a question of what capacity do I have to contribute to the good work that's being done? Right. What are my capabilities? And, um, when it comes to teaching Judaism, I'm at the back of the, right. I, we should plug your YouTube channel. You do have a YouTube channel. I do. Yes. I have a YouTube channel, but so I have one track date of the Talmud to my name, hundreds of thousands of people are on the daily Talmud, which finishes the, the entire Talmud every seven and a half years. I have no capacity for that. Um, I do have the capacity to teach, uh, the Hebrew alphabet and, uh, T for tech last week. I taught him to read Hebrew. He, he can read Hebrew now. Mission accomplished. Seriously. I love it. I love it. I know. I, cause I, I heard you two going out and on the discord, I thought, Oh, this is fascinating. This is interesting. I can't use that word fascinating. People say use that word too much. It was okay, but I'm interested. So it's funny. I've been watching a lot of the master's seminary classes on YouTube. Um, boy. You're going to have to explain that one. I don't know if I can, where's, uh, where's Preston Sprinkle when we need him. Um, Preston Sprinkle, I just got, I've just got another one of his books. I'm going to do another conversation with him about his, he, he is a writer. He went to master's seminary and, um, he's, we have a conversation. We have a couple of conversations on the channel. He went to master's seminary religious. You know, this is, this is something that's hard and you and I both understand this, but religious communities and their interrelationships are so complex and there are all these little rivalries and discomforts and bigotries and this, you know, there's all this stuff going on between them. So masters is, you know, they're, they, they're sort of clumped up in the reformed category, but a lot of us think they're not really, they're sort of these weird dispensationalist American things and not, they're not the real deal. So. Well, I mean, so their, um, their, their history, I mean, I, I watched two semesters of theological history. I binge watched things and, um, I mean, obviously he had his bent, but what he was talking about was, you know, God's word. Yeah. Yeah. You, you put your faith in God's word. God's word changes the world. You don't change the world. I don't change the world. Right. Right. Right. Right. So if, if I'm teach like in, in my, uh, videos, I'm just teaching people how to use the various internet tools that are available, which miraculously are available. And I do believe this is a miracle. Um, did you get a chance to read that section of Maimonides I sent you? No. When did you send it to me? I, I direct messaged it to you. Um, so, um, there's a, there's a small section of Maimonides that was, uh, censored until very recently because it talks about Jesus. And, um, now that, you know, the internet being what it is, um, so people have started publishing uncensored versions. And censored it, the Catholics. Oh, okay. Um, so this is, this is actually pretty funny. You know, the standard, uh, Talmud additions that we have and what's called the rabbinic Hebrew Bible, the mikraot gedolot, they were all published by a Catholic printer, uh, first time, like he, he had a staff of some very prominent rabbis and he got permission from the Pope to print the first actual printings of the, the Talmud and the rabbinic Bible. And, um, yeah, so I mean, the Maimonides, Maimonides, his, uh, Mishnah Torah, I usually translate that as restatement of the law. Um, that was, that was censored by the Catholic censors. Oh my. Yeah. Um, and I mean, it, it would have been prudent for the Jews to censor it themselves because, um, most Christians probably would disagree with what Maimonides has to say about Jesus. Um, but, um, 900 years ago, Maimonides said that, um, he believed the reason why Jesus and that Ishmaelite, he means Mohammed, were able to do everything they were able to do was because they would spread the concept of God and monotheism and the Messiah all over the world. He says, and this is before the discovery of the New World, to the furthest islands. And so when the Messiah comes, everyone will be familiar with these concepts. They'll realize the Christians and Muslims are completely wrong and, and, uh, and understand the truth. Right. Right. Um, and while I do think he was absolutely prophetic, I don't, I'm not so egotistical to think that there might not be some things that I need to realize that possibly I've gotten wrong so far. Um, and so, I mean, where I got my interest in Christianity became based on that Maimonides, um, that section of Maimonides was, well, so I know enough about Judaism to provide context to the things that Jesus says, uh, to people who want to hear that. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, when, when people, and which led me to actually trying to read and understand what Jesus said, because I'm used to, if, if I ask, I ask Rabbi Wagner something and we have a disagreement, I have it, I have yet to actually win a debate with him. Right. Uh, he, he's only two years older than me, but, um, he's like, you know, when it comes down to it, he knows everything, Pat, and when he says it's X and I'm thinking it's Y and we pull out the sources, it's X. Because he actually knows his stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, he knows Judaism almost as well as people on the server think I do. I know. Um, but so my, my feeling had always been, you know, the Christians understand Jesus better than, than I do. So when a Christian tells me that Jesus said he was God, I figured Jesus must have said he was God. Um, I've changed my mind on that. I've changed my mind on that. Well, let's, let's, let's move over to Jesus now. And because you've, I mean, you've, you've shared a bunch of stuff with me and, and I've, I've valued your presence on the server and, um, you, you've shared some really interesting perspectives that you've had on Jesus with me on his Messiah ship. Why don't you talk about that a little bit? As I had never heard any of that before until, until you brought it out. It's like, oh, well, that's interesting. So I looked up some of that stuff. Okay. So I'm not trolling. I'm not trolling. And like, people will say he's trolling. I'm not trolling. Um, Christian comes from the word Christos, which means anointed, which is the translation of the word Messiah Messiah. I don't see a lot of messianism in Christianity. I don't. When you told me this the first time, I thought, oh, this is fascinating. And so what is, what is messianism for you? I mean, looking forward to the coming of the Messiah. Okay. What is the Messiah to you? The Messiah is the fulfillment of prophecy of God's prophecy, of God's kingdom on earth, the Mellach Hamashiach, the King who is anointed by God and God's kingdom being here, this being God's kingdom, the end to suffering, the end to, uh, you know, that, that it should no longer be, be necessary for me to say to you, know God because we should, we will all know God and right. The waters cover the sea. And, and Stefania three nine, I, um, I, I, I quote it on, uh, I quoted at the end of each of my videos, right? I, I will, I will the, the Hebrew word is very interesting. It's, uh, comes from the roots to turn over, right? I will turn over a Barura, a winnowed language. And so that all the nations will be able to call in the name of God with literally one shoulder, right? So the, the fulfillment of God's wishes on earth, heaven on earth, not heaven on earth, on earth, right? Um, and honestly, I'm like, if Christians talk about the coming of Jesus, it's with trepidation, maybe. Yes, you're right. You're right. No, nobody's, nobody's looking forward to it. And all the Hollywood movies have it trying to forestall the apocalypse, which is of course, the apocalypse is the revelation and the revelation of who it's the revelation of the Son of Man. It's the revelation of it's the second coming. It's all those like, no, you're quite right. And this is what's, this is what's fascinating to me about you is because the points you are making are, are so, I mean, you're looking, you're watching Christians from the outside and you know, the text and you know, the story from, you know, from the Hebrew scriptures and you're watching them and you're like, what's with you? And then you read the gospels and you know, the gospels are this, I mean, to me, what those gospels are was Jesus' attempt to redefine that term, because everyone expected a certain thing out of him, including John the Baptist, apparently from Matthew 11, and Jesus doesn't deliver and Jesus does this other thing with it, which then sets up, I think, the heart of your question about, to the degree that Christians are messianic or not. And so all of those, all of those tensions and ambiguities are right there in what you say. And I simply love it that you bring them and you say, what are you people doing? I think that's exactly right, because I think it makes, it makes the tensions in the New Testament gospels come alive to a church that in many ways is sort of, doesn't know what it's doing, but is going through some certain motions that it has been set on, instead of actually stopping and asking the kinds of really important challenging questions that you've been asking Christians on the server. That's part of the reason I love watching you do what you do there, because it's a breath of fresh air for someone who has been in the church forever, because you don't come, you know, sometimes sometimes people sort of forest gump in some fresh air, where they just ask the obvious thing and and it's, you know, it's the obvious thing, but you come with, you come with a degree of knowledge and preparation of a certain angle that many don't have. And so when I watch you challenging and asking questions and I see it as a very helpful, I see it as a very helpful contribution to the community. So I agree with you that I think, I think God's got you exactly where you should be. Amen, amen. But of course we're coming at this from, you know, sort of different places. And that was part of the reason why once I heard learned a little bit of your story, it's like, well, what's he doing here? And the more I watch you here, the the more delighted I am by it, because, because of all the ways that you are challenging Christians and non-Christians and atheists and the whole menagerie of folks that are in this strange little community to, you know, to think, to think about the text in a serious way. And so, and I, you know, I, as a Protestant minister, that's one of the real, that's one of the things I want people to do. I want people to think about the text in a serious way. And you prompt them to do it, because you ask uncomfortable and difficult questions, just like your point about, you know, your, and the first time you told me that, I thought, I just found it, you're not very messianic. What's wrong with you? I thought, oh, this is delightful. So I don't know. So I love what you're doing, and I want you to keep doing it. Thank you. Well, I hope, I mean, I hope what I'm doing is, is like, because, you know, I, I, I certainly have my doubts, right? There are definitely people who are not happy that I am there. There are people who have asked for me to be kicked off the server. There are times when I wonder if it's not better not to poke people in their axioms so hard. I haven't seen you do it so hard. I mean, you're, you're just asking questions and, and who you are and where you're coming from, you know, for yet. And again, people on the server don't like it when you share your opinion of the apostle Paul. And I, but I, I don't, I'm just a very strange person. The further I get in this, the further I realize how strange I am. But maybe I'm just, maybe I'm just a very deep iconoclast, but for you to, to make the kinds of challenges you do forces people to, oh, what do I believe? Well, why, why should, why should we look at this book that has, you've got these four synoptic gospels, which are, you know, three of them obviously bear from a similar route. And then the gospel of John, oh boy. And then all these other Joanne books, oh boy. And then Paul of Tarsus. And for you to level the kinds of challenges you do, I think that helps people to say, well, wait a minute. I, what, what are the reasons that, that we think Paul is helpful and important? I find you have that, I find you have that, I find you prompt me in that way. And I find it forces me to pay more attention, be a little less sleepy and be a little sharper. So I think you do me a service. Because now when I say stuff, I've got you, you know, you've colonized one little member of my consciousness parliament and about the apostle Paul. And I've got to deal with that little fella sometimes. And that's, that's good for me. Well, I mean, that's, that's what Jordan Peterson said about people speaking the truth without fear and being able to provoke and be provocative. And honestly, I mean, what I have found, and again, I believe this is miraculous because I do believe that the gospel of John is helpful. And I think miraculous because I do believe we are approaching the coming of the Messiah. Is that scholarship is actually, you know, coming along in ways like a lot of the things that I am a very unique person in believing. Very prominent scholars of Christianity in the past 20 to 40 years have been writing. I mean, I just discovered, I have Robert Eisenman. Yeah, Robert Eisenman. He, so he, he, I believe has cracked the Paul nut, the Paul of Tarsus nut, because what was absolutely clear to me was that Paul's story made no sense whatsoever. And I have a very hard time reading Paul because honestly, he just, he says things which are so not Jewish. They're, they hit me in all those moral taste buds Jonathan Haidt talks about. And he has a theory of Paul and that suddenly, so really makes a lot of sense to me, that he, that Paul was actually Herod's grandson. That sounds like Oak Island. And he bases it on, I mean, I mean, there, there is apparently one line where Paul says, in one of his letters, he says, send my greetings to my kinsmen Herodotus or something. And he's like, I'm going to go to the other side of the world. And so, and now that story, right, somebody who I don't believe ever had a Jewish education, claiming to be a Pharisee of Pharisees, having the wealth and power that he had, having the power to be a Pharisee of Pharisees, having the power to be a Pharisee of having the wealth and power that he did, because the story, my problem with the story of him going to Damascus was that the high priest didn't have the authority to send him to Damascus, and there's no way the high priest would have sent a Pharisee to Damascus. Now, Prince Solace, which Josephus speaks of, of a Herodian named Solace, who was prosecuting Jews, not Christians. Prince Solace could very well have gone to Damascus, because it was an uncle of his who was Tetrarch at the time there. And like, so a lot, and his Roman citizenship, and the fact that not just that he was a Roman citizenship citizen, but that the guards believed him when he claimed it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, which is always a really, you know, why did they, I'm a Roman citizen, everybody's a Roman citizen. No, why did you believe? And then they all get into all these questions about how could he prove it, yada, yada, yada, but they did. Yes, and they sent an escort of 470 men. You don't send for just anybody. No, no. So if, and he's actually like, identified, so Herod's second wife, Maryamne, was Maccabee, right? So she was the last of the Maccabees. She had two sons, two daughters. Herod killed her, his two sons with her. I forget what happened to the elder daughter, but apparently, so I haven't gotten into all of his stuff yet. But so his, he seems to believe that Paul was adopted into the family of the younger daughter. And he bases the adoption on the fact that Paul was named Solace, right? And not one of the traditional names in the family. I've never heard of this guy or this theory, but it's very interesting. I'm just looking at this Wikipedia page. Very interesting. I just recently discovered it. Yeah. So he wrote a book in which he kind of goes through this in 2006. And apparently, it's made a lot of waves. Because it's a very strong argument. Prince Solace could have and would have done all of the things Paul claims in ways that I, it's obvious he was never a Pharisee. I'm sorry. But no, that's just not, that's not, no. No. Well, this is, I mean, New Testament studies, the interest in second temple Judaism has been over the last couple, over the last few decades, sort of the exciting spot in New Testament studies. And because obviously there's more and more stuff being dug up and worked on and thought about and that's going to change. See the, you know, obviously in the church, there's this trickle down theory thing, because you've got all these scholars out there and they're all sort of sorted in terms of, well, where do they stand with respect to touch points of orthodoxy? And then they write commentaries and, and professors read those commentaries and professors teach students. And so, you know, there's this whole ecosystem that all this stuff sort of gets worked in. And so it's not, it's, it's very, very interesting stuff. And of course, all of that happens while the astounding dynamics of the church itself moves where there's political actors. And I mean, it's, it's just, I mean, the, just like one human being is too much for any of us other human beings to really fully understand, including the human being that we ourselves are. I mean, these things just get crazy complex and huge out there. And so I, you know, here again, so, so you just brought up another thing, which to me is like, oh, look at this, some, a new name for me to scratch my head about and another theory that I've been working on for a long time, which is, you know, I'm going to bow and another theory, another theory, because, you know, anyone, so I get frustrated as a minister, because there is in the ministerial profession, an obvious desire for, for the sheep to, for the sheep to be non-player characters in the church. The minister says that the sheep believe it, the minister decrees it, the sheep obey it. I mean, all of us want that kind of thing out of the people that are in our lives to a degree. And, but if you're any, I guess this is part of what I appreciate about Protestantism, that there is within Protestantism, I'm not saying there isn't in the other, in the other rooms in, in the mansion, there isn't Protestantism, a desire to continue to go back to the text, to continue to go back and say, okay, well, what does this mean? And what that forces you to do is to, to always be critiquing the tradition through which you learned the text and the tradition that has, that has surrounded the text and critique that tradition that's deep in Protestant DNA. And that, that leaves openings for, for lots of things, even though with any, with Eddie, with every religious tradition, openings are sort of anxiety points because something might come in that disturbs the, the church and the tradition and all of these things. And this is basic to me, this is basic religious sociology, always dependent on the, the aspects of the religion. So I, I find these kinds of conversations stimulating because there are always loose ends in the text that you never know enough. And so you'll read something and it'll be like, well, how does this fit with that? And then you have to work on that. And now we're sort of back to where we began in this conversation of what you enjoy. Oh, I hit something. Let's hear it. Yeah, you did. So where's God in this? Oh yeah. I think God is, I think God is drawing us to himself. Okay. So I believe that, for instance, it wasn't just by luck that the Dead Sea scrolls are, were discovered, how they were discovered, and they are making huge waves in Christianity. I, I think Google Translate exists not for, I don't think the internet was made for porn. I think Google Translate exists so that people who don't speak Hebrew can, can study the, the Hebrew Bible. I believe that God is moving in through our history, that there's a narrative, that there was a creation and there, there is a terminus that we're heading towards. So if, if you're just trying to preserve your garden, how are you participating in God's building of his kingdom? Well, and that's why you shouldn't just be trying to preserve your garden. I know that's why I'm saying that's it. That is for certain ministers, a rather, that, that is in a sense, the corruption, a corruption of their calling. You are to preserve your tribe in that this is something that's been entrusted to you. And when the master returns, you ought to not only give him the tribe you had, but show the increase of the work that you've done within the tribe to him. And so the job is to, is to take the little church and, and, and participate in the work of the Holy Spirit to make them better, to, to increase them, to make them shine. So, and, and there's always, there's always within this, I really have to track, track down this Jordan Peterson quote, because he said it so perfectly at one point, because to, there's always a dynamic between change and not change. You know, okay, we're not going to change because change is, is, is dangerous. Yes, but not change is dangerous. So you're always in the middle of that and you're always trying to figure out, okay, stuff is always changing around us. What must we change? What must we preserve? What must we improve? And so we're always in that dynamic. And so I, and as a Protestant, we keep coming back around to the text and saying, okay, this is the situation we find ourselves in. This is the word of God that's been given to us. How do we, how do we, how do we make this work? How do we obey? How do we believe? How do we live this out? How does this, how does this word become manifest in our community and in our lives? That's, that's in a sense, the Protestant ethos, at least as I understand it. So, okay, within Judaism, we have this idea of the revelation of Sinai, the five books of Moses, and then we have progressive, you know, then the prophets come and again, revivify, right, enliven, right, and the rabbis generation to generation, you know, are refining our, and so there is the constant, it's called chidush, right, which means it means new, but it also means month, right? So like that renewal, that cyclical renewal that moves forward. What's the new moon, isn't it? Yeah, yeah, because it's the month, it's new, and it's the new moon. I mean, it's, yeah, that's what we're doing. That's what, that is what we're doing, and so while the Torah of Moses will never change, it is eternal, it is what everything else is based on, right? I don't have any problem whatsoever with, for instance, Rabbi Isaac Luria, 500 years ago, revealing the Kabbalah, which I believe miraculously has spread and taken over all of Judaism, or Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov 300 years ago, revealing his teachings, the Torah of the Baal Shem Tov, which I believe in, right, or the Rebbe who died in 1994. I believe he could have been the Messiah. I never knew him during his life, but even watching the videos of him, I see the prophecy in him. He's the one who made Hanukkah Hanukkah. Hanukkah was a tiny little holiday nobody knew about before the Rebbe said, no, we're, you know, and based very much in the Talmud and the codes and stuff, right, but from that basis, he made a campaign, and this, it started in the 50s when the Rebbe first became Rebbe, you know, every, it was right after World War II, and the Jewish establishment was on this, okay, we need to keep, okay, we need to keep, you know, religion out of public life, and, you know, so the whole Jewish establishment, Orthodox, Reform, Secular, everybody was against, and the Rebbe said, no, we need to bring, have public menorah lightings, and he took it all the way to the Supreme Court. He did, and the reason why you can have Nativity scenes along with Hanukkah displays, if the Rebbe hadn't done the Hanukkah display, go and look at the Supreme Court decision, so there were multiple cases, there was the case of a Nativity scene and the case of a Hanukkah display, and the Supreme Court said, no, the Nativity scene is establishment, and the Hanukkah display is not, so without the Rebbe's Hanukkah display, which, I mean, you look at the amicus briefs, the people who were against the Rebbe's amicus briefs, it's the Jewish establishment, it's the entirety of American Jewry filing amicus briefs against this Hanukkah lighting, precisely because of the Nativity scene, and the Rebbe was like, no, no, no, this country was founded on God, and he was really into this, he's like, this country was founded on God, and he was really into this, he's like, this country was founded on the idea, people came here to practice their religion, and he took that to the utmost, he was a big proponent of a moment of silence in schools, he constantly talked about how even on U.S. dollars, it says, in God we trust, and he's like, that's why America is rich, that's why, because in God we trust, and I mean, the only thing, I just hate the fact that we don't have someone like the Rebbe, like leading us the way he did, and just a couple of months ago, we lost both Rabbi Jonathan Sachs, and Rabbi Adin Steinsault, who were both actually very close to the Rebbe, got guidance from the Rebbe, and were very innovative at the prodding of the Rebbe, Adin Steinsault's, he translated the Talmud to English, and now the entirety of the Talmud is available in English on the internet, because of Rabbi Steinsault's, it was a monumental task, and there were a lot of people who weren't happy about that either, a lot of people were like, no, we shouldn't, because we've had enough trials of the Talmud, and we've had enough people trying to find everything they hate about it, and look, there are secular biographies of the Rebbe, they all read like hagiographies, because that's the life that he lived, and I have to believe there's somebody out there who is ready to pick up that mantle, and to be the Messiah, and I believe that, and I'm looking, it's funny, I forget who said it, I quoted a lot, he's like, if the Jews didn't constantly have false messiahs, if there weren't constantly Jews saying, this is the Messiah, that he's the Messiah, then Jews wouldn't seriously be on the lookout for the Messiah, because if you're seriously, the way social justice warriors are looking for racism, if you're looking for the Messiah, you're gonna find it somewhere wrong somewhere, you're gonna find it somewhere wrong somewhere, right, and that's a key point, right, so this is another thing, like I tell people, I recently found out that Christians don't really believe Jesus is the Messiah, because when you say to a Jew, Jesus is the Messiah, what you're saying is, the messianic era is here, and he's the one who's, right, and Sam taught me the word preterist, which I've been throwing around, and he says, he says, because I genuinely, I thought all Christians were preterist, because I thought, you know, because that's the ones who come talk to Jews, are constantly, well, Jesus fulfilled the prophecies, and I look around me, and I'm like, how are they fulfilled? Yeah, yeah, that, and that was, and that was, I mean, again, if you go back to Matthew 11, the disciples of John go to Jesus, and they say, they have exactly that question, they go to Jesus, and they say, oh, it isn't looking fulfilled yet, and Jesus' answer might not impress, because he says, well, the lame walk, and the deaf hear, the blind see, and the good news is preached to the poor, you know, blessed is everyone who doesn't stumble on account of me, and, but, you know, and see, and again, this is, this is why your, your challenges, I think, are so refreshing, and, and helpful to Christians, because to me, it throws, it throws the, it throws the question back at the text, and asked, what exactly was Jesus about? Because, and that's something that was very important, has been very important in my own formation as a Christian, that question, what exactly was Jesus about? Because his behaviors, in his behavior in the story, and, you know, and these are, these are aspects that I, a bunch of questions arose to me that I'd never heard anybody else ask, one of which was, now, if, if I had been executed by, if I had been executed by the United States government, and the governor of California, and the president of the United States had an opportunity to commute, or pardon me, and they didn't, and I went ahead and was executed, and I rose from the dead, where would I go? I, you know, I'd walk up this, the, I'd walk up the steps of the, of the Capitol building here in the state of California, and I'd say, how do you like me now? And that doesn't happen. You know, he shows up in a locked room to his disciples, and he eats a fish, and it's like, I was gonna bring that up. Okay. He eats a fish. Yeah. So where is he? So where's Jesus? You, you, you tell me. That's why you have the Ascension story. No, no, no, no. Ascension, Enoch also ascended. Yeah. That's not resurrection. No, that's, well, the Ascension is key in terms of the part of the whole story. I mean, because the question then is, well, where is he now? And he seems to pop in and out. Now, okay, you're skeptical. He seems really gnostic to me. See, and I think, I think it gets, I think it gets exactly to this point of what a Messiah is, because when I read the Gospels, and I think when I, when I read the Gospels, so much of the, because again, I was in college and I was, so I'm, okay, I'm away college. Don't want to be a Christian. I'm in a Christian college, but I'm so deep within a Christian community. It's like, you didn't get any status for being a Christian. Not really. You got more anyway. So, so I read these Gospels and it's like, why, why, why are they writing about healing on the Sabbath and the Sabbath observant things? And why? He's not answering any questions I care about, because most of the messianic questions that, you know, would, would sort of go along the lines of what you're, how to make this world better. And fair enough. And Jesus, you know, apart from healing people's illness, and all these people went on to die again, and multiplying loaves of fishes, and all those people went on to be hungry again. Well, what, what does any of that mean? And, but here's the problem. On one hand, you might say, wow, it never really happened. On the other hand, if you say, yeah, it did happen, then what game is he playing? You know, he, he, he lets Peter walk on water. And to the best of my knowledge, Peter continued to use a boat anytime he went fishing after that episode. So, so, so what, what, what, what game is Jesus really after? But yet at the same time, you have the fact of the matter that this man and his disciples revolutionized the world to a degree that you and I are deep beneficiaries of without us even knowing it. It was, it was part of God's plan. I agree. And so then the question is, who is this God and what is his plan? And I would say his plan is a lot closer to pharisaic Judaism than Christians realize. And, you know, first I said this, then I searched for the answer, not, not for my answer, right? People were saying the Pharisees were, didn't like Jesus healing on the Sabbath, which is a silly idea. And because I know the fights of that time, the Talmud is very, very clear on the fights at the time about healing on the Sabbath. And there, there were a lot of fights. And the Sadducees were calling the Pharisees Sabbath desecrators, because they were healing on the Sabbath. And that was not a light charge to get, right? And so go ahead, Google, did the Pharisees, did the Pharisees challenge Jesus about healing on the Sabbath? And I found a very nice book on Amazon by an incredible academician. And I could read you the, the presses of that book. And it's no, the, the Pharisees were for, you know, this was an act of healing on the Sabbath. And I found a very nice book on Amazon you know, this was an active fight. We have literature going back into the Maccabees. That's, and this is part of a lot of things in the Greek Bible are, are just not credible. They're not. And, and I, I think I am not, the first book about the Josephite Messiah was printed in the past 20 years by a Christian. The first book that's actually devoted to this topic, right? Was written within the last 20 years. I think there's a reason for that. I think that the son of man debate which I stumbled on because I was, I was arguing over, you know, things in the forum with, with Sam Adams and I literally stumbled upon it because I know enough Aramaic to say, to know you can't say son of man, capital S, capital M in Aramaic, right? And, you know, and, and let me just say, you know, and, and reading the Peshitta in, in Aramaic made things a lot more clear to me in ways that I will gladly take hours to explain if necessary. But from my position, I think that there is a very coherent story, a narrative which is starting to reveal itself through the Dead Sea Scrolls, through the uncensoring of Maimonides, through the scholarship that's being done, which is actually showing a very different story than Christians have been saying, telling for 2000 years. And the crazy thing is that there's a lot of people who are suddenly becoming God-fearers the way they were 2000 years ago when some quarter to 50% of synagogue attendees were not Jewish. And now Orthodox rabbis are being approached by people who want to be Noahides. They don't want to, they don't want to become Jewish. They, they want Noahide Judaism existed 2000 years ago. We have, we have Acts 15, and suddenly it's existing again. And a lot of things are being thrown into parhesia and that word I think is really, really important because God's plan, I believe, is coming to a culmination. And I, if, I think if people have the eyes to see and ears to hear, they can look at it and see there's a story being told and we're getting to the climax of the story. And, you know, I think the story's a lot clearer than, than, than people want to think. Very interesting. Yes, I am the guy with the sandwich board you described. The end is coming. Well, I was just watching Jonathan Peugeot on Rebel Wisdom with Evans, I think. And Evans, Evans sort of said something like, well, I think this will all, this will all straighten out and things will be okay. And Jonathan Peugeot says, I don't know. We've got a, we've got a fair number of people walking around with sandwich boards and saying the end is near, the end is near. But, but are you looking forward to it? Oh, I think so. Yes. Well, I, the road may be bumpy, but the, of course, the road is going to be bumpy. What'd you expect? Yeah. But I'm a, I'm a Christian. I think the apocalypse, the revelation is, is what we look forward to because it is the, it is the, also the consummation. It's the marriage of the, the bride and the bridegroom. So. And I think it's coming. And I think we see the birth pain. And the Dead Sea Scrolls did not make the front pages. There's a lot of people who have no idea what the Dead Sea Scrolls are. But the reverberations of that miracle, and I do believe it's a modern day miracle, a lot of things have changed. When when I was in college, in undergrad, there was a professor of Old Testament studies or something like that, biblical Hebrew. And I asked him some questions about the Dead Sea Scrolls. And this was only 20 years ago, 25 years ago. And he said he, he still didn't have access to them because he was Jewish. The guy. Who has them? Well, now, now Israel has them. But the guy who originally had them at Notre Dame. And again, I believe this was part of God's plan because there's always been some people within Christianity who believed that the rabbis had edited the Hebrew Bible. Right. So the Masoretic text, and you still see people like that, the Masoretic text couldn't be trusted. Well, by some miracle, the first person to get the Dead Sea Scrolls at Notre Dame was a rabid anti-Semite. And he was convinced that if he could, you know, get the truth out of these Dead Sea Scrolls, then it would show that the Masoretic text has been edited. So he would not let any Jews anywhere near the Dead Sea Scrolls until they were all photographed and the photographs were disseminated. And I think that his rabid anti-Semitism was actually part of the miracle because Christians needed to have that type of assurance. No Jewish hands, no Jewish magic, no Jews involved, right, to see, nope, Masoretic text, still the best text we have and remarkably so. Right. I don't think anything happens just, I don't believe in coincidences. Right. And so no credible person, you know, it used to be people would say the Masoretic text was finalized, you know, the Westminster Leningrad Codex is a thousand years old, so the Septuagint is much older and the original is the Septuagint and the Masoretic text is from the Septuagint. The Dead Sea Scrolls has exploded a lot of myths. And look, I believe it is a miracle that my uncle Baruch, who was born on the rivers of Babylon, lives in Jerusalem right now. Right. And my uncle, my uncle, his name is Masiach. But like, so I think there's a lot of miracles happening that too many people are not paying enough attention to. The Dead Sea Scrolls are a modern day miracle and they have verified the text of the Bible in a way that only a miracle like that could do. And I don't believe it was just, it just happened that this Arab boy's goat went missing and he went and, you know, and suddenly he found these, you know, and there have been other discoveries and there continue to be discoveries and so this is my biggest bit of woo. So you remember in the Five Books of Moses, it says that as they're crossing the river into the land, they're supposed to put up these 12 stones and write the law on it clearly. I've been waiting for at least 20 years for those stones to be found because I don't think God just gave that commandment for no good reason. And I expect those stones to be found and can you imagine, can you imagine? That would be a big deal. Similarly, I've been waiting for the Gospel of the Hebrews to be found. That's the, possibly the text, well it's the name of the text the Ebionites used. Apparently it was either, it may have actually been Q, right, the proto text for the Synoptic Gospels, or it may, you know, the most Christian belief is it was a translation into either Hebrew or Aramaic, but I could see an earlier version of the Gospels being found. That would be pretty jaw-dropping. But isn't it jaw-dropping that my uncle Baruch is in Jerusalem? Yeah, it is. You know, there's that verse, my house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations. A 2000-year-old text, at least. If you have that type of real estate sense for what's going to happen in 2000 years, look, there's a story here, there's a heroic story, there's a pattern, and that pattern is is obvious to anybody who wants to see it, I believe. There's a reason why there are billions of Christians and Muslims, and the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, I believe, is both agent and arena, is both divine and meta-divine, and is working through history. Maybe that's a good place to end. Maybe that's a good place to land the plane. Well, good. Anything, well, why don't you mention your YouTube channel? It's just my last name. I'll come in the comments and I'll put a link. Or Hebrew Bible in English. You can Google Hebrew Bible in English. You can Google Hebrew Bible in English. Most of it is just me going letter by letter through the Masoretic text for anybody. I started it as a project to get my mind off of politics and everything, and I figured, you know, this is something I can do that if somebody wants, you know, to go through letter by letter and, you know, using the various websites and allow people to translate the Bible from Hebrew to themselves, for themselves. I thought that, you know, if I create this and upload it to YouTube, maybe in God knows how many years somebody wants to look up a verse, it'll be there. And to my surprise, there are enough people watching that I've been continuing to make videos. Good. Good. Well, Jacob, it's always a pleasure to talk to you, and you do teach me a ton, and I do find your challenges stimulating and so often your viewpoints stimulating and refreshing, and you're just a lot of fun to have around, so I'm glad you're hanging out on the Discord and stirring the pot. Well, I'm doing it for myself. The reason I'm there is because I get a lot out of it. Good. Good. I'm glad. So I will end the recording right now, but just formally want to thank you and to say that this, of course, is a pleasure. I don't know, my scheduling's kind of crazy these weeks during the vacation and the holidays, so it'll come out within a few days, I'm sure. Okay. All right. All right.