https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=T5_1SeQsULs

 Hi, this is Paul. My videos come in all sorts of different ways and mostly not working. MNW, you'll find him in the members area of the YouTube, you'll find him in Twitter, and I know who he is. We've had a Rando's conversation and that Rando's conversation is not public. If he decides to, now that we've got the paywall, maybe some of you out there who have had Rando's conversations with me that have decided you didn't want the conversation on the open internet, Laura, I'm thinking about you too. That first conversation that we took down, maybe you'd be okay with that behind the paywall. So I'm actually going to have another conversation, a Rando's conversation behind the paywall coming out. And again, part of the reason I did the paywall was because some people don't want their Rando's conversation out on the open internet. And I know a bunch of you say, no, no, I want to see other Rando's conversations. That's okay, but then it's going to be out on the open internet. And then you say, no, I want it to be on Bridges of Meaning Discord. And no, I want it to be on... So anyway, so mostly not working is a huge source of stuff for me because he is always tweeting at me. He is always making comments. He always putting in links. Mostly not working is a very good colonizer and he colonizes me regularly. And so he noticed that I've been doing the stuff on the Holy Grail and the videos about that. And then he... And then I was talking about meta, the meta modern. And then he noted that a while ago, used the clip function a while ago, I actually mentioned it. I'd talked about this and I had forgotten that I had talked about this. So the mythos behind science. After the discarded image was discarded, we looked for a new universal, look at what we call the universe and why we call it that. And so we imagined, well, modernity, via modernity, we can see all of this. There's a neat video that someone who follows me on Twitter pointed me to actually has the... Maybe we can play it. I think it's actually Germaine. So, so I don't know, John. I'm probably going to play it now. Postmodernity is now pretty much taken and nearly worthless. So I played that little bit of that video before. This is what I was talking about, that things take time in that it's often the fact that I can't see things until I'm ready to see them. And we don't know things. Things don't get named until the name sort of becomes. And I use the example of woke because it wasn't that long ago when there were a whole bunch of contenders for the nomenclature of the thing that we point to right now and call woke that was sort of out there. And then finally it's sort of, it's sort of whooshed and woke was the word. And so Brendan Graham Dempsey has very much been around this corner. His channel is still fairly small, but he's been on Conversations with the Verveki. I've seen him on a few things. He's been working the meta-modern thing quite a bit. And the beautiful thing about YouTube is that I can kind of go back and I can see what videos of his that I've watched some of. I watched this part two with Verveki and Pascal. I have watched some other ones, but I haven't watched a lot of them. And I watched some of these earlier ones about after postmodernism and some of those, but it didn't sort of gel. I wasn't really quite ready for it. And so after I did the video about Mrs. Davis and the grail, then suddenly I was ready for it. And it's just a little eight minute video. So let's take a look. So you want to know what's this meta-modern business all about? I read this meta-modern manifesto. Some would call what you endorse to not be modernism, but in fact meta-modernism. And again, just a little Jordan Peterson clip there. I for sure saw that, but it didn't stick. And that's sort of the way we work with our brains. A lot of our audience really wanted to hear your commentary on meta-modernism and Hansi Freinat. And of course, when you start seeing all these, it's like, hey, wait a minute, over the last five years, I've watched him, I've watched him, I've watched him, I've watched him. I've sort of been all over this place. To get at what meta-modern means, first you have to get a grasp of what traditional, modern and postmodern mean. Here's a quick crash course. Traditional refers to ways of living and thinking that were long the norm in human culture. Think the Middle Ages. Here religion is incredibly important. And pretty much everyone understands the world through the lens of religious stories of this world and the other world beyond. Now, of course, if I wanted to fine tune this, I would probably describe things differently, but hey, close enough. Don't worry about the, get the big point without worrying about all the little details. Most people work the land and live in kingdoms run by monarchs or lords. Things don't change much, and that's seen as a good thing. Everything has its set place in the great chain of being. There's a natural order to things, laid down by God. And one does well to play the role they were born into within that divine hierarchy, while seeking their ultimate heavenly reward in the other world after they die. Eventually though, the traditional came to be replaced by the modern. Modern refers to a perspective based on the critique of traditional presumptions and articles of faith. Think the scientific and industrial revolutions. Religion and its other world notion here loses its unchallenged authority as more and more people come to understand the world through scientific and materialist models. Most people work in factories, living in cities run by bureaucratic governments. There's a lot here that's, you know, urbanization really doesn't, I mean, it's building steam through, you know, basically some urbanization happens before the Protestant Reformation, but it keeps building steam. Of course, when it gets to the 20th century, it sort of takes a hockey stick. I mean, suddenly in the 20th century, you get there. So these are, of course, vast generalizations. And the truth is, of course, that many, many, many people in the world continue to live in traditional societies. And so this isn't just time. In some ways, this is someone speaking from a position of, let's say someone like me, who's been in this for a while now. Things change a lot at an accelerating speed. And this is seen as a good thing. This is progress. There is no social order of things set down by God, but the possibility of a true meritocracy in which people can change their own lives for the better. One does well then to try and improve their lot in the world in the small span of their single human life. Sorry, no afterlife. And again, I thought Thomas Flight really laid this out quite well in the video that I did about Mrs. Davis, the second video. Eventually, modern yields to postmodern. Postmodern refers to a perspective based on the critique of modern presumptions in articles of faith. Think the anti-war, civil rights, environmentalist, and social justice movements. Here, science loses its unchallenged authority as more and more people come to see other modes of knowledge as equally valid. Most people work service jobs and live in post-industrial, urban, or suburban centers. There is no one narrative or story for life, only numerous perspectives. That whole progress trope? That was just a modern secular religion. Not coincidentally, it served those in power. In fact, because what counts for merit in the so-called meritocracy is only determined by those with power in the social order and always at the expense of groups or identities deemed marginal or outsiders to insider values, one does well to dedicate themselves to activism aimed at correcting these power imbalances by seeking a redistribution of power. Got that? The traditional, the modern, and the postmodern, each one supplanting the previous. Now, this process can be viewed historically as the movement through different cultural periods, or it can be viewed philosophically as the movement through different epistemas or ways of knowing. Or it can be viewed developmentally as the movement through higher and higher stages of understanding and cognition. However you interpret it, everyone agrees that these represent a sort of series, a progression of different modes or structures of thought. Okay, so much for the traditional, modern, and postmodern. Now we can finally talk about the metamodern. The metamodern follows after the postmodern. It is then, in broadest terms, a post-postmodern paradigm, and thus a perspective based on the critique of postmodern presumptions and articles of faith. This corrective is accomplished in important ways by reintroducing ideas, sensibilities, and practices from before the postmodern back into the cultural conversation. But, and here's the crucial part, altered now by their interaction and recontextualization through postmodern critique and awareness. In this sense, metamodern refers to a perspective based on a critique of the postmodern and an attempt to reintegrate the perceived merits of previous perspectives, including the postmodern. The metamodern critiques the postmodern for its failures and excesses, while also integrating postmodernism's own genuine and important critiques. Here, postmodern power analysis loses its unchallenged authority as the ultimate interpretive lens, as more and more people come to see the limits of this kind of political discourse. Radical relativism and endless deconstruction yield at last to earnest, vulnerable, and admittedly fraught quests for true human connection and meaning. Driven by the unavoidable proliferation of global crises, a better, more holistic vision for human flourishing is sought. One that integrates the postmodern social critique, even as it avoids its pitfalls and impasses. Metamodern culture, or metamodernism, thus brings critical postmodern awareness to naive traditional and modern cultural ideas and forms. Not in an effort to denigrate or cancel them, but in a good faith sensibility that attempts to hold them in balance. In this way, elements from the... And I thought again, keywords right there, good faith sensibility, you know, how often in Thomas Flights metamodern, you know, sensibility, sensibility, sensibility, sensibility. Traditional, the modern, and the postmodern all effectively coexist simultaneously. Metamodernism is characterized by a continuous oscillation between their embrace and their critique, between enthusiasm... Again, another key word there is the oscillation, and that's, you go to Thomas Flights film, it's the, you know, the turning, that's sort of the, the oscillation between sort of the postmodern sensibility and then to the, this, this new sincerity sensibility, and this has been around in the conversation for quite a while already. ...and self-consciousness. The sensibility that emerges is thus exemplified by such seeming paradoxes as ironic sincerity, pragmatic idealism, and informed naiveté. Different metamodern theorists and writers have focused on different aspects of this emerging sensibility. Tim Vermeulen and Robben van den Acker, the Dutch cultural theorists who first popularized the term, have focused on its impact in the arts. Likewise, Linda Ciriello and Greg Dember, curators of the What Is Metamodern Hub. Meanwhile, its resonances and applications within the fields of philosophy, sociology, and political action have been the focus of voices like Brent Cooper, Leni Anderson, Thomas Bjorkman, and Hansi Freinacht. Hansi's contributions in particular have brought metamodernism into dialogue with adjacent kin communities a bit further afield, such as the integral and game-B communities. Though diverse, all share a commitment to critique and transcend the postmodern, while still integrating its insights along with those of the traditional and the modern, in an effort to bring forth genuine political and even spiritual transformation to solve the immense crises facing humanity in the 21st century. My own focus, along with the likes of John Verveke and Laman Pascal, is metamodern spirituality, with a distinct appreciation for how the loss of meaning and spiritual moorings at a societal level, occasioned by modern and postmodern onslaughts, contribute directly to the nihilistic unsustainability and precariousness of our present moment. In summary, metamodern refers to that perspective that has emerged, which brings from the postmodern a much-needed critique and critical awareness to traditional and modern ideas, which it reintroduces, while also avoiding the excesses and failures of postmodernism, in an attempt to achieve genuine societal transformation and spiritual development. So, the transformation and spiritual development is such an interesting term, because the question is sort of into what? I was having a conversation with a couple of, let's say, pillars of the corner this morning. They know who they are. And we were talking about the frustration of, well, all we do is talk. We want to get things done. And I made the point that we're not exactly sure on what it is exactly, where it is exactly we want to arrive, what it is exactly we want to achieve. And what we, I think, sort of imagine with, especially with sort of a modernist framework, is that what we need to do is develop an algorithm. And I don't mean necessarily a computer algorithm. I mean basically an engine where this practice is going to lead to this outcome. This practice is going to lead to this outcome. And of course, this can get more complex, that the practice is actually sort of a set of practices, and the set of practices will lead to this outcome. But it's tremendously hard to get very specific about outcomes and practices. Practices are always complex, and outcomes are always, in some ways, multimodal. The outcomes will obviously have to be some, you know, very much have, very much be embodied, have all the four P's, and especially in a Christian frame, not limited to this dispensation. One of the things that occurred to me after I worked on the Mrs. Davis Metamodern video was the tension between the traditional and the metamodern. Because if, you know, if you look at someone like Jonathan Peugeot, he's clearly promoting and pursuing a deeply traditional telos, but he has passed through, he was birthed in the modern and very much passed through the postmodern in his process. And if you go back over the conversations where he tells his story, you know, he went through art school. And so then, of course, he goes to Africa and is working on craft and then becomes sculptor. So this tension between the traditional and the metamodern, it feels quite circular. And you never quite know when you get to neo-traditional if it isn't in some way, and doesn't have to be in many ways metamodern, because the new traditional has to address and have plausible responses to both the failures of modernity and the critiques of postmodernity. In some ways, because all of these levels can exist at the same time and certainly do, both exist within us and exist globally, there's a degree to which not everything has to sort of be resolved, that you leave these tensions in yourself between wherever you find yourself, traditional, modern, metamodern, or postmodern, metamodern, and all of the various elements that are still sort of floating in the dynamic. Now, one of the really exceptional conversations that's coming up in the channel that people have, the no ads, no weight level, membership level, already have access to, the title isn't done, there's no thumbnail for it yet, I haven't fully digested it, and usually, before I started the before I started the member levels, these things just sort of stayed backstage, okay, and I might talk about them, I might mention them, I might, and then word leaks out and people want to see them, so part of, again, the reason for these levels is that, okay, now you can see it, the title isn't done, the thumbnail isn't done, and I think part of what some of you are seeing is that, well, you had access to it, and apparently, the member levels, YouTube, you can't make clips of them in the member levels, you can't, apparently, on the mobile app, you can't even turn off the screen and have it continue to play if it's in the member level, so there's a bunch of technical things that are going on there, which I don't understand. Well, I sort of understand the clip thing, but this conversation blew my mind, and Lenny Levi is a professional wrestler in Israel, I didn't know they had professional wrestling in Israel, they do, he started in middle school, which blew my mind, and the entire conversation for me just brought a whole bunch of things just right down into reality for me, and you might say, well, why don't you share it on the channel right away? Well, it's because I always have this sense of narrative sequence and pacing for the channel, and it'll come out next week onto the full channel, so you don't have to be a member to see it, but so much of, even just using the word metamodern, presents a barrier to people, and one of the things that struck me as I was talking to Lenny, and he is sending me all sorts of YouTube clips in the background of wrestling, which is wild, I haven't really watched wrestling since I was probably 16 years old, when I watched it on the black and white TV, and I don't even remember what channel it was on TV, but my friend at the, I tell the story a little bit in the video, my friend at the bakery where I cleaned up after school, he was telling me about wrestling and talking about this, talking about that, so I went home and watched it, and then we'd talk about wrestling at the bakery, and there's something deeply interesting, I almost thought that in some ways, the religion that's not a religion for the masses is wrestling, is professional wrestling, it really is, it's embodied, it's metamodern in that they've done all of the little angles, and he talked about the, oh shoot, I took notes, I should pull up my notes, he talked about the shoot and the work shoot, and just the layers after layers after layers of this, and what was amazing was that he really just, it was a master job of colonizing, or maybe just like the metamodern video, the time wasn't right before, I mean we've poked into wrestling before in kayfabe, the way he laid it out, it was just like, oh I see it, oh this is collective cognition, and he's also a cognitive scientist, so he's a cognitive scientist who is, or studying cognitive science, who is also a professional wrestler, and he's also working on an online course to learn modern Hebrew. If that isn't meta, I don't know what is, but then he said this towards the end of the conversation, I think that's true for where we are right now, people just really are looking for a narrative they can embody in a way that is engaging them correctly, that feels harmonious, that works. And again, this sense of works, for a long time I talked about dead reckoning, part of the mysterious thing about us is that we sometimes get to a point and something just works, and we barely even know what that means, because it doesn't mean it's just like big t truth necessarily, but we just sort of arrive, and all of the different pieces of us that include sort of the monarchical vision certainty of modernity, and the internal critic uncertainty of post-modernity, and we sort of come all the way around to a new sincerity, and again there's the tension there is, well is that what traditional was? Because you know, it's interesting because you can point to medieval Europe, but what medieval Europe was, was actually sort of the success of Christianity having in many ways digested the Roman Empire, and it was sort of a new way of being. Let me finish this, then I got another video I'll pull in. Yeah, so wow, that works. I'm afraid, I'm not really afraid, but it may very well be that a whole bunch of you watch this video and are like, so? And it's that weird thing about works that sometimes you hear something for the first time and it just sort of clicks, but we tend to have a sort of a progressivist imagination with respect to history, like the previous video sort of mapped out, and one wonders to what degree, at least in early forms, many of these movements, traditional, modernity, post-modernity, meta-modern, bleeding into traditional again, how you know these cycles haven't taken place, maybe not with the kind of speed we're seeing, because of course the technology and the connectivity tend to accelerate cultural change, but to what degree, again, aren't these sort of pauses? So CRC Voices has become rather estuarial lately because all sorts of creatures are moving in from the open sea, maybe it's just an estuary within the estuary because a lot of this little corner people are sort of sneaking into CRC Voices and I caught one today because I'm a moderator for CRC Voices and every time someone comes into the group I get an email and it's like, I recognize that name. Well, one name I didn't know but was a great name, the guy's name is Laramy, and he teaches philosophy at Dork College and he wandered into CRC Voices and dropped some really juicy posts in there, which I very much enjoyed, and then he sent me an email and we got chatting a little bit and we said, well, we'll have to do a convo at some point, but he sent me this video and I just want to share it with you and share what I think and hear what you think. Well, this is a fairly, this is a video that's been seen, I mean, this is a, well, actually this video hasn't been seen that much. It's a video advice channel that has 3.3 million subs, but the video is two years old and has 89,000 views. So part of the interesting thing about YouTube is that almost everybody, once you put a number on something, people are going to have a hierarchy and everybody sort of looks at the subscriber number and gets a sense of a channel's relative popularity, importance with respect to the subscriber number. The subscriber number does tell you something, but it by no means tells you everything because you can find channels with millions of subscribers with videos with very few views and you can find channels with hardly any subscribers with very many views and in many cases the reason is obvious, but that's just part of the complexity of YouTube. But Laramie sent me this video and I'm not really convinced by it, but it was an interesting idea and thinking about sort of this movement from traditional to modern to postmodern to metamodern into traditional again, it's sort of connected in my imagination with this video. So let's take a little peek. This is all part of a pattern and it's a pattern that's gone back centuries in Anglo-American history. I think it frankly characterizes history of many countries around the world today. Like nature's four seasons, the cycles of history follow a natural rhythm or pattern. Over the last five centuries, Anglo-American society has entered a new era. Now part of the difficulty with this kind of thinking is that there's so much of it and it's so absolutely difficult to nail down and so much of it is relevance realization and you wonder how much projection you're doing because you can't possibly run the experiment because history isn't subject to experimentation the way, let's say, some chemical in a lab is. It's a different sort of thing. History by definition almost really only happens as it is once and you have all of that reality of the the enumerability of the enumerability of history, let's say. But given all that because some people said well 500 year cycles and there's some plausibility with that. I mean this is of course this is the kind of stuff historians just play with all the time. Turning every two decades or so. At the start of each turning, people change how they feel about themselves, the culture, the nation, and the future. Turnings come in cycles of four. Each cycle spans the length of a long human life roughly 80 to 100 years where the unit of time the ancients called the saculum. The first turning is called a high. This is an era when institutions are strong and individualism is weak. Society is confident about where it wants to go collectively even if those outside the majoritarian center feel stifled by the conformity. America's most recent first turning was the post-World War II American high beginning in 1946 and ending with the assassination of John Kennedy in 1963. The second turning is an awakening. This is an era when institutions are attacked in the name of personal and spiritual autonomy. Just when society is reaching its high tide of public progress, people suddenly tire of social discipline and want to recapture a sense of inner authenticity. Young activists and spiritualists look back at the previous high as an era of cultural poverty. America's most recent awakening was the consciousness revolution which spanned from the campus and inner city revolts in the mid-1960s to the tax revolts of the early 1980s. The third turning is an unraveling. The mood of this era is in many ways the opposite of a high. Institutions are weak and distrusted while individualism is strong and flourishing. Highs follow crises which teach the lesson that says... Now there's a lot you can critique with this, okay? And especially it's like the 90s. You're describing the 90s or you still describing the 70s. And as I've said before, part of the perhaps whole waste of time of this kind of project is you have to sort of pick your things and you can almost always find another thing to pick that sort of proves the opposite. Society must coalesce and build. Unravelings follow awakenings which teach the lesson that society must atomize and enjoy. America's most recent unraveling was the long boom in culture wars beginning in the early 1980s and probably ending in 2008. The era opened with triumphant mourning and America individualism and drifted toward a pervasive distrust of institutions and leaders and edgy popular culture and the splitting of national consensus into competing values camps, red and blue. And finally we enter the fourth turning which is a crisis. This is an era in which America's institutional life is torn down and rebuilt from the ground up, always in response to a perceived threat to the nation's very survival. Civic authority revives, cultural expression finds a community purpose, and people begin to locate themselves as members of a larger group. In every instance, fourth turnings have eventually become new founding moments in America's history, refreshing and redefining the national identity. Currently this period began in 2008 with a global financial crisis and the deepening of the war on terror and will extend to around 2030. So what does all this say about our future? Well, we know. Okay, so again, yeah, you, I think you could fairly summarize this moment as crisis. It's interesting if you want to map this onto sort of the traditional modern, postmodern, meta modern, obviously post modernity would be a crisis of sorts or it's a tearing down. And then, and then the meta modern would sort of be inklings, inklings at establishing a new tradition, let's say. Well, let's, let's hear it. It's a short video. So in our paradigm, America has entered the fourth turning. What can we say about for its turnings? Each turning lasts around 22 years. So this turning is going to last until about the year 2030. So we're not quite half the way, halfway through yet. Now, this is the winner of history. It's a time of creative destruction of public institutions. We're going to radically change. Ultimately, when we got out the other end of this thing, our, our, our, our politics, our economics, our sense of what we need in terms of public infrastructure around our lives. And very much of that is going to be. And, you know, he has a point because, you know, in, but of course it's some places are building right now. Some places are tearing down and the Christian Informed Church, there's a, there's obviously a tearing down that's going, what, what year was this video out? Okay. Two years ago. Yeah. You know, and looking at, at the Christian Informed Church, part of it, it's easy to see where the builders, the builders in a sense handed the, the, the denomination to the boomers who, you know, really took over after the second world war and sort of reached their peak in the seventies and eighties and nineties. And then in the nineties, things begin, you know, women in church office wasn't in a sense peak boomer. And then after the nineties, the numbers have continued to fall. And some people are out there, well, Paul, you should, you know, you should, you should run the Christian Informed Church. And it's like, no, you don't understand how the Christian Informed Church works. There's the Cy Board, which has now used to have a general executive director and then a general secretary. And I say, well, and that job, I just, interviewed the guy for the job on the floor of Synod 2022. You can watch the video. It's out there. There it is. And, you know, and I said to some of the people that have said this to me, number one, I don't want the job. Number two, for me, the job wouldn't fit. I like the chair I'm sitting in. And number three, I don't think we have any idea what kind of institutions we're going to need coming up. In some ways, in the now, you always sort of need something of an algorithm. You need a plan. You need to know what you have to do every day. Well, I get up in the morning and I brush my teeth and I eat breakfast and do some exercise. And then I, and then I go to work. And when I work, these are my routines. And the idea is that when you have a routine, your routine basically helps you keep a well-balanced life and you have a well-balanced accomplishments and you get things done. But I like Jordan Peterson's sort of feeling through the swamp with your feet metaphor, because I think in a time of chaos, that's really that's really where we're at in that we don't know what to do and we don't know where to go. And there are so many, so many pieces out there that no one can tell. Of course, after the First World War, the big idea was the League of Nations, which failed. And after the First World War, there was ideas such as making war illegal. That was the idea after the First World War. We're going to make war illegal. We're going to pass laws against war. Yeah. And then we have the Second World War. So you just see the dynamic between institutions. And again, even institutions and what they are has changed. If you look at something like the banner, the banner was the vehicle for the 20th century for the Christian Reformed Church. And the banner was, in a sense, the locus of leadership. In many ways, the president of Calvin Seminary or the chair of Systematics or the president of Calvin College or the banner editor or these were in a sense that this is how the institution was led and doesn't really work that way anymore. When we look at things like this little corner, people are very quick. And I've been fighting this for a long time, very quick to organize. We want to organize something and we want to accomplish something. And my admonition is always, please go do that, try and see what can be done. And we've had a whole variety of organizing efforts. We've had conferences and there's going to be more conferences and more conferences are in the works. But when you organize a conference, take what someone else did and improve it. Now, it might be an improving by just a tweaking or it might be an improving by a changing. And because part of what I think we do is sort of work through things and as we work through them, we learn. So there certainly is sort of an algorithmic process to learning, but learning, you always have to be willing to sort of break and tweak the algorithm and the patterns and the disciplines in order to achieve something else. Apology of these turnings. Well, it starts with the catalyst. And of course, the catalyst was like 1929, it was 2008, a sudden shock to our system. Since, okay, we're in a new place now, you know, we're not in Kansas anymore. We have a whole new sense of where we need to go as a nation. We suddenly shocked out of our third turning individualism, celebrity circuses and whatever we thought about back then. Things are going to be different now. Families are suddenly aware that they're not going to do as well as their parents. That we're suddenly see that our role in the world maybe is not what we expected. That's the first thing. And that's already happened. The other three phases of the fourth turning haven't happened yet. The one which will soon happen is what we call the regeneracy. This is when distrust reaches its low point and we suddenly begin to coalesce around something, some leader, some move. And again, you see this in the Christian From Church. One of the speeches on the floor of Senate was, we've gone from a high trust environment to a low trust environment. And I'll have to ask Aaron if I can replay. I did an interview with Aaron about the CRC on his channel. But one of the things that I impressed upon Aaron was the Christian From Church is a very high trust organization and always has been. And that's part of the breaking that has happened. We began to feel positive about as a fulcrum, as some point at which we can begin to find increasing trust in someone who can piece together institutions that can make sense again. Additional shocks to our system, either in terms of economic, financial, or geopolitical shocks. Now in terms of institutions, I mean, I've used the Oz Guinness. It might not be original with Oz Guinness, but now that all of you know Oz Guinness, at least those of you who watched the Exodus seminar, you know, without individuals, nothing changes. Without institutions, nothing lasts. There will be new institutions, but the shape of the institutions and how visual the institution is might change. One could ask whether this little corner in terms of what we talk about is an institution. No, is it a pre-institution? Will it result in an institution or will it be sort of a spirit that goes away and another spirit replaces it? We don't know. This is what happens in a fourth turning because at this moment of great vulnerability, we're going to hit further points at which we realize we are unprepared for the future. A lot of the assumptions we're making actually aren't going to pan out. We need to retool our institutions in a much more fundamental way than we've seen thus far. That's exactly what happened in the 1930s where we kind of ratcheted down our expectations and retooled things in a bigger and bigger way than FDR ever thought going in in 1932 that he would ever have to do. That's where we're going to go. Well, and of course there was a war. And again, that's part of what's so easy to critique about these things is that, well, there's the Second World War. The Second World War changed everything for the United States and in many ways everything for the world. It changed everything for the Christian-informed church. It was such a massive catalyst that so many things had to get transformed. And that's going to lead to what we call the crisis. That's the third point in a fourth turning when suddenly things get worse and worse, but we're beginning to match it with greater and greater civic effort. We're rebuilding our civic life to match this greater and greater sense of crisis. Then we reach the crisis and pass it. And then that leaves the final act in a fourth turning. And that's what we call the resolution. That's when the treaties are signed, the negotiations are made, all of it. And again, part of the weakness here is that there's so many arcs going at the same time. For example, one could argue that the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights was, let's say, the resolution of WASP Protestant Christendom as the United States towered over the world, at least until the Soviet Union sort of got the bomb and rose to be its rival. But part of the difficulty is that there's always these nested arcs that are going in. Even these kinds of ways of thinking themselves are monarchical in that you have to have a singular summary. And perhaps part of the lingering vestiges of post-modernity are that we have a loss of confidence that this is the big narrative. And that there are cycles within cycles within cycles. The civic cement, which was wet during the fourth turning, suddenly dries. And then we suddenly have a post-crisis order, which hopefully would endure a beneficial and working post-crisis order. We hopefully will endure for the next two or three turnings after that. Well, and again, I mean, if the 50s, if the 40s, late 40s and 50s, the baby boom, early years were, you know, this resolution. And they were because, of course, there was a confidence. But, you know, if you read George Marsden's The Twilight of the American Enlightenment, there's always the seeds of the next turning in it. The civil rights movement really gets going in the 1950s after the Second World War. The loss of India to the British, the British empire, basically the dissolution of the British empire comes at the same time. So, yeah, I'm, I see the movement of these turnings, but I'm far more skeptical that you can actually apply these globally. I think probably you can take a look at these, at his four little boxes here. Let's get the fourth one in. There it is. These four little boxes, high awakening, unraveling crisis. And there's something to the fact that after a crisis, you're just sort of, both individually and I think collectively, because there is sort of a collective psyche set up for the next high. At the end of the crisis, the high naturally follows because maybe you're not experiencing all the pain you did. It's part of the reason that pastors and therapists warn people after a divorce, don't run into the next marriage real fast because falling in love is sort of the high and then the awakening won't be so sweet. And then the unraveling comes and they find themselves in another crisis. So it's interesting. I was just going to look for something on ancient modern worship and I saw this thumbnail from Modern Wisdom that takes a lot of Jordan Peterson clips. Jordan Peterson crying must just be catnip for YouTube because Modern Wisdom loves putting them on the thumbnail. And so he's got Jordan Peterson crying in front of sort of like a standard big box evangelical worship slide. You know, part of this we've seen in sort of the evangelical evolution of the last 20 years, even during my ministry in the United States, the last 25 years, when I got back to the United States, the seeker movement was at its height and it was beginning to wane. The emergent movement which sort of split into progressive evangelicalism and young restless and reformed. And then the third element which was sort of ancient modern worship. In the early aughts there were all kinds of books out about ancient modern worship and you could just see things, you know, early adopters sort of running back into the metamodern very quickly, even in the 90s and early aughts. And so even though for many progressives they look at the church and say, oh the church is a lagging indicator, I think often you can see early indications in the church just like you can in artists and poets and filmmakers because a lot of the people sort of working church are in some ways similar to professional wrestling, working it out in drama with their bodies and in acting. One of the things that I remember about the early Jordan Peterson biblical series, and probably the first one was him talking about this cycle. First we work it out and how we act and then in modernity we always imagine, and you see this in the New Atheist, that we come to this conclusion by virtue of reason and then we act it out. And much more often it's that we're acting out stuff and then the rider on the elephant looks down and says, I got to figure out what this elephant is doing because I'm going to have to explain this to some of the other elephants and then off you go. So yeah, again I get to a point in a video like this and I think this is a terrible video, I should scrap this, but I've done dozens of these and I don't scrap it and then people are like, oh I like the messy videos. So though now part of me is like, well maybe I'll just make this a member only video and another part of me says, no you can't because it's not really the kind of member only video that I make where there's a degree of transparency that probably should be behind a breakwater. We'll use the new German word that has emerged, the breakwater. So yeah, my apologies about this video. Leave a comment. Yeah, very messy indeed.