https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Srp8Ta_hJRo

 Hi, this is Paul. Big day today. The Peterson, Peugeot, Vervecki, Bishop Baron conversation just dropped. I was just finishing up the PowerPoint for this conversation. And it's a short week and family is coming in town and extra service and, and, and, and, and I was in church all day yesterday. Three and a half hour Nigerian Anglican ordination service. So while I didn't have any time last week to deal with it, the symbolic world, Jordan Peterson posted a lecture that Jonathan Peugeot gave to a zoom group, a zoom group of Jungian group about Genesis. And Jordan began with a little intro explaining why he thought it was important. And he posted it in conjunction. In a sense, he tagged it onto his Genesis It's a fascinating move. Is Jonathan Peugeot's work a psychological take? This is really interesting. A lot of people said, Oh, you know, you should do a commentary on this. It's kind of an end to end commentary. So much of this is, uh, Jonathan presenting in an orderly way, a lot of what he presents anyway. So at least at this point, I'm not planning a full walkthrough. It's, it's, it's a very worthwhile video. I thought it would actually be more helpful to situate the video because I think a lot of people will watch it and have difficulty sort of framing the video and understanding how this fits into the very long standing conversation about the Bible and modernity and how to read it. First thing I want to say in terms of motivation, go all the back, all the way back to Jordan Peterson's classroom lectures that are on his channel. One of the things that I gleaned very quickly from that is we see obstacles and opportunities. Now, again, obstacles and opportunities are not physical things like this sharpie. We see obstacles and opportunities. Talk about exaptation, talk about relevance realization. This is what moves us. This is what motivates us. This is the, this is the spiritual direction that brings us through the world. Now, with Peugeot's lecture, it takes, he begins the lecture just talking and he's talking in a fair amount of abstraction. And I think a lot of people will get lost and turned off almost right from the start. Those who are Peugeot fans, those who are Peterson fans, especially Peugeot fans, they'll hang in there because it's won't be too difficult for them to understand what he's talking about and what he's doing because they've watched him talk about this and do this for so long now. But for many people, I think they're just going to be completely lost initially. So actually, one of the better places to start is towards the end with the questions and answers. And what was very interesting were these questions and answers, because these were the kinds of things that ignited Jordan Peterson's status rocket and really brought a lot of fans into Jonathan Peugeot. Okay, there's two more psychological questions. I'm going to tell them both together because I think they are linked. And Jordan, you may also have something to contribute to that one. How would you work with the problem of inclusive exclusive categories in these times? Projection scapegoating. And the other question that's I think is related, where do the movements of cancel culture or Black Lives Matter fit or how to make sense of these movements into this intelligence model? Now, these are applications of everything that he did before in the talk. And so for many people, what hits obstacles and opportunities will be a question like this. Okay, something applicable, something concrete. Am I against this or am I for this? What's my judgment with respect to a specific thing in the social context right now? Yeah. So one of the things we're seeing is we're seeing out of control versions of this identification system or the system of communion. The way in which reality works is fractal. And so communities or identities embed themselves in each other. That's how it works. And so in a normal kind of traditional world, you can be a family in a neighborhood, in a community, in a nation, in a church, and it's all embedded. And you can also participate in all these different identities. You can be in a club or you can be in this and that. And so it all kind of works together. So one of the problems we're having right now is that let's say kind of woke culture has understood the problem of identity. Right. They understand it. They understand the problem of exclusion. But the answer they give is that they want to account for everything. They want everything to fit. Now the problem is that it's impossible. It's impossible. And it's even a day. And now his answer is pretty abstract because when they say they want everything to fit, they want everything to fit into their framework of, in a sense, a certain type of exclusion or oppression ought to be at the top of a hierarchy and everything is subservient to that. And again, it goes to absolutely everything in life. It goes to all of those types of social questions. It goes to all relationships. Dangerous thing. And there are a lot of ancient traditions which help you understand that. So for example, like you have the idea in Jewish law that you have to leave a fringe on your vestment or you have to leave the corners of the field untilled for the strangers. All of these patterns are there to manifest the fact that you can't have a system which is both coherent and complete at the same time. You can't. Those two things. Let me interrupt just for a second. Well, the ziggurat answers that question too because people can be included at a higher level of unity and excluded at a lower. And so part of this is conceptual confusion. It's like the problem of category is the problem of inclusion and exclusion and exclusion. Okay. And that's really helpful. The problem of category, because how do you categorize a person? Because all of us are multiple categories at once. And this is part of the main point that Peugeot makes right at the beginning of the talk where he talks about the fact that when you look at me, you see an individual identity. Now you might say, I see a man or you might say, I see a big beard or you might say, I see a Protestant minister or I see Paul VanderKlaai, but there's a thing. And that aspect exposes and covers other aspects of mine because it's multiplicity. You might say you're looking at me, but you're not looking at all of me. I'm covered with clothing. You're only seeing from here on up. But again, in terms of how the world lays itself out, how we process the world, this is how attention and category and all of these things hold together. Inclusion can lead to demonization very easily. And that's a big problem, a fundamental problem. But the problem that you're talking about that's manifesting socially is a consequence of this lack of understanding of the hierarchy of value. So the people who are pushing diversity, inclusivity, and equity are saying something like, look, we're all divinely human. And you object to that by saying, well, yes, but we still need to differentiate ourselves into specialized categories. And we have to think through that very carefully so that we subdue things properly. Oh, exactly. And so now subdue, he made a point earlier, but this is just this would be a classic Jordan Peterson clip ism that if someone hears subdue right away, they're going to run with it, such as enforced monogamy, etc, etc. What's happened and so what's happened is that people want to make inclusivity the only value, really the only value because of the problem of exclusion. And so what happens and this is this is what I'm going to say is going to be seem radical to some, but what we're seeing in this process is the actual destruction of the world. And it's actually going to this. Okay, right there when he says the destruction of the world. What happens with many people is a tiny little mental picture of a globe with lots of people on it. Now, this is not anything any of us have ever seen. They may say, well, I was up in space. Well, there might be one of you out there. And I doubt anybody who's ever been up in space ever listens to my videos, just on the basis of odds. But when you're up in space, you didn't see little people on the globe. Did you? It's this mental picture. And I've gone over this with CS Lewis's book, miracles about London and and the train station that he would always go into. Now, we know these little mental pictures are fabrications, but right away when he says here the world, that's what we think of. And this is our material modernist conceptionality expressing itself. Being in this process is the actual destruction of the world. And it's actually going to this type of thinking will can actually destroy the world or and again, when people hear that, it's like, whoa, because this is this picture of the world. But you have to understand how Peugeot through this video lays out the world lead to absolute tyranny, one or the other, or maybe one because causing the other because so imagine you have a basketball team, right? You have a basketball team. The purpose of the team is to play basketball to win the championship to do this. But then you say, no, no, no. The purpose of the team is inclusion. And now imagine you do that for every single level of reality and every single communion. You say that the purpose of your group is inclusion. But so then you sacrifice the actual purpose of the group, which is to play basketball, to win games and everything for inclusion. And you end up doing that in all aspects of reality, which you know, you're devouring the purpose. You're eating it. It's like it's becoming eaten by this thing. This it's a monster. It's like it's the potential. It's like potentiality is infinite. It's like you need to let all this potential in. And so we were like, this is wrong, right? You're excluding this potential. So we need to kind of bring all this potential in. So what it does is it's like a sea monster that comes up and devours the identities. And so either it brings about a kind of fragmentation and chaos and breakdown, but often the world can't sustain itself that way. So what it tends to do is it tends to lead into a kind of absolute identity. And it's weird because the way it seems to be happening, it's just the strangest thing, is that it's like people are trying to make inclusivity as the tyrannical system itself, which is just seems like it's not possible, but that seems to be what's happening is that inclusivity is going to turn into tyranny. But what's important is that that gesture is going to create something like absolute scapegoats, absolute scapegoats, which is that those that will refuse to participate in this highest, this weird principle of inclusivity will be absolutely excluded. It's the only sin and it's an unforgivable sin. And so we're moving kind of moving towards that. And it's a, yeah, it's kind of scary to see it happen. So that's his application of it. And for many people, once they hear that, maybe they've been a victim of, or they feel themselves to be a victim of a system that has done this. Maybe someone else got preferential treatment on the basis of a policy of diversity, inclusivity. For some reason, then you hear this, you say, oh, okay, Peugeot sees the world to right because from this, from this, from my standpoint, epistemology of being the person who was excluded from a system on the basis of these new policies that are given more and more power, I assume Peugeot's view version of the world is right. Now, suddenly all sorts of things start to start to lay out for you with respect to how you see Peugeot and what his work is doing. And the same thing happened with, with Jordan Peterson. So for you, this is the application of betterment because you say Jonathan Peugeot and Jordan Peterson have a better view of the world than the HR department at work or the admissions office at school or the woke politician that you feel is threatening your proximal betterment around you. And so now I listen to Jonathan Peugeot, he seems to have an argument that stands up against this because this was a very powerful system that seemed to be morally right because it was against racism. That's a, you know, we agreed racism was bad. And so this seems to be, you know, this is at least being touted as the next advancement of anti-racism, even though many people look at it as in fact, a another form of racism in the name of anti-racism and on and on and on and on that thing goes. Now, religion is always in politics is now. So we usually take the proximal betterment. We take the now and we find someone who is voicing our proximal betterment. And then, so we begin to align with them and then down the hierarchy, it's like a whole bunch of dominoes tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick. Now, suddenly I've been red-pilled or I, this, the script has been flipped or for some reason, the world turns upside down. Okay. Now key to this in terms of understanding Peugeot and Genesis, because that's where we're going, is that I view the world. The world cannot be viewed from no place. Now, part of why this is difficult is because Christianity and other religious systems have really tried to tamp down egocentrism. And if you say the world is viewed by me in this way, we sort of have an egocentric, an anti-egocentric bias in the culture that says, no, I can't talk that way. No, I can't think that way. But key to Jonathan's approach to the world is perspective. See, if I say it that way, it doesn't trigger our anti-egocentric biases right there. Now, Peterson, of course, was working psychologically and how this, how this plays into this conversation is rather interesting and how then Peterson applies Jonathan's talk here to his working on the book of Genesis, psychologically is a really interesting question. In all of this, we have beneath it the quest for the universal. And that's something that we shouldn't forget because in some ways, what Jonathan is doing is substituting the modernistic universal perspective, which I call the monarchical vision. You go up from on top and you look at the world view from nowhere. Actually, it's a view from above. We imagine we see the world as it is. We think we're seeing and we think we're prioritizing objects. This is the quest for the universal and what, well, we'll, we'll get into why this is. Well, why do we chase the universal? We're always chasing the universal because we're always chasing the frontiers and the universal is always beyond the moreness. And we have suchness and moreness, another vervechism here. We're always chasing the moreness and so the universal, because it's beyond what we see, the universal is always beyond the moreness and we're always sort of chasing it. We're pursuing it into the future. We're looking for something that will give us the ability to wield everything towards any end we desire. Notice all of the universals in there, something that will give us the ability to wield everything towards any end we desire. That's a very universalist framing of it. And it comes with the resistance to claiming that we will. Oh, I don't remember what I was saying there. And betterment is something that I've been thinking a lot about lately. So we have this, we have this desire for betterment. We have this desire to make the world better. That's a very universal. We have the desire to make our lives better. When Peugeot was talking about the basketball team, if you were a basketball player and let's say you had an injury, a career ending injury, you would say, I lost, you know, my world was lost. That's, that's how we talk. It's because that's how we think. It's because of the perspective that we're employing. Now there's proximal betterment and that scales out. There's ultimate betterment and that's this, this chase for the universal. And then there's absolute betterment, which sort of obliterates in the way that Hans Georg Müller was thinking about Wittgenstein and the absolute. So we've got to be a little careful with absolutes because they tend to just blot out everything. But ultimate is at least the degree to which we can attain or the degree to which something can be attained. It's not exactly the same as absolute. So, so what happens here? Let's see, did I, did I plan on a, I did plan on a clip with respect to this, this universal. How sure are you about the universality of heaven and earth distinction? As far as I know, it is symbolic pattern appearing with the axial age cultures, Buddhist, Christianity, Socratic, Greece, Islam, animistic culture, for example, do not have clear distinction between those two categories. So by extension, what makes you sure that all of this isn't just a perfect exposition of an axial age mind? How can I say that? He goes off here. A lot of my argument about the registers has been that, well, this is part of an axial age mind. And I think this aspect of mind is why, and I'll go into, well, let's just hear him go off a little bit because this was, this was quite, this was quite interesting. Yes. Now I'm going to go back into what I'm saying. I'm going to go back into what I'm saying, which is about embodied reality. People who talk about the actual age and animistic as if they don't exist in the world, they just, I have no, I have very little patience for that. Like, where are you? Where are you to tell me about the actual age as if it's something which you're not in and talk about the animistic age as if it's something that somehow you can see from outside. Like if you want to see four hours of Peugeot frustrated with this, go back and watch his conversations with Adam Frended and his conversation with rationality rules. That's, all of those talks were stuck at exactly this point. This, how can I say this? It's like, we don't know much about animistic religions because we're not animistic religions. We're always interpreting animistic religions from the place where we are. And so it's a very, to me, it's always like, do you know the secret traditions of the shamans? But you read the texts that some European went out into Tibet and wrote some texts based on what they encountered there. Were you initiated? Right? Did they bring you into the secret of secrets? Did they tell you what their secret traditions are? No, they didn't. You don't know them. And so I'm not saying that the comet is true or false. I'm saying that you really know less about these traditions than you think you do because the way you know about something is not about, it's not by studying it from the outside. But it's about encountering it and living it from the inside. And those that are initiated into the higher mysteries, they're not supposed to talk about it anyways. So they're not going to tell you. So even if a scholar was at some point maybe initiated into the higher mysteries, they shouldn't tell you. And if they tell you, it means they probably weren't initiated and they're bullshitting you. Right? This is true, like even of the Elucidian mysteries. Everybody talks about the Elucidian mysteries as if they know what they are. That was a pretty awesome thing because no one ever told anybody what happened there. Right. And if I tell you, I'll have to kill you. I mean, you have to put that on. So what he's getting at here is a function of worldview that modernity chafes against. Modernity and monarchical vision says, everything is subject to analysis in our ways. We see the whole world and someone says, you don't see my world. Say, yes, I see your world and I can explain your world. Now, with all of the tensions with respect to standpoint epistemology and a bunch of the tensions over racial or gender exclusion and exclusion, my lived experience, the secret, sacred self, all of that, this has to do with this. The question of, well, now we're saying that modernity can't see some things. Modernity can't see that in steep inside. I really am Natalie Wood and I am pretty and I'm so pretty and I'm so witty and pretty. And yeah, I might look to you like a month. Well, I don't even look that big on YouTube as everyone who meets me say, you're a lot shorter on YouTube. But when they meet me in person, they're like, oh, I don't look like Natalie Wood. I don't look like Shirley Temple. But if I have my secret, sacred self as Natalie Wood or Shirley Temple singing about the good ship lollipop, well, too bad for you because you're not privy to my world. Now, this is an aspect of what Jonathan is doing here. And let's get to the next. So if you go a couple of videos ago on my neo paganism, Christianity, the rest is history. This gets into these questions because Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook asked Ron Hutton, why don't we know anything of ancient paganism? Why do we know so little of the druids? Why do we know? And Ron Hutton attempts to answer that. But part of the answer is actually in Peugeot's answer here, which is they couldn't communicate it to you. Why? Well, they didn't have books. They didn't have sacred scriptures. One of the things that happens when you get these Axial Age religions that have sacred scriptures is now suddenly there are things that outside people can observe. Now there remain some of that internal dynamic because the folklore and the paganism, these shamanisms, they don't actually disappear because they're actually incorporated into it. For example, even if you look at, let's say, John Calvin's ideas about the Holy Spirit and scripture, well, the Holy Spirit shows you how to read scripture. Now from a modernist perspective, which is again, everything is out in the open. Everything is visible. Everything is possible. That is simply dismissed and declined because there can be no such thing because everything is acceptable and open and accessible to everything else. That's part of modernity. The ancient world didn't see it that way. And now, well, what about Peugeot's system? What do you do when you write? So what happens when you had the world religions? The world religions basically mow all of the paganisms and the folk lores and the animism. It just completely consumes it and in fact it subsumes it because what tended to happen in that old world was whenever you encounter a rival pattern, you either submit, obliterate, or assimilate, incorporate. Those are really the three options. And this had been going on for a very long time. And well, what happens then when the world views come along, the world religions come along, these world religions are totalizing. And what happens when they encounter each other? Well, that's when you've got submit, obliterate, assimilate, incorporate. Those things come into play and then you have conflicts between them. And what modernity does really as a function of Christianity and secularity, modernity comes along and looks at it and says, no, there is no secret knowledge. All knowledge can be made visible. All knowledge can be propositionalized and put out there in the open. And in doing so, what we tend to do then is we sort of obliterate personhood and the subject is destroyed. There are no people. This takes a long time for this to sink in. We have the meaning crisis because first we're obliterating all other subjects and then suddenly we look in the mirror and say, am I subject to obliteration by modernity seeing all knowledge as propositional just flatly there? And then suddenly you have a meaning crisis because there's no there there. There's no ghost in the machine. There's no homunculus down inside making big PVK move. And so this has been the process that's been going on that's been going on through history. Now, one of the interesting things is that people are not offended by Newton, even though Newton himself was deeply religious and even though his mechanics are not as universal as it was once imagined. They don't they don't scale fully to both ends as everyone imagined it would be. Now with this little illustration from National Geographic, universality is implied symbolically in this. We have a telescope. We see the moon. We see an image of the sun and planets in orbit. We have a prism. It's all sort of this secret initiation for those who have the power and the technology to open up the world. And that's sort of the the mythos behind science. After the discarded image was discarded, we looked for a new universal. Look at what we call the universe and why we call it that. And so we imagine, well, modernity via modernity, we can see all of this. There's a neat video that someone who follows me on Twitter pointed me to actually has the maybe we can maybe we can play it. I think it's actually Germain. So you want to know what's this meta modern business? And I don't know that meta modern is a concept or a term that's going to catch on. Postmodernity is now um pretty much taken and nearly worthless at this point. And so now we're looking for new words for what is beyond modernity. That's all about. I read this meta modern manifesto. Some would call what you endorse to not be modernism, but in fact meta modernism. A lot of our audience really wanted to hear your commentary on meta modernism and Hunzey Freinand. Meta modern is a To get to what meta modern means, first you have to get a grasp of what traditional modern and postmodern mean. Now I thought this video was really, oh see I don't even have it on the screen right now. Let's put it up on the screen. I'm all I'm all in a rush. I'm all in a rush. Here's a quick crash course. Traditional refers to ways of living and thinking that were long than norm in human culture. Think the middle ages. Here religion is incredibly important and pretty much everyone understands the world through the lens of religious stories of this world. I don't know if everyone understands that. I think people think they understand it, but again back to Peugeot's point, unless you're sort of living inside of it, you can look at someone else and you have these labels and you have these descriptions and you can explain. But now notice that Peugeot is sort of an amphibian here. He's explaining he's taking pre-modern and explaining it in the modern, but that's why Peugeot always says well you have to go to church. You have to participate. You have to embody yada yada yada. Participate you have to embody yada yada yada. Most people work the land and live in kingdoms run by monarchs or lords. Things don't change much and that's seen as a good thing. Everything has its set place in the great chain of being. There's a natural order to things laid down by God and one does well to play the role they were born into within that divine hierarchy while seeking their ultimate heavenly reward in the other world after they die. Now there's a lot of selection because you can't help because every time you speak you have to select. You select words. You select concepts to forefront etc etc. So there's you know he's trying to compress a ton of stuff into this and these are what people imagine especially from an egalitarian modern modernist perspective. These are sort of the the salient points that we overcame in order to achieve the modern world. Eventually though the traditional came to be replaced by the modern. Modern refers to a perspective based on the critique of traditional presumptions and articles of faith. Think the scientific and industrial revolutions. Religion and its other world notion here loses its unchallenged authority as more and more people come to understand. And the moon is incredibly important because of course the moon was the beginning of the beginning of the heavens and and when Galileo and Newton say well mechanics on the moon are exactly the same as mechanics on earth suddenly you lose the ether and you lose all these aspects of the of the discarded image and now the world is significantly more flat. And so it's the world is significantly more flat and subject to math and the world through scientific and materialist models. Most people work in factories living in cities run by bureaucratic governments. Things change a lot at an accelerating speed and this is seen as a good thing. This is progress. There is no social order. Now again notice everything is flat. Everything is horizontal in some ways. Even our pictures of it and you know anyone is allowed to go in the store unless you're a homeless alcoholic and you keep robbing the store and then they kind of say you know businesses have the right to exclude anyone for whatever reason they want. It's like wait a minute really? A number of things set down by God but the possibility of a true meritocracy in which people can change their own lives for the better. One does well then. Henry Ford is a seriously ironic picture in what he just described. Try and improve their lot in the world in the small span of their single human life. Sorry no afterlife. Eventually modern yields to postmodern. Postmodern refers to a perspective based on the critique of modern presumptions in articles of faith. Think the anti-war civil rights environmentalists and social justice movements. Here science loses its unchallenged authority as more and more people come to see other modes of knowledge as equally valid. Most people work service jobs and live in post-industrial urban or suburban centers. There is no one narrative or story for life only numerous perspectives. That whole progress trope that was just a modern secular religion. Not coincidentally it served those in power. In fact because what counts for merit in the so-called meritocracy is only determined by those with power in the social order and always at the expense of groups or identities deemed marginal or outsiders to insider values. One does well to dedicate themselves to activism aimed at correcting these power imbalances by seeking a redistribution of power. Got that? The traditional, the modern, and the postmodern each one supplanting the previous. Now this process can be viewed historically as the movement through different cultural periods or it can be viewed philosophically as the movement through different epistemas or ways of knowing or it can be viewed developmentally as the movement through higher and higher stages of the movement through higher and higher stages of understanding and cognition. However you interpret it everyone agrees that these represent a sort of series a progression of different modes or structures of thought. Okay everyone is a big word in modernity is a big word. So much for the traditional modern and postmodern. Now we can finally talk about the metamodern. The metamodern follows after the postmodern. It is then in broadest terms a post postmodern paradigm and thus a perspective based on the critique of postmodern presumptions and articles of faith. This corrective is accomplished in important ways by reintroducing. It's interesting the way certain things linger such as experts like David Foster Wallace. Okay so he's the one that gets to announce he's the one that gets to announce postmodernity is done and it's validated because he killed himself I guess. Ideas sensibilities and practices from before the postmodern back into the cultural conversation but and here's the crucial part altered now by their interaction and recontextualization through postmodern critique and awareness. In this sense metamodern refers to a perspective based on a critique of the postmodern and an attempt to reintegrate the perceived merits of previous perspectives including the postmodern. The metamodern so that would that would sort of put Peugeot as a metamodern but again I don't know that these these labels are necessarily going to hold sway with with everything we've got going here but that's a that's a I thought a very helpful video and it was it was clear it was easy easy to understand. Modernity is going away it fails to incorporate the subject it fails to incorporate standpoint epistemology it fails to incorporate the perspective that not everything is available to the modern not everything is available and applicable and achievable from it and the pattern the subject of course is the pattern seeing the pattern. Now Peugeot's world in that sense is sort of metamodern if we're going to use that phrase because it reincorporates the subject and of course Peugeot would say and I think I think he's he's being as fair as he can that he is trying to articulate a traditional world but he now can't unknow what he knows about the modern and the postmodern so in fact those will be elements of his perspective so his perspective isn't simply let's say a traditional perspective naive to the modern and postmodern and in that way metamodern or beyond modern or symbolic and and so the symbolic world is has the reincorporation of the subject and it tries to recapture what modernity has lost but now we're still using the internet and computers and so we don't want to lose everything that modernity had this gets into the lab leak what I call because the lab leak is we learned Galileo on top of that tower learned to well will one of the balls fall faster if I pray for it so in a sense in the lab you exclude the subject if anybody goes on the same tower with all of the same variables and drops the balls in exactly the way Galileo did then they will always fall at precisely this you know the rate that Galileo measured that's behind the scientific method method now the lab leak is you take this one trick you take this one perspective and now you apply it to everything and that's exactly what modernity did applied it to theology applied it to the bible applied it to human nature applied applied applied applied applied applied and what happens after the lab leak is that in a sense the virus sort of expends itself out there in the world and then those who are those who are fundamentally committed to what's happening in the lab want to say hey wait a minute we we this this has got to stay in the lab we can't just destroy all the labs because of the lab leak and because of the the destruction and the difficulties that the lab leak created for us so now what's interesting is that what Peugeot is doing here is in a sense offering a certain validation of the symbolic world by demonstrating how this can make genesis make better sense and you know this whole sense making obviously rebel wisdom's talked a lot about it what does that mean what do we mean by sense making it offers a more coherent picture of the world so we're still hungering after universalization because part of the problem was well we had genesis and then we had science and we couldn't put them together but now with this new perspective we can afford both genesis and science and they're no longer but heads against each other see modernity had a hidden preference because there's a little trick that modernity did in this lab leak which was that well there's certain things that sort of got smuggled into it and so what we what fundamentalists didn't appreciate when they were now they didn't appreciate the change that had happened inside of them and the change that had happened all around them and the consequence that that change would bring on how they approached the bible and this is part of what modernity couldn't really couldn't really capture modernity couldn't see the changes inside the changes in the pattern that was looking at the other patterns and so modernists were reading a different bible you'd say yeah but all the words are the same and we took very a great deal of care to make sure that all the words are the same now in a certain place in here Peugeot complains about modern translations and that's right if you watch my adult sunday school class i spend a lot of time in that class talking about words and at this point now lining up six different english translations we take a look at usually the leb which is one that probably you don't know much about the niv which is a very popular one and then the new living translation which is by which is not really a translation and then we're looking at david bentley hart's translation which is very interesting and nt wright's translation and eugene peterson's paraphrase and when you line all these together and usually i'm in the book of roman so i'll have the greek text there too things become interesting and so with my sunday school class i have to sort of walk them through all of these different layers and part of the beauty of the sunday school class is they indulge me in the generosity and benefit of time taking a long time to go through this because modernity has framed the world but the frame looks hidden and materiality and linear time are in fact part of the frame and so when a someone through modernist eyes reads genesis one they have certain assumptions that they are bringing to the text that may or may not be shared by the authors of the text and of course post-modernity became good at bringing this out literary criticism if you look at the work of of robert alter they brought these kinds of issues out when it came to reading the bible and what what this what happened when fundamentalists didn't understand that they were reading with new eyes modernists probably didn't understand it either none of us can fully comprehend the changes in our pattern as we're looking at other patterns now now this with this we're in danger of falling into a certain solipsism but we have no other way but to risk it and so when one thing is framed many other things are obscured that's in fact the reason for a frame cs lewis points out that we tend to see in pictures and so part of what i like doing with go to the google zeitgeist image search and just search solar system and you get all of these pictures and so when i say solar system a bunch of these pictures have been embedded into your internal mapping and that's what you think the solar system is and what we fail to see is that we see all these objects and these objects are set up sort of in pretty pictures that try to relate certain aspects of them so if you search solar system suddenly then you see things like oh come on show me the whole picture there we go oh but all of these are symbols and oh are those words floating in space and then of course many things we don't see like hey wait a minute those are roman gods except for earth why would that one be doing and sun well but mercury venus mars jupiter saturn uranus neptune and then you go to another one and just notice how we oh wait a minute now this one shows different relations oh now wow that doesn't make any sense oh look at this one this one moves oh that one moves faster oh now we're getting into questions of of size well where are the little names and oh now we're getting into questions of questions of scale and distance and oh now we've got some pretty swirly thing with colors and on and on and on we tend to go with with these types of and now we're going to look at the progression etc etc etc but these pictures all have frames and you have to include and exclude and what peugeot is masterful at is showing you that you're seeing these things and and in that way post-modernity is sort of included in that but trying not to fall into the pit of post-modernity which is this individual solipsism and so what what developed in the modern period were all these concord as concordisms now i've used this word before and a number of you have said well what what do you mean by that word well if you look at like creation science that's a concordism because you're sort of trying to take temporal succession and physicality and understand the biblical text in those terms and i recently had a fallen earth creationist on on the channel and he tries to well here's a new way to map this in and but but notice what you keep is is a is a particular approach to reality and you're trying to take all of these pieces and fit them into the other picture and others try to sort of dismiss this and say well genesis is a metaphor and pachaud would kind of say no because that that word isn't getting at the truth of genesis and how reality lays itself out and how the world comes into being but now when i say the world comes into being you might think well we're gonna have to think either 10 000 years or 16 billion years notice all the conclusions you jump to which you need to jump to conclusions in order to understand language okay there has to be a frame of reference that you employ and part of the reason pachaud is so difficult to understand is that he is employing different frames of reference and this is why you got to feel bad for jonathan because he has to keep repeating himself and saying the same things over and over and talk to rationality rules and he doesn't get it and talk to adam friended and he's not getting it and and you know i've listened to jonathan over and over and over and over and over and over and over again and you know just i think increasingly trying to coming to understand what he's saying and trying to find other language because this is what this is what preachers do we take two worlds and we try and connect them and find ways for the two worlds to try to meet i guess i'm a jonathan peugeot ally in that sense so so there's all this concordism with hidden modernity and and people are always looking for these allegories so i remember when i was in in christian middle school and a bunch of these allegories were presented to me the gap theory and the gish theory and um you know ways of trying to sort of account for genesis one with with evolution or just breaking the frame and saying this is the way it happened and all the science is wrong and then looking for all kinds of anomalies in the science and and trying to fit a cohesive picture together this way that when i was in seminary it was it was quite clear that the the page was turning and this concordist approach wasn't really wasn't really cutting it anymore and people were simply giving up on that project but it but they weren't quite sure then how to read the ancient text because in a postmodern frame modernists say well it's all out in the open a postmodernist will say well you can't know anything well that's not satisfying and so this meta modern approach says well let's see if we can continue to learn and maybe we can understand the relations now when jordan peterson was doing his genesis series that's why i called it a psychological concordism because he would take aspects of psychology and he would map them on to genesis and once people saw that mapping there was then a relief about oh good i can keep my bible metaphor or imagery or mythology sort of served that too for let's say a modernist christians but other things continue to slip because if the bible is just this this outdated ancient mythology then it stands alongside other outdated mythologies and then you say simply like a lot of celebrity atheists well zeus and yahweh are the same thing and this is part of the reason i've talked about ezekiel kalfman and and revolutionary monotheism in that no in all fairness even from a modernist point of view where we're trying to at least compare what we can there are some really radical differences between zeus and the lord even though jupiter by jove you know there's just history is really complex and really long and a lot of people have been mashing things together for a very long time and so so the allegory sort of goes away and um but but then again with jordan peterson there was sort of a psychological concordism that here are these psychological things in the world and oh look we can find testimony to the psychology in the bible and you just didn't worry about physics or anything else like that john walton did sort of a similar thing with um the lost world of genesis one where he's saying this isn't talking about materiality but he didn't have as developed a system as peugeot is using and so this is where the symbolic world in a sense peugeot is asking his adherents to step into a new world view and begin to see the world through new eyes now part of the advantage that peugeot has with this is he is in some ways saying that the orthodox these already got an institution with buildings and frescoes and art you can occupy and step into the symbolic world and then inhabit it look i am already and that's that's part of the way that jonathan and in all fairness to him he would he would have all kinds of humility and yeah buts and getting into it and yada yada yada this has been part of the big attraction for many people why started with jordan peterson then peugeot and then orthodox curious and then some get into orthodoxy again my take has been that's not going to be the end of the story or the struggle now maybe for some they'll be happily with an orthodoxy and i celebrate every time someone enters into the orthodox church that's that's a okay with me but i suspect and more and more of this is bearing out in conversations that have been having often with people offline that well it's not such an easy fit and orthodoxy is a very demanding um is a very demanding discipleship and again it's easy to say well you know you putzes and people who can't fully submit you know yeah you're gonna suffer for your lack of submission and part of that is true but i wonder see this is where i'm exactly in between vervecky and peugeot because i'm a protestant and i wonder and protestants are used to having a degree of flexibility in the construction of these worlds in order to try to accommodate some of the disruption the destruction that has gone through the system and i thought i thought peugeot's um i i really loved this video this was a terrific video and i was i was amazed at how he laid this stuff out and wow it just it all flows so nicely and it does and this is a a fantastic interpretive key of genesis one now it's not the only interpretive key every description is limited by its frame and context you can't have an absolute description because as peugeot says you can't fit everything in this is a function of our the limitations of ourselves and so for example john walters in the um the lost world of genesis one is sort of emphasizes the temple and he tries to i and it's he doesn't do it anywhere near as elegantly as peugeot does because again what peugeot is able to do is with this introduction in a sense welcome you into an entire system which is still present and to one degree or another increasingly accommodating and do the doing the difficult theological work to bring it all together and i suspect the orthodox church in america is going to be having some interesting decades as on one hand you have an ethos that is now benefiting it of not changing i mean talk go back to my conversations with nathan jacobs it's very clear they don't change but going to it is a change for the individual and we like that moving out into the universal and so for jonathan peugeot the symbolic world is more universal than the cross pressured evangelical world and the postmodern world of art school the symbolic world is more universal and and this is again part of the real difficulty that john vervecky and is well see that's not being fair to john it's really hard to be able to talk about this um because why christians have this enormous advantage is because we've got the buildings we've got the institutions we've got the books we've got the material we've got the communities we've got the allies we've got the schools now all of it is fraught to one degree or another because jonathan peugeot is sort of a vanguard of orthodoxy but not every orthodox priest when you walk in is going to be sound like jonathan peugeot in vestments it's not going to be that way and now there's there's some that you can find on youtube and in their podcasts and they might be your shining light but that's an enormous advantage that peugeot has in terms of welcoming people into the symbolic world and offering an avenue of participation and you can get in a car and you can maybe drive for an hour or two to get to an orthodox church and you can participate but you don't really escape all of the phases that have come before ideally you would walk to your orthodox church and everyone who lives around the church would be walking to the orthodox church same with a protestant church and and it's not too many generations ago that southeast grand rapids my grandparents walked to their church and almost everyone who lived around them were from that church same in prospect park new jersey dutch hill see new jersey bingo right there i'd seldom mention prospect park if you need me to say patterson just so you can get the bingo there it is so but that world has been pulled apart and so you're not actually going to have the same orthodox experience now if you like burn power move all the way to tablisi georgia where there's a church next door burn power now walks into the church and oh they're happy to see him and he's a good guy and the longer he's there but he'll never really be part of them because now we have all of the other layers that are here but what's beautiful about peugeot's system of genesis one is you don't have to dig up fossils and play all this creation science concordism to validate and verify the truth of genesis one it's there before your very eyes the world lays itself out in this way and jonathan is expert at showing how it's laid out here this is and he says it again and again this is how reality lays itself out the subject is now incorporated in this and the elements are so universal and so at hand once you become accustomed to seeing this you can live in this world it's larping i mean just grim gris has all the elements in his videos i know some of you are like that grim gris is so weird but grim gris has has he really embodied it have you really embodied it grim see grim is sort of on the outside says grim is a fringe character and this is probably grim is a fringe character and this is part of grim's ethos in his videos that he's not using this beautiful sony camera like i am he's not using this fast sigma lens he doesn't have this moderately priced yeti blue mic um you know he's in and out and in and out virtually not alone and he's leaving if you think the rough edges are in my video his rough edges are even more and so he's signaling he's signaling fringeness but all of the little things the larping remember embody you have no agency we want what's best for you i mean grim has all this stuff in there that's why his channel is so good but he doesn't take the time to walk through things step by step like i do and you get the sense that he's a bit of a sea monster and but peugeot i mean peugeot is doing it and he's doing it well and here's the way the world is do you want to live in this world join an orthodox church yeah but then once you get to the orthodox church there is a great deal of reality in the orthodox church that you didn't have looking at your your peugeotian screen and listening to the symbolic world now you might go down to the local orthodox church and you're expecting again to find jonathan peugeot investments and this is what you find this is christopher petcoo welcome to a different symbolic world ba ba ba ba old mcdonald had a farm again i'm not trying to do anything against the orthodox church i want people to go there but this is part of the reality of just reading my messages i shouldn't do this while i'm recording now this participates in a very very old thing i've been working with the book of romans and the apostle paul paul was in many ways trying to propagate a view of the bible in the roman empire and now if you listen to jacob from the bridges of meaning discord he he has very he has he has very unfriendly things to say about the apostle paul he does not like the apostle paul but this is what paul was doing and this is what i as a minister do and this is what jonathan peugeot this is what christians do and what happened in this struggle was we tried to save the bible for faith and you can find be a logos dot org i just noticed that be a logos dot com leads to some uh i don't know like you buy chemicals or something from them but be a logo be a logos dot org you've got all these ways of trying to either set it to the side or integrate it or science and faith working hand in hand because we know where we're not going to get beyond this and people can see that technology works and technology is you know we we grab on to technology for proximal betterment as as we continue to go through time often the limits of the proximal betterment of technology manifest themselves and so we we wrestle with this but what we want from science and that's the terms we use it's not the most applicable is we want to wield nature we want to feel certain and we want to behold pleasing patterns and you know i thought tammy's you know question for clarification was was quite apt in darwin i thought darwin was the enemy and with peugeot it's different from let's say theistic evolution which was something that's sort of been tried for a lot of people in some ways peugeot just basically says um no this is what genesis is talking about and that doesn't isn't threatened necessarily by science peugeot's got all kinds of other critiques of science because science is part of modernity and this is the anxiety of the idw and can science be restricted to the lab and they can the beneficial pieces of modernity be saved even as it's under assault by the postmodern and whatever is actually beyond the modern that we're heading into whether you call that meta modern or whatever language you use those who still want christianity can feel a bit at ease the bible is safe from darwin and in fact i think one of the ways to understand jordan peterson's impact on people was he actually used darwin to justify the bible but not in the concordist sense of earlier generations he had a psychological concordism and most of what people want from the bible is a degree of validation and hope that the bible can yield them wisdom in a way that a lot of the the modernist churches really fail to do in fact the most successful the numerically most successful wave of church growth in the last 50 years has been the seeker movement that simply used the bible for wisdom didn't really worry too much about questions of evolution and on the basis of what of biblical wisdom use that as credibility for the church and then for the most part used standard modernistic language to talk about i'm about to use a theological term soteriology you basically had modernistic protestantism in that they used for that frame but for the most part using wisdom and community and all of those things which would tend to outperform the absence of such things for many people and that's really where the seeker movement took off the seeker movement had some liabilities however which were eventually manifest in the emergent movement and emergent movement split into three for into three branches which were the progressive evangelicals and the the young restless and reformed and then now really the neo sacramentalists all three are are moving and i would say probably the neo sacramentalists are the closest to what we're talking about here in terms of what's happening more attention to liturgy more attention to symbolism and again i've been following this for a long time long before found jordan peterson or jonathan pageau they now suddenly we're seeing this in the broader context and we're seeing other voices come online now what happens to let's say peterson and jon vervecky and the more ardent secularists who are staying away from traditional religion that's really where we get more into the vervecky camp and again i think part of what we're seeing in the segment that has pageau for christians we've got the buildings we've got the institutions we've got worlds of literature we've got practice we've got all of these things it's terribly terribly difficult to construct a new way of being and far easier to adapt an older form and to recalibrate and tinker and i think that's in fact what happens whether you're conscious of the recalibrating and tinkering or not so those who still want christianity can fill a bit at ease the bible is safe from darwin and in fact now via jordan peterson you have darwinian arguments for the credibility of the bible even look at that credibility credo we're not getting rid of propositions they just often we just sneak them in in different forms we're not getting rid of credo it's always going to be there now this can be compelling and verifiable feels cutting edge than many of the rearguard concordisms of the past 150 years but there is again nervousness about the church and we hear that coming from jordan peterson's i haven't had so vervecky talked with sam vervecky talked with i think he talked with paul and my enlightener there was another conversation vervecky was on grail country i haven't had a chance to listen to all of these things and then peugeot on genesis which i just finished listening to this morning and then drops peugeot baron vervecky and peterson all of this this week you're crushing me people you're crushing me i'm big but i'm not that big y'all are gonna have to wait i don't know how long for commentary but um i might live stream a little bit of first look at the uh at the peugeot peterson vervecky baron talk and peugeot that they clipped right out of the gate it's like what do you what do you and it's not jonathan's fault because that was in context i don't know who's i don't know who's doing um jordan's the the person who's doing jordan's stuff today knows a lot better what they're doing than some of the ones who have done it in the past because you can tell because of the relevance realizations and they they sort of know where the conflicts are and and peugeot comes out swinging at protestants right off the bat at calvinists at i was listening to you know the i was listening to the nigerian anglicans i was in there for three and a half hours yesterday and yeah a lot of calvinism in that anglicanism even filtered all the way through nigeria and back to the united states was just quite a fascinating thing to watch they rent space from us here and they had this ordination service and their bishop came in and the the um the venerable was asking if i would please please attend so they could thank me and yada yada yada it was a it was absolutely fascinating delightful way to spend three and a half hours but cuts into your video time folks um the church is always about application and egalitarianism feels so liberating there's nobody better than me in action and knowledge and morality or maybe the church is and knowledge and morality or maybe there is the church makes demands demands on my attention which is worship demands on my energy money and time demands on my allegiance identity the church makes demands and again if you listen to jordan peterson in part one and i haven't listened to part two of the podcast all of his anxiety about the church are you gonna plant a new one really really you got a big fan base but nothing compared to you know even if vervecky and peterson could get on the same page which i doubt i doubt they could the the it's just hard to compete with something so old and so big as these world religions and in many ways the conflicts between these world religions are the titanic conflicts and to make it even more complex christianity is so subtle and supple it it in some ways colonized the world via secularism tom holland you know setting the stage for more conquest in terms of christianity so i i i look at these conversations and say y'all will be christian soon i think it's coming and even in jordan peterson language you're way more christian than you ever imagined and so the transformation of attention energy and allegiance the utility of the church for betterment betterment must scale we're always judging by proximal betterment we're looking for ultimate betterment telos resolution consummation the business about darwin and telos i thought sam made that argument did i ever make a clip of that i should have it was it was it was a good it was a good thing maybe i can pull it up i got the city coming in here in a half hour so all these all these application things you got to do as a pastor and everything needs to get done in this time of year it's a mess look at that sam's been doing work he's got 717 subs i haven't even really pushed him that much but sam's sam's a brilliant guy oops i don't even have the and he makes much better videos than i do he's he's he's doing this church fathers things with hank which is was absolutely hysterious he had a conversation with bern come on the first verveky conversation gotta find it luke of course jacob all of these characters that you can find in your bridges of meaning discord channel near you maintain all right now you see he's a good youtuber he does all of these things yeah here's the here's the section this is a clip on its own fail properly that's sure that's why i'm taking the position i'm taking so so here's here's why i might push back on that a little bit so so there's you know there's a couple different ways i think to talk about sort of purpose in biology and evolution right so like the purpose of a polar bear is to hunt seals in the arctic right and so they are white because so that they can sneak up on seals the purpose of their whiteness is so that they're harder to distinguish from the snow around them so that the sneal the seals can't see them as easily right and you know and they're big and fluffy because it's cold right and you know etc etc there's there's purpose in all the sorts of aspects of a polar bear that are sort of you know all centered on their purpose which is you know hunting seals but you know the polar bear isn't aware of its own whiteness probably not as the the reason why it's white you know it knows to you know when they're sneaking up on seals they cover their nose right with their paws because their nose is black but they probably don't know why they do that sort of thing right it's like at the level of instinct so they're well i'm sure there's you know polar bears are probably you know more well they they have some level of cognition and and that sort of thing but there there are purposes that are not in their own mind that they're acting out and i i don't think that you would disagree with any of that but i i feel like it's almost like the theory the the process of evolution the mechanism of evolution the ability to encode a form right in sort of you know dna and that sort of thing and then to translate that into a form into you know there's the dna of a polar bear which can get translated into an actual polar bear and then you know the polar bear has more polar bear offspring if everything goes well that that that mechanism of you know information embodiment of information but also the search algorithm right you know each child's a little different there's some randomness and the randomness is useful right the randomness is because the environment changes or we're not a perfect polar bear yet there's still room for improvement in polar fairness and and that it's this it's it's almost as if the purpose of evolution is purpose itself right like there are a lot you know there's the purpose of an alligator the purpose of a beetle the purpose of a maple tree the purpose of all these different things and they have lots of different sub-purposes and make their livings in lots of different ways but it's like life itself is searching for purpose itself i would say and that you know there's nothing the the process of evolution isn't thinking this right it doesn't have a mind in that sense but it is almost like it is the the it is the bottom up you know emergence of purpose itself so so i think that's great and um and i when i said representation i didn't mean i didn't mean necessarily consciousness i think paramecium have sort of internal chemical processes that track things in the environment so that they so let's say when we talk about teleology we're talking about agency then let's try let's try a different term okay all right so paramecium is an agent it doesn't have awareness it doesn't think but the paramecium can in some sense detect the consequences of its behavior and then change its behavior right in order to maintain unless in vervecchian terms thinking is something we more do between each other than inside of each other which is why i've recruited you for my third lobe it's autopoiesis it's a self-organizing system that is self-organized so that it can detect conditions that will preserve or threaten its structural functional organization and if that's what you mean by purpose yes living things are on purpose that that's what distinguishes an autopoetic thing from a merely self-organizing thing autopoetic things are self-organized such that they seek out the conditions that will promote their continued existence so i agree with that and i didn't mean to attribute anything i i i think i i fumbled when i used the word foresight that that brings with it and i apologize for that what that was careless on my part i meant more this ability to detect forward and adjust so i think wherever there's agency it is and i mean it for like the paramecium it is appropriate to talk about purpose and i think living things are precisely the things that generate norms for themselves that they then bind themselves to and merely self-organizing things like fires and tornadoes don't do that so there are subspecies of self-organizing thing actually it's a question from tammy so i'll let her ask it how did darwin bring play-to back because by coming back into the world of biology he inevitably brought back purpose driven action or selection is the best way to to understand it right he brought back the idea of selection and selection is not chaos right selection is not random selection is is purpose oriented and it's purpose oriented towards the perpetuation of the seed the perpetuation of the identity and so this is the argument that i've been trying to put forth with sam harrison richard dawkins it's like you guys there's a big contradiction here between darwin and newton or the way we look at newton it's like this is a big problem and so it's a surprise it's like it's a it's a surprise i think that nobody kind of expected and nobody necessarily framed it completely that way but it did end up bringing back uh the idea of quality back into the back into the picture but because you you choose for a reason and the reason is something which is closer to your own the perpetuation of your own identity uh and it's like crafted by evolutionary forces and so meaning itself is the consequence of the evolutionary process and how that tangles up with the and you might figure out the relationship between god number one and this like the theological perspective that you brought to bear today that's an incredibly complicated and difficult problem but as you said god calls the earth to manifest its potential so yeah god number two it's the agent god number one is the arena so you could you could how can i say this it's like so you can see it bottom up which is i mean i've been experiencing i've been expressing it more bottom up recently just because people are kind of scientists scientifically minded but you can also you can see it completely top down like you can see it as like like i was trying to explain to you as these the evolutionary process of maintaining your identity is is a reflection of a deeper pattern which is a cosmic pattern of how the world actually unfolds so it's not that it's not necessarily that evolutionary process brought about this it's that the reason why evolutionary processes work the way they do and do what they do is because they're they're functioning within a larger system yes so they're imaging they're manifesting the way the world works so that's how the world discussion of subdue starts to become so relevant because as creatures make their choices and live or die by them what they are in fact doing is the spiritual process of subduing and if they do it improperly then they perish yeah exactly and so so there's an image like we were talking about the idea of man at the outset you know and so this is this is represented in iconography for example as the image of of christ jesus christ human jesus christ creating the world which is just like for people it just freaks them out because like how does this work how is this possible but that's that's the that's the that's the understanding there is a manner in which how can i say this and there's a manner in which just like we have this christian idea that christ acts as an axis which transforms the past and the present let's say which kind of acts as this this central axis you could say that intelligence as it manifests itself in the world does the same that is the human person human intelligence goes back into the past and makes sense of it and goes into the future and makes sense of it and so you could say that intelligent is at the outset the things don't exist outside of this this capacity to contain them in consciousness and so right there and if you get that little nugget from jonathan you'll go a long way to understanding the entire thing conscious so the world is is born in conscious and that's the fundamentally different turn from the modern which is sort of an imaginary frame up into the heavens a monarchical vision to look down on everything jonathan is looking through business and the past as well the past is born in consciousness too so all those those those processes that people try to understand all these all the big bang and all this stuff it's still born in man like it's still born in consciousness so the real origin is not the big bang okay this is going to be the weirdest thing you're going to understand the real origin is the intelligence which is able to even perceive the big bang or see it as a pattern as as not just a quantum field which never changes it's like proceed perceiving change transformation identity participating it like that's the origin of reality so the description in genesis it's like it's a fundamental frame shift from modernity it's fundamental and it's it's it's for that reason it's really hard for people to sort of think in this different way i'm trying to help you see that it is an actual description of actual that word in that sentence is vital actual right now genesis one is actual is no no genesis one is in the past because you look at that book and it's right at the beginning of revelation at the end peugeot isn't denying a linear conception we said no it's actual the validation of genesis one is all around you right now that's his argument the origin of the world it's not an actual description of the origin of the world it's not a metaphor like in the way that we want to think about it it's not just a fairy tale which is helping us understand things we don't understand it is describing the matter in which reality originates and it originates in meaning then phenomena not phenomena phenomena first that's a puzzle right i talked about that like this potential that bubbles up and calls to be answered and then meaning which comes down so you can see the same from every single all scientific theory is like that it's like something presents itself as a puzzle and you're like what is that and then here comes the logos the seed which comes in and patterns it or identifies it judges it separates it from other things in the way that happens in the first chapter of genesis there's the whole thing in many ways that's the whole thing so betterment must scale and back to the church the utility of the church for betterment and that's the crisis and in many ways again as i said before the i understand peterson's complaint for every one of his complaints i could probably have 10 but i don't know any other way than to go into it and we're always judging judging by proximal betterment and we're always looking for ultimate betterment we're looking for communal betterment and again peterson's articulation of the piaget's equilibrated state i think you know that imaginatively was was super helpful for me to sort of to gain a vision again we're used to sort of thinking in images to gain a vision for just betterment moving out into the world and for a way of imagining betterment and and then we're looking for cosmic consummation which again is is the theological language that we use we scale all the way to the absolute and and to have a satisfying system the absolute has to be a part of because we're not satisfied with just having a concept of the absolute without in without having some instantiation or imaginative image of the absolute and that again is is what what the by what the bible tell tends to what the bible gives now how that works out i mean there's tons more to say about this but this is how we're talking so john and sam had another conversation this week and john there's like four verveky conversations that i have to listen to and of course you know barren oh it's a nightmare but i gotta end the recording now the city's on its way kind of negotiate with them over an easement it's a crazy world leave a message or leave a leave a comment leave a what are we doing here leave a comment remember embody