https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=P0Sp8UKnwsg

 There we go. Great. Let me see. So I think I'm recording now too. Okay, great. So everyone, I have with me for a second time Paul van der Klei. Paul, welcome to the discussion. Good to be here. Today we are going to talk about John Verwecki and the reason I wanted to do that is because I have tried to watch some of his videos and to be honest, I have watched his discussions relating to Orthodox Christianity. But also some other things related to Lutheranism and... But I have not watched a lot. But I think my feeling watching or listening to him was that he's using many Greek words. That's true. And his vocabulary is a bit complex and it's not always easy to understand his jargon, let's say. So what I would like to accomplish with this interview is to give, let's say, an introduction to his thoughts and I think what did I... How did I frame the... Like John Verwecki for dummies, let's say. And I'm the dummy here so no one needs to... No one needs to feel bad about it. But I don't know, he has a PhD, he's an award-winning lecturer at the University of Toronto in the departments of psychology, cognitive science and Buddhist psychology. But maybe what I would like to do now is to discuss more general questions and then we can perhaps go into more the specific words he's using and what they actually mean. But who is his? My first question, I don't know, that's very broad but... And also, of course, the audience should know this is our or your, this would be your understanding of him. You know him, you have met him. So of course I don't know if he... There is a question here if he would agree with our assessment. But... Well, he's able to correct and he is, I do count him a friend and I think on his part as well. And so I will try to be clear and fair. But of course John's thought is very complex and I hope I can give a fair telling of it as well as some of my thoughts about it. So in terms of who he is, as anyone who knows my channel knows, I tend to do a fair amount of biography with someone. And I did that with John as well. He grew up in a Christian, in a fundamentalist Christian community. And when I say that in the North American context, these would be Protestant communities that have a high degree of Biblism with respect to them. He's mentioned before that part of the trauma that he experienced as a young man in that community was in terms of their belief about the rapture. And this is a dispensationalism is a movement that really took hold in some Protestant groups in England and America in the 19th century. And there's a lot that I could say about dispensationalism. But one of their eschatological beliefs is the rapture. And this idea is that God will take some of his saints up to heaven before a tribulation happens on the earth. And so some dispensational groups pay a lot of attention to this idea. And apparently there was, this became, and this has become a source of anxiety for some people that suddenly people seem missing. There was a joke in my college once, there was although the Christian Reformed people are not dispensationalists, there was someone going to Calvin College on the floor that was a dispensationalist and the floor decided to sort of pay a trick on him. So they all left and he was the only one looking around for all of his roommates. He thought all the Christian Reformed people had been raptured and he was left behind. So that was something that he found traumatic. Also you know Jesus has this quote about the unforgivable sin. And he had questions about that. And because he had a fair amount of anxiety as whether he had committed this unforgivable sin and if he himself would be subject to hell because of it. And the kinds of answers he got from his community weren't terribly satisfactory. And so like many people in North America when he got to college age he left the church and he left religion. And he started on a path of seeking wisdom and trying to figure out life. And so he got involved with various martial arts practices, Daoism, Buddhism, explored many of these things. He also explored Christianity at different places in his life. Paul Tillich became an important figure for him. And he explored a lot of practices including meditation and such. All of this in many ways to sort of bring peace to his soul and to make sense of the world. He also studied a lot of philosophy and then psychology and in fact founded the Department of Cognitive Science at the University of Toronto to really try to take all of both the wisdom tradition, you know of course there's a lot of Greeks there that's why he uses a lot of Greek words, and the religious traditions to sort of put them together. And at the same time he also began to notice what he called a meaning crisis that increasingly public society in North America was, seemed less and less capable of growing people up that felt a sort of peace with the world and an intelligibility to their surroundings. And he saw this rise in suicide and anxiety and depression and isolation and divorce and domicide as he calls it which is sort of losing your home. He saw this as a function of the loss of these legacy and traditional religions. And so his first course he had done, he had been teaching a course at University of Toronto, cognitive science and Buddhism which had become very popular where he was working on a number of these ideas. And then there were a lot of, I was recommended some people who were listening to my stuff recommended that I listen to that course. The sound quality was so poor. So then he had a number of students to help him do awakening from the meaning crisis which is a course of 51 hour videos that sort of puts together all of these arguments and brings together philosophy and cognitive science and elements from traditional religion, Christianity and Buddhism and sort of paints a whole picture. And that along with his friendships with Jonathan Peugeot and Jordan Peterson sort of began to put him on the map in this space about talking about the meaning crisis. And especially because Jordan Peterson sort of carved this new conversation in big terms. Jonathan Peugeot structured a lot of tension in terms of symbolism and then also a lot of people were interested in orthodoxy. And John Vervecky spoke to a lot of people who say we're leaving traditional religions, legacy religions, organized religions and we're thinking in terms of science or maybe people who had been exploring other kinds of thought, integral theory, some things that we might categorize as new age and really affording a vocabulary for people to try to look at this stuff without let's say a religious tradition and the vocabulary that a religious tradition offers. And early on, Jonathan Peugeot first sort of started talking to him. He had written a book with Christopher Mastro Pietro about zombies that caught Jonathan Peugeot's attention and some other people. And other people pointed him to me. And so that's where the conversation sort of began. And we wanted to, at least for my part, I wanted to have a space where both Christians and non-Christians could come together, find some common language, and begin talking about these issues that all of us agree have been facilitated by the decline of the world religions and their grip on populations in the West. So that's maybe a good idea. Who is he in terms of this whole conversation? Great, thank you. So based on what you said now, is it that he, so he had let's say negative experience of religion in its upbringing, but did the meaning crisis sort of reintroduce the importance of religion for him, do you think? Yes. He saw, he's quite clearly a careful observer of himself and those around him. And so having grown up in a religion, even a religion within which he experienced some trauma, he recognized the more he studied how valuable and functional religions are for people's sense of well-being and health and for a healthy community to function. So he recognized that, but many of the issues that really arose in the modern period, especially in the 19th and 20th century, cast doubt on religions, on the plausibility and viability of religions, so many people left religion, but they had nothing in their lives, they had no institutions, relationships, cognitive grammar, he would talk about language, which would sort of replace what those religions had done for people. And so in many ways, John's quest is of a seeker who remains appreciative of what he often calls the legacy religions, but also skeptical of their plausibility for certain populations, and so part of his project is to be helpful for those people for whom Christianity, Buddhism, the traditional religions, people don't feel them to be a viable way forward for them, and so he wants to give them some other things that might be helpful. Yes, so that leads us to one of the questions I have written down, that what is his appreciation, let's say, as well as critique of specifically Christianity, in your last that I saw interaction, you sort of talked about some of these things on stage, so yeah, maybe what's his overall view, let's say, and critique? Well, his critique of Christianity isn't a lot different from many modernist critiques in some ways. While he has a lot of openness to a lot of things that, let's say, new atheists would sort of dismiss, a lot of what, let's say, Charles Taylor might write in a secular age, you know, I get the sense from John that he has a fairly buffered self. His ideas about science and cognitive science for him, he's got some reasons to be skeptical, not only of Christianity, but of, let's say, modern theism, because I have noted when he talks about his non-theism, there are some similarities to what I call classical theism with John. Part of what happened, I think, in the modern world was that increasingly God became another being, another thing in a universe of things, and a lot of new atheists' critiques of God are that, and John is not part of that group at all. So as a non-theist, he would say that God is not another thing among things in the universe. And so some of the conversations with respect to non-theism and classical theism, I think, have been very interesting. But John will often critique what he calls a two-worlds mythology, fundamental to, let's say, Christian, to Christian eschatology, and even sort of a rationality of Christian behavior in this world, is that Christians in this age can take on a particularly sacrificial posture, because we believe that our agency in this particular arena is temporary, and through the resurrection, through the work of Jesus Christ, we will, in fact, participate in another world, in a second world. And John's got a lot of deep skepticism about the plausibility of that next incarnation, the plausibility of that next world, and he sees, and rightly so, some of his critiques about how this two-worlds mythology has been used. You know, he's got some strong points that he makes in that. But I think that's one of the ways, that's one of the things that is keeping him from, at this point, I'd say, embracing Christianity as a viable belief system for himself. That's just one. He's got a number of other ones, too, but there are a few reasons why he looks at Christianity and says, I'm impressed by a lot of the things that you've done, but personally, I don't quite believe that framework. And I think that framework's pretty foundational for most Christians. So, some of the things you mentioned resonate with me in the sense that I see a danger when we make God, let's say, almost a super strong creature, in a sense. And I was reading a Greek philosopher and theologian, Christos Giannaras, and he said that, you know, the fathers, when they speak about, let's say, the nature or essence of God, in Greek, osia, they often say osia and then iperosia, beyond. And in Greek, the word osia is the basic word is being. So, to say God has being becomes sort of a chore, in a sense, but he is being. So, we want to go beyond and we, you and me, and everything else, are participating in his being. So, I think he has, as you said, I think there he's actually onto something important. But let us take a step back and I would like to ask you, how did you hear or perhaps meet him the first time? So, one of the people that was listening to my videos, this is a common thing, right? Because of sort of how my channel emerged and what I like to do, which is sort of watch other people make stuff and then react to it and comment on it, a lot of the people who watch my channel are watching other channels and they're like, ooh, talk about this person, talk about that person, I want to know what you think about this. And so, actually a man in South Africa had been quite persistent, I had done a number of conversations with him offline. And he said, oh, there's another guy in Toronto, a colleague of Jordan Peterson, who's got some really interesting stuff. And this particular individual is very philosophical. And so, he very much wanted me. So, I watched some of John's Buddhism and cognitive science videos and I found them interesting. And I made a few comments on some of them, I used I incorporated them into some of my videos. And John that caught John's attention at that point, again, he wasn't big on YouTube, and he wrote me. And he wrote a very nice email and said, you know, I'd love to have a conversation with you. And so, that led then to our first conversation, which is online. And I you know, it's one thing to listen to somebody's ideas and respond to them, critique them, whatever. And once you learn, once you get to know someone, one of the things that became very clear getting to know John was, he was a very generous person, he was a very kind person. He's someone who prioritized relationships. And that's, you don't always find that. There are many people who do it, but you don't always find that. And very quickly, I found John to be someone who I could really have a wonderful conversation with and we could learn from each other. And he had been, he had started doing conversations with other people on YouTube. He had done a conversation with Benjamin Boyce, which I thought was really cool and clear. He had been conversing with Jonathan Peugeot. He had, obviously, was a colleague of Jordan Peterson. There was one really interesting video where he was in conversation with Jordan Peterson. And John had this theory about relevance realization. And so he had a lot of interesting things. And so that began a conversation. And then we did an Awaken from the Meaning Crisis. I watched that video series quite carefully and was able to do some commentary on it. And so the conversation continued to grow. And then in 2019, some mutual friends of ours who had been watching both of our videos did, they wanted to do an event in Thunder Bay in 2020. And so they had contacted Jonathan Peugeot and John Vervecky and myself and said, we'd love to do a conference with the three of you in conversation in Thunder Bay. Then the pandemic hit, so that got pushed back to 2022. But that then was sort of the impetus of the online conversations and the developing of a relationship. And yeah, so that's really how that happened. Great. Now he, I think I remember correctly, but in the beginning, Jonathan Peugeot and John had some disagreement of some sort. I think it was before they knew each other on the Twitter on some stuff. But it seems like since they have started to talk with each other, they have started to understand each other better, learn from each other. And their relationship has actually grown to something, I would say, beautiful and enlightening. But I don't know if you're familiar with that episode, let's say, and if you would like to say something about that. Because and the reason I want to discuss it is because I think disagreement can sometimes be a way to understand each other also. To see where are we as I said, disagreeing. I don't know about any early sort of Twitter fight. I think, and I'm skeptical about that because my recollection, and again this is off the top of my head so I may be wrong, my recollection is that John Vervecki joined Twitter quite late. But there are things that John and Jonathan and myself disagree on. And part of what has I think made these conversations work is we really try hard to disagree without being disagreeable. And try hard to not let our disagreements get in the way of the relationship. And to maintain an appreciative posture so we can continue to learn from each other. And to open up ourselves to being challenged. And work that through. If you go back and you watch the earlier videos, Jonathan tended to emphasize emanation which is sort of top down. And John I think earlier on tended to emphasize the emergence which tends to be the more scientific posture. The more non-reductive materialist posture which is that things will develop from bottom to top. And so I don't know what John would say about this. But in my observing him, part of what have, I think all of us, John, Jonathan and myself, we've all continued to develop and change. Now we might not have changed categories. John continues to label himself a non-theist. Jonathan continues to be orthodox. I continue to be Protestant, Dutch Calvinist, Christian Reformed. But I think we've all grown in appreciation for each other's positions. We've grown in knowledge of each other's positions. But some of the differences that have emerged in the conversation I think have been interesting and helpful. But early on some of the differences was, okay, what about top down versus bottom up? And I think as John has continued to develop his thinking about Neoplatonism, I think we've seen more from John about emergence and emanation. And I think John has also, you know, one of the things that John has started talking about over the last couple of years has been sort of this idea of a Silk Road that may be Neoplatonism because there's so much Neoplatonism built into Christian history, Augustine, you know, some of the Eastern Church fathers. So if you have enough of that sort of commonality below, well then maybe we can actually have some conversations. But no, there continue to be, you know, a lot of differences between all of our positions. But, and obviously, you know, a big line would be Christianity. So John and Jonathan and I are both on the Christian line. And John continues to be a non-theist. And so, but to me, those kinds of differences make the relationships interesting. As long as the way we go about talking about the differences arises in something that all of us can say, I may have left the conversation not necessarily agreeing with all of his points, but I've certainly learned and I certainly appreciate it. And this is probably continuing to evolve my thoughts on a number of points as well. So I think that's really been key to the relationship. Yeah. Now it's so interesting many of these topics. And when you mention you know, emergence and bottom-up were immanent, let's say. Thinking about the same discussion as I can at least see in biology when it comes to the cell, let's say, because it's not simply that, you know, DNA is replicating. It's also that the cell is, you know, going down and correcting when the DNA sequence is making something wrong. So there is both direction, let's say. And of course we have the discussion of conscience. What is conscience? Is it something emerging from biology or is it something prior? So these questions, let's say philosophical questions, are actually I don't want to say real questions, but you know what I mean. They are closer to the material world than we think. Let's see. You kind of already touched upon this topic, but maybe, I don't know if you want to say something more, but my question is how does it fit into the corner of the internet? And then I'm thinking more what, let's say, space do he fill in this discussion? We have, as you said, the Orthodox, we have Protestants. I don't see so many Catholics in this discussion, but maybe I missed something. But yeah. Well, they're definitely there. Part of the challenge that we have is if you've got people on stage, and because this sort of evolved, I mean quite, you know, I haven't had a conversation with Bishop Barron, but Jonathan and John have both had conversations with Bishop Barron. And many of the people who watch the videos, Kale Zeldin, and I do quite a bit of conversation with Kale Zeldin. He's Roman Catholic. So there are a number of Roman Catholics that are participating in the conversation. And even to some degree, I mean, Jordan Peterson says many appreciative things about the Roman Catholic Church, but he hasn't joined any church. Yeah, Roman Catholic. He has his own. What's that? He has his own, though. Yeah, he has his own church, that's right. That would make him a Protestant. You know, you're mean to your own. I can pick on Protestants, because I am one. But John, well, a lot depends on how big a frame. One of the things that has emerged on YouTube has been, I think, David Fuller, who had the Rebel Wisdom channel going for a while, we call it sense-making. And so John Verbeke is definitely someone out there doing sense-making for the internet. And there is a broader community out there doing sense-making on the internet. And it has been for a while. Integral Theory, Ken Wilber, that's been out there for a while. Various philosophical YouTube channels. These are all sort of sense-making channels. And that sense-making is in some ways parallel to religions, because religions are giant sense-making structures, if you will. And philosophy, in some ways, is parallel. And Verbeke has been very good on noting that philosophies in some ways were analogous to religion. And so if you look at John's After Socrates series, he very much pushes on that, that there's a religious sense to Plato and Socrates and Aristotle and obviously some of the other schools as well, the Pythagorean school, all of these things. So in that sense, if we want to use sort of a secular term, we can say he's a sense-maker. So broadly on the internet, that's where he's playing. In terms of in the smaller community that I tend to commune with, that these conferences have developed around, part of what I think helps keep the conversation and the communities fresh and honest is that he is a non-Christian voice. And if it's, let's say we had a conference with me, Jonathan Pujo, and Bishop Barron, most non-Christians would look at that and say, that's a Christian thing. That's not for me. I'm not a part of them. But John's participation in it says to non-Christians who are trying to do sense-making, I have a part here. John Verbeke is not a Christian. Jordan Peterson has operated in similar ways. And so I think as we continue to develop events and sort of communities, to me it's been important to really try to maintain credible non-Christian leadership in the community, because that keeps the door open. Now I obviously have evangelistic ideas. I would like more people to become Christians. I think it's the truth. But I think anybody who believes in that they have some handle on the truth and has some generosity in their heart would like others to believe as they do. And so they argue their case. John Verbeke does the same thing as does Jordan Peterson, as does Bishop Barron, as do the Orthodox. So I think part of what also makes this work is that I'm understanding that nobody's going to play games with you to try to get you in their little tribe. But everyone, I think, is going to hopefully put their best foot forward with respect to their tribe. Be honest about maybe the challenges of their position or their tribe. And then have a good faith conversation so that even our tribes can learn from each other. Let me ask you something that just came to my mind. I don't know if he has ever engaged with this question, but as a non- how did you say? Non-theist. Non-theist. How does he answer the questions of objectivity, of morality and questions like that? And he's talking about the meaning. Can we have meaning without the divine being or God? Has he ever engaged those more apologetic Christian questions? He acts like a moral realist. We've never really talked about moral realism. And I think he would agree with moral realism. But we've never- I suspect he, like many non-theists, would talk about the moral realism of being and it would derive from there. I suspect. But he and I have never conversed about this. But like I said, he acts like a moral realist. He's a deeply moral man. And he's a deeply thoughtful man. And so I'm sure he's thought this through. It's just not been a topic focus of our conversations. Yeah. Every time I have listened to him or watched him on YouTube, I feel like he's a very humble person. And you can actually see that because sometimes we Christians have a caricature of atheists. And we say that- He's not an atheist. He's very clear about that. Non-theist. Thank you for- This whole episode is about understanding his use of language. This is great. A non-theist, let's say, we have some caricatures perhaps. But he kind of breaks that for me. He's really a humble person and an inspiration. Maybe we can move on to more of the specific questions I have. And the first is we have kind of talked about this already. But what is his main focus, the core of his message? I think the core of his message is even though he's an academic and he's a scientist and he practices that, like Peterson, I think the core of his message is he wants to promote human flourishing and well-being. And so to address the meaning crisis, he wants to make accessible for people what he'd say would be an ecology of practices. Which would help people- Again, when you look at the- He has an early video with Christopher Mastro Pietro about the symptomology of the meaning crisis. Depression, anxiety, breakdown of community. He very much wants to see the product of his efforts be fairly common image that most of us would share of what human flourishing looks like. Now again, as religious people we would, even within our own traditions, have some of our own particular language about new life in Christ. Religious language that gets at this idea of human flourishing. His language would be more secular, but that's what he wants. He wants to help people do better. And I think that's- So a big part of his work is that, but a lot of his work is also just- He continues to be a seeker, and so he's exploring the nature of reality. He wants to know the truth. He wants to see the beautiful. He wants to live the good. So I think that's the core of what he's about. Gregory of Nyssa has a sentence. I want to try to give it in Greek, but he says something like, He says that to find is to always seek, in some sense. But he's not saying that we are in this darkness and always seeking, but he means that every time we find God, we're kind of seeking more of him. And this process can begin different. Maybe someone is born, I don't know, in a Christian home, someone is not, or we have all these kind of adventures in life. We lose our way, we find our way again, and so on. But I think that's a beautiful image of life. And in a sense, the identity of human beings, we are these always seeking beings. He talks about, as we have already discussed a bit, about the meaning crisis. But it's not obvious what that actually is. So what is the meaning crisis for John the Great? I talked a little bit about some of the symptomology of the meaning crisis. In the third chapter of John, Jesus makes the point about spirit, that spirit is like the wind. You don't see it, but you see what it moves. And I would say for him, the meaning crisis would be similar. You don't see it, but you see what it moves. And you see it in, again, some of the many atheists and new atheists saw the loss of traditional religion as a subtraction story, and a happy subtraction story. John doesn't see the loss of traditional religions as a happy subtraction story. He sees it much more as kind of a catastrophic subtraction story. Now many religious people see it that way too, and they say, oh, we need to revive, you know, we need to revive our presence in the public sphere. He would say that, again, there are some real reasons why people have left religion. They might not be aware or conscious or cognizant of those reasons, but they are still working under the surface. And the manifestations of this are depression, anxiety, breakdown of social structures, breakdown of the family, inability for people to create and maintain lifelong friendships, and even romantic relationships. Contagion of divorce, let's say, because divorce can be contagious, would be a symptom of the meaning crisis. And so, you know, I think that's a good point. I think that's a good point too, is that there's a symptom of the meaning crisis. I just finished watching a TV show, a TV streaming show called Mrs. Davis that Bishop Barron had made a comment on. And part of that was in, you know, even a semi-silly show like Mrs. Davis notes that people lack meaning. Victor said that people can't live without meaning. People can't live without meaning. Jordan Peterson, of course, has nailed this home. And part of what happened in the wake of atheism is nihilism. The belief which, nihilism basically says nothing means anything. And, you know, even the existential school in some ways attempted to address nihilism. And so in many ways this pervasive contagious nihilism would be something very similar to a meaning crisis. So, is he talking about a meaning, you know, an overall meaning, let's say, or is he more talking about the meaning we as individuals, let's say, find in our context that we live in or perhaps both? Both. It's, you know, part of the package of, let's say biblical religion, I'll say that to try and make it as broad as possible, you know, is to love, I almost used a Protestant thing, is to love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength, and love your neighbors yourself. And, you know, the roots of that are in the Torah as well. And this mission that we've been given, whether it's sort of a covenantal mission that comes out of the law of God in the Old Testament for Jews, or it's this kingdom vision that Jesus puts us on the road to, that's, if you're born into that, you've already been given, along with all of the sort of practical survival things we must do to maintain body and soul together. We've been given a tremendous amount of mission, and this mission has energized civilization in Europe and beyond. And, well, now there are many elements to the meaning crisis, part of which is affluence. Some people live meaningless lives because they can afford to. When I worked overseas in a very poor part of the world, I didn't see much of a meaning crisis because they couldn't afford one. They had to work every day just to have enough food on the table. They had a very meaningful existence, but it was just survival. And now for many of us in a much more affluent place of the world, survival doesn't require that many hours a day. What are you going to do with the rest of your time? And human beings need meaning. Yeah. So your meaning to my mind is related to the word purpose. And does he see that each one of us has a purpose in life that sort of comes in a sense from above? I'm pressing the non-theistic. Yeah, I know why. Yes, because that's part of the I think for theists, a lot of our purpose comes from the fact that we have a personal God. And we relate to a personal God. And that personal God puts us on a mission. More impersonal imaginaries struggle with this purposiveness. I was actually I'm working on Paralandra, C.S. Lewis's book, Paralandra. And it's interesting because the video I made, I haven't put it out yet, of a speech in Chapter 10, Weston, who sort of typifies kind of western atheism, as it were. And in Paralandra, he sort of switches into a much more spiritual, a western materialist yet spiritual sort of Hegelian system. And so he inserts sort of a purposive progression. But it's still impersonal. But I think part of what people who have more of an impersonal system, they keep having to add that purposiveness. It's sort of like if you're eating a banana, it's already sweet because the sugar is in it. But if you're having to make this fruit up for yourself, you're going to have to add a sweetener to motivate. And so that's that purposiveness. So I think again, that's an interesting question that I haven't really asked John. I think again, he very much sees purpose for living, but the source of this purposiveness. And again, he's talks increasingly about Neoplatonism. And so Neoplatonism is a tricky thing because, okay, it's non-theistic Neoplatonism, but the one, boy, I'll tell you. And that's part of the reason Christians, you discover the Bible in Jesus, and then you're living in the midst of a very Platonic world. It's like these things kind of fit together pretty well. Look, look. Yeah, no, it's very interesting, all of these questions. I was listening to a talk by another theologian and priest, Father Nicholas Ludovikos, and he was saying that, he said that synergy is the identity of human beings that we find our being, let's say, you can throw in the purpose meaning, let's say, in our relationship with God. And in a sense, the more we lose of this source of life, because we have being by participating in the being of God, when we are sort of distance ourselves from this, we kind of die, like literally. But I had always a question there, why don't we fall into nothingness, let's say, why are we still in some sense in the orthodox tradition keep, you know, after death there is like, you know, heaven and hell image there. But yeah, so why don't we really turn into nothing again? And I think Ludovikos, he he resolved that question for me with poetry. He said that God created us out of nothing or non-being, but we don't know the way back. And it's like, yeah, I understand that from intuition, yeah. I would say the graciousness that God expresses in giving us being, and you know, the more I understand some of the orthodox, and I of course come from the West, I think, you know, in some ways I'm trying to, because in some ways they come at these questions from two different sides. And God is full, and also Louis, you know, the more I get into Louis, the more I realize just how broadly he read. I mean, he remained an Anglican lifelong. He grew up in a context which was very anti-Rome, but he was such a classicist and a medievalist, he imbibed so much of church fathers, and so you know, I can understand and deeply appreciate how someone who comes from Western Christianity, the opportunity to increasingly understand and appropriate a lot of the gifts that God has given to the East. So that's been wonderful. But it's a human, one of the big fights in the Christian Reformed Church at the beginning of the 20th century was about common grace. And common grace in Dutch Calvinist theology I think touches on exactly this point that you make, that God in giving us the being he has gave us such an extraordinary gift that even in our rebellion he's given so much to us we have to work really hard to undo the amount of goodness that he lavishes on us. And you can take a Protestant saying out of a Black church, you can't out give God. I mean, and you might be rebelling, but God just keeps strengthening and at some point the wise person surrenders and says, okay Lord, I'll let you keep giving. I'll stop fighting you. And C.S. Lewis says, we're not so much what we are really is rebels that need to lay down our arms. And in many ways lay down our arms and let ourselves be loved by him the way he really wants to love us. And now that's a complex love. And again, Lewis, I think for me Lewis is a real guide to help me with this. And again, the more I learn about you folks from the Orthodox tradition, the more I see, oh shoot, Lewis snuck a lot of that Orthodoxy into me when I didn't know it. I have actually read, I don't know, four or five, six books of his. So he's not only speaking truth, he's doing that. He does that in a beautiful way. So he brings together truth and beauty. And I have always envy that. I want to write and speak like that. Now, we come to the end of this interview or discussion, but this part is important for me and it's his, some of his vocabulary relating to knowing. So he talks about prepositional knowing and participatory knowing. Can you explain what he's getting at with those words? Yes. This has a lot to do with this is, Greece is interesting because you're right on the cusp of East and West. You're sort of on the Western border of East. And so, you know, you Greeks, you hold such an interesting and important space. Part of what happened in Western theology and Western philosophy and especially in modernity was a privileging of the propositional, a certain way of knowing. And this privileges, this privilege afforded some real good things in terms of the scientific method, in terms of technological breakthroughs, in terms of political structures. But it was always, you know, it was always a reach whose balance would eventually need to be corrected. For example, if I, if I want to reach, there's a can here, if I want to reach and reach and reach, if you think about civilizations as very long lived things, civilization in the West took about 500 years of reaching along the propositional line and we've gained some lovely things. We've gained some lovely Dutch Willemina mince and that's fine. But there comes a point when you have to regain your posture and regain your balance. And as modernity recedes, we're at that point. And so, what John did as sort of a mnemonic device to help us remember is he's talked about four P's of knowing because one way of knowing is this is a white can. That's propositional knowing. The can is white. Okay. How about procedural knowing? Well, there's a grasp ability to this can, affordance he'll talk about. And just by the shape of the can and psychology deeply built into us, when I see this can, I don't have to sit here and cognitively, propositionally try to figure out the can. I grasp it. And the can, in fact, has been shaped in such a way, in such a size, so that it is graspable. If the can was this big and this flat, well then, so that's sort of the that's a procedural thing. And in fact, we have a lot of procedural knowing, which is different from our propositional. You can tell someone how to swim, but they won't do it until they get in the water. They can't learn it. You can't learn how to swim without water. You just can't. It's a procedural form of knowledge. And it's different from propositional, that the can is white. So, and then there's perspectival. And perspectival is oh, Wilhelmina mints. These are something that in the Christian Reformed Church children would be given to help them sit through the service. And in fact, you've got a little you've got a, let's see how the camera can focus, cover my face. You've got a little picture of the queen, Queen Wilhelmina right there on the mint. And so, there's a perspectival way of knowing. Maybe the reason that the CRC people gave their children the Wilhelmina mint was because, so the procedural and the perspectival are very deeply connected, is because they wanted them to love the queen. And they wanted them to have fond memories. They wanted them to feel Dutch. And so, in the Christian Reformed Church you eat a Wilhelmina mint. And I would dare bet that in your churches there are many, many things that even though you might share theology with churches in Ukraine, in Russia, in the Antiochian traditions, all over the place, there's some particularities about your Greekness and your religion. And so, there's a perspectival. And you look at, you look at orthodoxy through Greek lenses. And so, that's a different kind of knowing again than propositional. And you can sit there with propositions and try to lay it out. But I can try to maybe write poetry about the wonders of Wilhelmina peppermints. And the, actually my mother didn't usually give us these. She gave us a different brand growing up. But I got peppermints in church as a little boy. And almost everybody in the Christian Reformed Church did. And that also sort of leans us into participatory. Because there suddenly, this is a different kind of knowledge again. And when you look at, there's in some ways a divide because of the reach that happens in modernity of the propositional. It was so privileged that the procedural, the perspectival, the participatory sort of all come around and clump. You know what it's like to go to church. Because when you go to church, you notice your body starts doing things. And especially I would imagine in a tradition like yours, you know when to bow and when to go prostrate. You know how to move. You know where to look. You know what to do. You don't even think about it. You just know what to do. That's all knowledge. And then suddenly, when you're there in the communion of the saints and the church, you know God is presence because you're all together. And if you were to walk into that building at a different time and a different place, it would be a very different experience. And now you can, you know we're trying to describe this right now with very propositional language. But we both know that the description of it is insufficient in the way that, okay, so you lay in the water and you move your arms a certain way. It's not swimming. Swimming involves, if you're swimming in the ocean, it's participatory because there's a current. And you know, it's perspectival. It's procedural. But the water is still wet. And so what he does with that is to say and cognitive science had recognized this, that there's knowledge in the universe is far more than just what we can distill down into these propositional statements. And that's a really helpful thing if we want to understand why two groups of people can't get along. Oh, they might have a whole bunch of their propositions lined up, but going to church without mints, it's just not the same. Yeah. Yeah, this is good. Yeah. In a sense, I think cataphatic and apophatic theology tries to deal with some of this. We say things about God that are true, but we are also constantly reminding ourselves that these words don't encapsulate the divine. Now, yeah, I remember. I think that's a good description because of course the West tends to be much more cataphatic. And that we, so it was always funny when you're studying. So, you know, God is beyond us. Here are his attributes. It's like, wait a minute, how, you know, the attributes are, you know, so no, you're exactly right. Yeah. I think, though, also in the East, we have a cataphatic theology, but that goes more to what we, when we talk about the energies of God. So there we have, in a sense, a very radical cataphatic theology that we actually can participate in the life of God without ever becoming God in our nature. But as I said before, I think like Gregor of Nyssa is saying that still there is an in, God is infinite in a sense. There is, we will never reach, you know, the end of God. It's like, here it is, you have seen it all. So it's like, we have cataphatic theology, but the apophatic aspects is still there in a sense. That's, yeah. But this was very helpful the way you explained those words. To be honest, I'm not sure I totally grasped everything, but I have to, I will, I will need to go back and re-listen, I think. I remember John Verwecki talking about this in relation to, was it an expedition to Mars? The people that were, you know, steering the thing on Mars, well, they didn't only steer the thing, they were almost identifying as the vehicle there. Yeah. So they were using, yeah. And this will perhaps be my last question, but do you think this can be applied in, let's say, biblical theology? Let's say that, so this is a new thought I had listening to John that in a sense, when we talk about the theology of Paul, we read what he writes, you know, but at least in the Orthodox and I think old Christian theology in a sense, we also want to have the experience of Paul. And if we have the experience of Paul in being one with Christ and so on, we can actually understand him through that. Even if we don't have his words in a sense, that kind of participatory knowledge also gives us some insight in him. And this would probably be nothing, I would say, to modern biblical scholarship, because you know, who says who has the real experience of Paul and it kind of goes beyond the limits set by at least the more liberal. I don't know if you agree or don't agree, but do you have some thoughts about that? Well, the propositional has some, there's a reason why it got privileged. If we can all stand in a room together and say, God is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. And we can all say that. Oh, that gives us a sense of unity and it gives us an agreement and it's fairly compact. Now, in the book of James, for example, James makes the point that, well, the devils know God, too. I mean, that's part of the weakness of the proposition. You would imagine that the devils are can be more accurate in their propositional statements with respect to potentially, they're liars, too, so you got that problem, but potentially, then we can. And so part of the reason Jesus doesn't just give us, these are the list of things to say. And at the end of them you say, I believe. That's not being a Christian, because to be a human being means to that they're all of these four P's are part of the Christian faith. And so it's always, on one hand, if we all profess the Trinity, let's say, then we, here we are, we're all in this Trinitarian church and we can all be one. But if someone says, well, this position, this particular idea or this particular behavior or this particular thing over here doesn't feel like God, well, let's put ten people or even two people and say, well, how does God feel? It's harder. And so churches, churches get on the same page by embodying and being and living. And even though they're all going to have different sensibilities and different experiences, they're also going to have communal experiences, but the funny thing is we're never quite sure beyond each other. It's the old question. Does I both look at this book and we say it's green, but does on the inside green to you look like green to me? And there's a lot of, you know, fancy scientific reasons that say, yeah, it probably does, but yet the phenomenological that's tricky. And because in order to for you and I to participate together in the phenomenological that inside those barriers between my inside and your inside always remain. And the propositional can sort of bridge that sometimes. The book is green. So say we all. But is green to you like green to me? And because our relationship with God is so expansive in terms of how we think, how we feel, all colors, all kinds of different things, it's always going to engage all of the four P's. And even though it's hard for us to go beyond the propositional if we want to have real shortcuts to certain kinds of unity. Yeah, I think in a sense words have a the same perhaps function as an icon. It's like it's not the prototype. It's like the word love is not love. But it's not either also arbitrary. So it's a sign in a sense. We can't even quite figure out what words sort of know what they are and we sort of know what they do. But even in this, so Spanish, Latin, many languages have like in Spanish it's Saver and Conocer. To know that is different than to know my partner or know my wife or know my children or know my church. We sort of all have them. You probably, you know, I don't know, contemporary Greek, but you've got lots of words for knowing. I know that. They've all got their own elements to it. Yeah, that's true. My teacher in Greece at the university said that about synonyms that they're actually not exactly the same. There is a reason why an author chose this word and not the related term. So I think that goes to your point. Paul, I think that this was very helpful and I realize now that when we ask questions like what does John Vervecki think, let's say, it's not only on the prepositional, did I say that right, level. It's actually also related to who is asking the questions and because we are Christians, we are focusing on some things that we are interested in. So perhaps to atheists or I don't know, Buddhists perhaps would ask other questions and highlight different aspects of his teaching, I think. And I think in a sense that's beautiful because in a sense there is depth in a person that can't be fully explored. There is always room to say, oh, you surprised me or because we have complicated and we have not experienced everything that we can experience and befriended everyone, we can't befriend. And so yeah, I think Louis talked about that. When a person loses a friend, he loses a part of himself because there is things that only your friends can bring out of you. And for better or worse, I suppose. Do you want to add anything that you think I totally missed that is important as to the discussion of John Verbecky for dummies? No, I think we hit the most salient parts. He's not always easy for some people to understand partly because he is developing a new vocabulary that is specific. And so this question about language comes to the fore. And when someone starts using a word or using a word in a different way or taking like dia logos and then you try to figure out, okay, now what are you just substituting that? And often when people listen to him they misunderstand what he's doing. And it's also the case that I know when I play around with language I'll maybe, you know, I've been talking about the arenic and the agentic. And then when other people hear it, they'll hear a different thing and then they'll feed that back to me and then I'll see it in a different way. And it's in that way that the development of language is highly participatory. And it's been, you know, this conversation has been going on for four or five years now. And we've developed a whole bunch of little insider language and so part of the struggle that we're having is people come and they see something that grabs their imagination, their attention, and they say oh, well tell me more. And then it's like, okay, I'm gonna need to just exactly what we're doing here, figure out, okay, how can I take this new inside and make it accessible to people from the outside and have it intelligible, have it graspable, so that they then can actually, the excitement of this is the participatory. Because someone new comes along, picks it up and says, y'all been talking about it in this way, but did you ever notice this little, this little, I gotta hide my face with the camera, come on camera, you can do it, this little leaning church here out there, what's up with that? And that then goes back into the group and that's the delight of the participatory because new voices come in and it's tough because once there's a certain number of voices, we all have our Dunbar numbers, we all have 24 hours in a day and you know, you're competing with all of that, but someone can bring a new thing in and sometimes that new thing is procedural. So these events we're doing, we're continuing to play around with the events and try new things and try new combinations and then that feeds into this larger thing which is itself hard to describe and hard to know exactly what's going on, partly because we're all seeing it from different angles too. So that's what's happening and it's a lot of fun and I think I know sometimes people, you know, Christians rightly, tribes are important things, you need to be a good member of your tribe and part of being a good member of your tribe is defending your tribe and doing that, but for tribes to continue to be fresh and grow, the members have to both defend their tribe but also figure out their semi-permeable membrane so that they can continue to grow and learn and develop. So that's just again, connecting to what your friend said was, you know, as we go into God, we never exhaust God and in fact the Christian idea of that our relationship with God is going to be everlasting and never ending, is directly connected to God's inexhaustibility. To be clear, it was Gregor of Nisa but I hope he's my friend. I think you're a friend of Gregor of Nisa, for your part at least. Good, good. Yeah, that's great. Yeah, when I listen to him, sometimes he says words that I've never heard and I'm like, wait, he's speaking Greek now, so dialloos, dialloos, ah, dialogue, is he really meaning dialogue? No, he probably means something more deep here. Perhaps, so yeah, okay. That's a lot there to unpack. Paul, thank you for your second appearance but still with grace and not with judgment as Christ, when he will come again. No, it's great fun and I appreciate having the opportunity to, I mean, it's a challenge to try to introduce somebody's thought to somebody else and it's a good challenge. So, I'll play this on my channel at some point too and I think people will then have a sense of, because there's a lot of people who have these questions and I mean, you're a native Greek speaker and so you're having to do this in English. If I had to do this in Spanish, oh, I don't know if I could do it. So, it's a challenge. Yeah, thank you for that. Every time I rewatch an interview, I hear all the miss, I don't know, not misspellings but I say the words wrong and so on but people are understanding so that's great. Well, yeah, just have them do it in a different language for themselves and see how well they do. I've had the experience of butchering the Spanish language before in the context of all native speakers and saying some things to watch them bust out laughing because I said it completely wrong. There is no prepositional knowing when you speak Spanish. Nope, there is not. Okay, thank you, John. Thank you. Thank you also to the audience for staying with us to the end and I will see you soon again. Bye. Okay, very good. Bye-bye. Bye.