https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1oYKvGNNRbU

 All right. There we go. So tell me a little bit about yourself. Okay. Well, I grew up in this town called Oakville, Ontario, or I grew up in Oakville in southern Ontario. And I was the middle child of two sisters. And it was, it would probably be what it would be. You mean you have an older sister and a younger sister? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Yeah. And back then, it might have been just normal middle class. But nowadays, because of housing prices, like it would be probably considered upper middle class. It was basically just like a standard kind of middle class upbringing. And yeah, I, it was, I had a good childhood. Up until when I was about, I guess, 10, I think it was about 10, it was 2006 when my parents separated. And yeah, at the time, like at the time it was, like it was really hard at the time. Like, I remember the dinner table conversation when it happened and we were all in tears. And both my, like everyone was crying. And then like, it's like a week later, it almost felt kind of edgy, because divorce had become so common. You know, like it just, it became something so common. You know, I think it's like, I don't know what it was. I remember reading a stat somewhere that was like a third of all families or something like that. And so it stopped bothering me for a while. How old were you? I think I was about 10. Okay. 10 or 11. What did you have a sense of why? Like why they split up? Yeah. At the time, no. Okay. I had no idea. Yeah. I didn't get it. So it was, it was just something that was just bang out of the, you know, where did this come from? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Basically. That's how it is for a lot of kids, because of course the parent, as a kid, you can only look at so much. And, you know, parents, of course, as an adult, you can see so much more. So, yeah, it's not until years later too. Yeah. Because the huge thing is the financial thing. Cause then you have this split income. Yeah. And then like, so it was the, the, the financial situation, like it's later on when you realize all the consequences. But at the time, like, you know, even in high school, when I was a teenager, like I was really indifferent to it. Mm-hmm. And I remember I had this one friend and he used to talk about how much he wished his parents divorced. And he'd tell us like, you know, he knows what, that he, you know, he'd give like, whatever he'd say prior that I know it sounds kind of messed up, but kind of wished they got divorced, you know, and. And what did you think when he'd say that? I thought he just wanted it so he could get away with smoking weed. Not getting it by his parents. Like that was a huge part of it. And, you know, like when I was, because you get away with that stuff more easily. Cause you know, eventually when I was in, you know, when I was 16, me and my dad, so I moved, me and my dad moved out. My mom, like they, it was kind of a weird situation. They weren't living together, but for a little while they were like, after like immediately after the divorce, my mom didn't have a place to stay, blah, blah, blah. That's not that uncommon. I hear that story fairly frequently, especially if because of the financial thing. I mean, suddenly go from one household to two households. That's a huge jump when your whole financial thing is settled on one. Yeah. Yeah. But at the time, the move was nice because the house we were living in was way smaller and it was like, it was a bungalow. You know, it was kind of like the sort of lower blue collar house. And, but it was right by the mall where all the kids hung out. And it was really close to a lot of my other friends. So like, it was a move at the time that actually worked out really pretty well. And like, I got a basement, I had my room in the basement, which I loved, you know, because as a teenager, you like it and then you grow up and it's like, well, you're just stuck in basements all the time, you know, because that's just like, you're, I don't know, that's just how it worked out for me. Yeah. You know, I was always living in basements, even now I'm living in the basement, but yeah. So, and, so did it impact your, how you did in school? The separation? Yeah. I want to say most of, most of, I think that, I don't know, like, I always had a problem with gaming addiction. One of the things that happened, so one of the things that happened after my parents separation was that they went really easy on us because they felt guilty. Right. And so they, you know, like I was allowed to eat cinnamon buns for breakfast, you know, and at the time I was kind of like, huh, why is, why is mom doing this for me? Like this is weird. And so, you know, I got really into gaming, like MMOs, which are, you know, easily the most time consuming kind of games. And for elementary, that hurt my schooling a lot. Like, it's kind of strange because it consumes memories too. Like it consumes, like, I don't, like grade seven, I was really addicted to World of Warcraft. And so grade seven is just like a blur to me because of that, because all my time was just spent playing this game. And, you know, that, that addiction will come to haunt me back later because there were these things called private servers and it was like old school World of Warcraft servers, like unlicensed Blizzard servers that would be hosted by, I don't know, like, you know, whatever, some European guys. And then you'd play those and, you know, it was just kind of a rush because the game was so addicting and it was like a version of the game you hadn't played in so many years. So, so you had nostalgia included, you know, sort of on top of the just addictive nature of the game itself. Yeah. Yeah. Big time. Yeah. So how many years, I mean, so did you play, do you still play or did you play all the way through high school? What did that do to your life in high school? Well, I wasn't playing any MMOs. I stopped, like WoW got boring by, so grade seven, 2008 comes along. I mean, I'm going into grade eight and they come out with a new expansion and my parents were just sick of my addiction. They didn't want to pay for the game anymore. And like, I was bored, you know, the game got boring, like end game because you're just kind of stuck at the max level and it's just this chore-like grinding. So in grade eight, I had a good friend group, you know, I had a couple of really close friends and we always hung out. We did a bunch of different stuff together. And then, so at that time, like I didn't have a problem with gaming until I got a PlayStation 3 in grade nine for Christmas. And that was, you know, like my first game console. And so it was kind of a surreal moment because, you know, everyone I knew had a game console and I didn't. And so when I finally got one, it was just like, holy crap, like I'm playing a, you know, I have a PlayStation 3 in my own home. Like it was, you know, and then that really consumed up a lot of my time in grade nine, but it wasn't the same addiction. Like those games aren't as, they're not as addicting, indecisive, but they're not as they're not as addicting individually. Certainly not because there's so much, you know, they're just like single-player campaigns and multiplayer games. Like it's not like, you know, this full-scale massive world MMO kind of thing. Right. But grade nine was also when I started smoking pot. So that's when I started getting into, you know, stoner habits. And then that was all throughout high school. Um, yeah, I'm trying to think what else to throw in here. Like I had hobbies, you know, like I, I took up guitar and, um, I took up skateboarding again too, which I started when I was 11 years old because in elementary, there was a bunch of every, like so many kids did it. And so I thought, oh, okay. So it's the cool thing to do. And then when I got to grade nine, when I got to high school, I didn't like a lot of the skaters because I thought they were just preppy and I was like, but then this girl, uh, I, there was this girl I, uh, I met and she, like, she met me and we, like, she wanted to hang out and I was like, oh, okay. So we ended up making out at night at this, uh, one of the local skate parks, like the biggest local skate park. Uh, and, and I found out like she had a thing for skaters. I was like, oh, I got to get back into it. So that's basically what happened. And like, to this day, it never, um, well, it's funny, like I still skateboard to this day on and off, like I could never really quit because there's a couple, there's a few reasons for it. Like it's kind of something more philosophical for me. Like, uh, but it's, it's almost like the crush, like, because like, I think like a man's crush on a woman lasts a lot longer. Whereas a woman's crush is kind of temporary, you know? I think that's true. I think that's very true. So, um, yeah, I, um, what did you, what did, what kind of subjects did you like in high school? Not much. Um, like I was actually good, like in grade nine, I was pretty good at school, but once I started, uh, once I became, you know, this burnout, you know, that kind of all just passed on because it just, you know, it, it turns you, it just makes you like, it just turns you into a vegetable and it kind of, you kind of think like one. Yeah. Um, so, so did the pot and all this stuff just kind of go all the way through high school for you? Yeah. Yeah. So what happens, what happens after high school? Um, well, I started working at a restaurant and then the goal was, I took like a half leap year and then, um, I was going to do a year for, of like general arts because, you know, it was, it was my dad's good advice. Like just do something that you want, do what you want to do. It would interest you. Read the stuff, like read all the program material and then pick a choice and that's it. That's all there is to it. And so that's what I did. And it wasn't until college that I learned to enjoy school and college. Yeah. I mean, subjects in high school, I took an American history class because it was, it was by the same, there was the teacher taught world history and American history and they were both electives, but you can only pick one. So I chose American history and, um, that was okay. I didn't do well on it for so many reasons outlined, but, uh, yeah. I mean, yeah, like I said, it wasn't until college until I really started to, and like until I started, I had courses that I actually liked. Like in college, it was the opposite. Like I hated rest. I hated college. Like I hated the college life and residence and everything. Like I couldn't stand it, but I liked the school where, like, I liked the schooling and whereas in high school, it was kind of the opposite for a little while. I mean, most of high school for me was in hindsight was a nightmare, but like when I was 16, I, when I was 16, I did have good times. You know, I had a good friend group. And even though, uh, you know, we, we smoked a lot of weed and we drank, you know, we didn't, we weren't like, you know, we didn't have sex with all one another and everything. Like, and at the time it was really, really annoying because I had like this, this string of, uh, moments like throughout my adolescence where I would come so close to losing my virginity and then it was just snatched away from me. And like it would always, at the time, you know, for a while it was just the most frustrating thing to look back on my life history. And, you know, now I look back on it and I'm kind of like, I don't know. I mean, I don't know if I would have turned out that much better. I mean, you know, we haven't reached like the point where I became a Christian, which came, which comes much later because that then changes everything. Yeah. So was there, did your parents go to church at all? No, before, after the divorce. No, that was, that was just not a part of the picture. No, like we, it was totally atheistic. Like I remember, uh, like I think it was grade three or four. I asked my dad if God was real. Yeah. And I think at that point, that's when he told me he wasn't. And it's strange now because I don't know if this happened before or after, but as a kid, as a child, I'd be laying in my bed at night at times. And like I'd have this existential dread about death, you know, and I can't remember if it was after he said that or before, like if this is just a consequence of growing up in a house without God. Yeah. It's not uncommon for a kid to have an existential dread about death. I mean, because once again, it's, it's hard for us, it's hard to recognize what you don't know. It's hard to see the edges of your knowledge. And then of course, as a child, you're just, things are just opening up slowly. And then of course, with something like a divorce, it's a trauma, but then at some point as a child, you're going to learn about death and that's going to be out there. And then you're going to realize, wait, I, this, this, and then, so it's, it's a lot, it's a lot. And so then you're, you're in high school and you're playing around with this stuff and you're, but then you go to college and you discover you like learning. What happened with the pot and the video games? Did it go away or did it just kind of recede a little bit and not eat everything? Well, when I went into college, like I was really hoping I wanted to get away from all that, you know, like, because when I was 19 prior, prior to going into college, or 18, for a little while, I was selling dope, like I was a pusher, like just weed and, and like, I was a pusher, like just weed and, and, you know, and I just wanted to get away from it. Like I wanted to get away from that lifestyle, like, because to me, it was just like, I'd already lived it. I already lived it. Like, I, you know, taking stuff up my nose, I mean, not like addictively, but you know, I'd smoked all the dope, like, it's just like, you know, you have these experiences and you get tired of their pleasure. Like you just, like, but when I went into college, you suddenly are surrounded by all these kids who haven't done this stuff yet, you know, and then, so it was just, I was hoping that wasn't going to be the case. What, what wasn't going to be the case? That, that other people weren't going to now sort of discover this in college, what you had lived in high school? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so. So what did that do to you when you realized that, when you realized that you were on an accelerated path compared to others? Because probably many of those kids in college, you know, a lot of studies show that in college, kids who make it to college proportionately more often come from homes that didn't have a divorce. That doesn't mean that divorced kids never go to college. It means that basically if you have an intact home, if you're, if you don't have the financial challenges, if you don't have the trauma, chances are better, you're going to make it to college. People have college educations, divorce less. I mean, there's a whole clumping of different sociological groups there. So when you go to college, in some ways, you enter a different population. And then you discover that a whole bunch of these kids that have lived lives where their parents had, had a degree of control. And that control meant that they didn't sort of get lost and have unlimited time for video games and have lack of supervision to do pot, et cetera, et cetera. Now, a bunch of these kids go to college and now they're going to discover pot and video games and, you know, hooking up and all of this stuff, but just at an older age. And you get to college and you look around and you're like, uh, yeah, yeah, you know where that goes? They don't. Yeah. And you do. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it produced a bit of an ego, like at the time. Um, cause you, you just, you know, kids felt like they just wanted to be edgy about it and, or they felt that it made their lives authentic, like something like that. Yeah. And. So, okay. So what did you study in college? Well, I took the, the, I took humanities and then humanities stands out and, um, you know, Jordan Peterson is absolutely right about the humanities. Like nothing is cited, you know, I mean, as much as I really liked the course, because, uh, it, you know, even, even even though college was just like a fricking, like just a hell hole at times, like it really, it directed my intellect, you know, and I learned that all these things that I actually had an interest in that at the time I didn't think I, I had no idea that I would, you know, um, um, and there, I took a number of film courses too. And that got me really into movies. I mean, I had some, some, I had an inkling of interest in, in film before, like particularly after I watched that, that movie Fargo, because I'd just never seen a movie done that way, like with that kind of realism. But when I took, when I went into college, like I took a number of film courses. And so I got really into movies and, um, kind of think what else stands out. I mean, there was social sciences and there was this other course called human relations, which was kind of like a psychology course, you know, a pretty decent, it was a good course. I really liked my professor. Um, what happened in terms of, um, girls and women in college, any steady girlfriends at that point? No, no, I've never had a girlfriend. I had one in high school for like a month when I was like 16. And, uh, that was it. Like, why do you think so? Why do you think that's the case? Oh, I've been trying to answer that question for years. I think it's a number of reasons. I think I've sort of cracked it. Uh, you're not a bad looking guy. You're smart. You know how to talk. I mean, we'll get to the, we'll get to the stuff after college in a little bit, but just looking at you, it doesn't seem like this, like, you know, the sub guys I meet, it's like, yeah, it's going to be rough, but that's not my sense with you. Yeah. Um, the reasons I think are, I think growing up in a household of women, I think that's one of them, but it's compounded with the fact that my dad didn't know how to deal with that dynamic. Because like my, my mom had, my mom had a temper. My mom had a real temper. You know, my dad was the very kind of emotionally level headed one, but my mom had a real serious temper. Like, you know, the quote, don't, don't cry over spilled milk. Like at the dinner table, that was what really triggered her. You know, it was like, don't spill the milk because if you spilled the milk, literally, like, you know, my mom just had a hissy fit. Like she would just freak out about it. And you ever hear of borderline personality disorder? Pardon me? You ever hear of borderline personality disorder? Yeah. Okay. I don't know if that's her maybe. I don't know, but, um, but she'd fly off the handle and, um, could you as a child predict, I mean, did you sort of walk on eggshells around her all the time or did your father do that? No, it was just my, yeah, my dad did. I think my dad did a bit. I didn't, it was never, uh, she just had a, did I say she had a hair trigger temper? No. Okay, good. She didn't have that kind of temper, but she just had a real temper and like she could just, um, it was just stuff like that, that she would freak out about. And I didn't walk on, I, in a kind of sense, she, she, in many ways, she became, the problem was that she became more of a father figure than my dad because of her, like real kind of, well, she, you know, she, she was the Dutch side of my family. So she's got kind of a big mouth. Um, so that's hilarious. Uh, when, you know, my dad, when she would have these hissy fits, my dad just kind of shut down. Like he wouldn't do anything and he didn't know, he just didn't know how to deal with the situation. Yeah. And, and it frustrates me now looking like at the time, like, I think he thought he was doing the right thing. Yeah. You know, when it ties into the whole idea of like putting the woman in her place, it's like, it's not a matter of being some kind of tyrant. It's just like, he just couldn't, he just, you know, he wouldn't try to calm her down and settle her and like, yeah. And even at times himself, like raise his voice when he needed to. Like, yeah, you don't want to see your parents yell and fight and everything, but it's just like, you know, there was just too many times where he had to put his foot down. And so basically, you know, back to the whole girlfriend thing, it's like, this is kind of what I'm seeing is that the kind of woman runs the show, you know? And it's not the only reason. The other reason what the other reason was is that when I was 17, 18, that's when I became a porn addict. Okay. And that hasn't, like, it hasn't left me to this day. Yeah. Like, it's still this thing. I don't know what to call it. Like, it's, you know, it's like, you could call it a demon, but it gets to a point where it's like, this thing is, I don't know, like, it's something, it's truly diabolical, you know? And so that was the other reason. And, you know, and so you just, and then politics, I think that's partly to do with it, too. All the stuff that came later on the internet. Well, when Jordan Peterson, like, I mean, when I guess an example would be like, when Jordan Peterson came out, you know, it's like, if you went up to any woman and said, like, you know, here's the guy, like, he was the guy to me, you know, in terms of like, being like the ideal man, let alone a Canadian, it gets, you know, I mean, because to me, that's, it gets, you know, I mean, because to me, that's also the reason for my initial strong biases towards him is that like, to have like this canuck, like come out and, but, you know, it was like, okay, he's educated, you know, he's a high earner, like, he's super intelligent, you know, he's got a wife, he's got kids, like, he's successful in every freaking way, he's disagreeable, you can't push him around. And my sis, and I'm like, you know, if I went up to my sisters and described them this man, you know, and they couldn't stand them. They just couldn't stand the guy. And so it was like, what the, I don't, I just, you know, and like, I'm not the only guy to say this. And I had a conversation with a friend last night over the phone about this, because we've been talking about it a bit. And it's like, you know, I don't think, like, guys out there have said how women don't like intelligent men. You know, and it was that conversation you had with Aaron Wren. And then I started exploring his substack. And then he had a, he had an article, and he'd had a chart and under beta characteristics of that chart was intelligence. And that's how I knew this guy knows what he's talking about, because like the whole like general intelligence isn't like it's not there's no sexual attraction to it. And I think with the 20th century, like, there was kind of this romanticizing of intellect, like they made it kind of, they made it something looks sexual, and it's not. But the thing was, everyone was doing it. So it just kind of everyone just went along with that whole idea. And it's just not true at all. Because it's like, you know, like, no one likes like the sort of posh arrogance, intellect and all that, like, you know, and my friend was telling me, like, I had another friend, he was telling me, like, women hate that. And I'm like, yeah, but you know, women don't like it event, like, they're not interested in it, in general, like, it doesn't matter if you have like this brash intellectualism or whatever. But so you develop like all this resentment. Because it's like, you see these guys who aren't as smart as you. And then they got all this game. And it's just like, and you know, I mean, my parents thought that with me, like, because I was the smartest one between me and my sister. So they just thought he'll just figure it out on his own. Yeah. It's like, it's just so naive. Like, no, I'm like, what? Because there's no, there's no correlation between how big your brain is and your will to act. Yeah. Like, there's no correlation. Yeah. So yeah, I mean, it's, it's, it's funny talking to you now, because like, there's actually a lot that's, I don't know, I just don't know how much to talk about. So. Okay. So what, what did you get your degree in college? Well, it was only one year. Oh, so I just, I just, I just got a certificate. Okay. So what'd you do after that? Just started working blue coat, like just started working in factories and stuff, just low income work. And my thinking was, which wasn't like, didn't surprise me. Like, it wasn't really a disappointment. Because all I wanted to do in college, like, like I said, it was just to learn. You know, that's it. And uh, I started just working all these factory jobs and I was just, um, I was terrible at holding down jobs for a while. Why, you know, not sure if it worked or not perform at work. Yeah, there'd be late, there'd be late, there'd be truancy, like stuff like that. Because you slept in or were you still doing sort of video games and pot? And I mean, what were you doing in your free time? Well, I was, yeah, there was a bit of weed for a bit, like, um, after college. And then I really did eventually like kick it entirely, you know, and, and uh, and then there was gaming because the reason wasn't like it's, it's, I mean, yeah, I wasn't waking up on time, but I wasn't going to bed on time. They just stay up all the freaking night. Yep. Yep. Yep. Way too late. And you know, this factory I was working on in the beginning was 12 hour shifts and it was alternating shifts, like, you know, so you do night, you do the two, two days on three days, uh, two days on, two days off, three days on two days off. And then it would cycle until, and then it would reverse the next couple of weeks. Um, and it was night, it was night shifts and day shifts. It would alternate between night and day. That's, that's, that's just hard. I mean, I mean, people don't realize how hard night shifts are on people, especially when they alternate. I mean, you can kind of get acclimated to working night shifts, but so when I was in college, I worked a lot of security work and that was a lot of night shifts and boy, if you start living that way, you just live upside down. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there was this one Iranian guy I worked with and he was like old Iranian, you know, like Christian, like he fled the country in 79 or whatever. And, uh, but by the time I was, by the time, while they sacked me, but by the time they sacked me, like he had Alzheimer's and he was only 64. Wow. You know? Yeah. So. So you mentioned you became a Christian. How'd that happen? Oh, now we're getting somewhere. But, uh, yeah. Um, well, Jordan Peterson comes around and then I started consuming his channel. There was a whole period where I was on YouTube for a while, like something kept replacing something else that interested me. So when I first got on, started diving deep into YouTube seriously, like I got into channels like Wisecrack. I don't know if you've heard of them. And then the School of Life was another one that I got really into. And to this day, I think they actually still do good videos. Yeah, they do. But School of Life was very, very like, you know, it's Ilenda Batons. He's like the CEO and he has his calm, soothing voice, you know? And then came Jordan Peterson and, uh, and, uh, you know, that's like David Fuller said, you know, from Rebel Wisdom, like, uh, it was exactly what some, like the culture needed. So then it was exactly what I needed. Yep. Because Jordan Peterson, like the, the thing that's, and I first came across him in the newspaper because there was, I was working at that factory job and then I'm looking at the paper and this was the whole Bill C-16 thing. And, uh, the first thing that struck me was just how blunt and matter of fact he is, because that's kind of a Canadian thing. Like, you know, we're really matter of fact people. And I was just like, you know, he just had that. I was like, I just couldn't get over the conviction. You know, I mean, um, I don't want to get into politics here or anything, but it just like, at the time, like the, the, these transgender people were, uh, they felt they were untouchable, you know, and for this guy to stick his finger out, it was like, holy crap. Anyway. Yeah. I come across his, all his motivation lectures then afterwards, sometime afterwards. And, um, I just got hooked and then, but, you know, it was just, but it, it, the thing was, is like, there was also, there was Jordan Peterson and then there was things like all the YouTube blood sports that they called it. Yep. Yep. And so during this time, it was a really demoralizing time for me, like, uh, because of all of that, because like, to me, it was just like, you know, I was just this completely freaking broken ass kid. Yeah. Like, and, and, like, I didn't understand what, what people just didn't get about him at the time. Yeah. Like Peterson. Yeah. And, um, so anyway, moving on, I discovered, I remember when I was in your channel, like I saw you in the recommended and at the time, like, it's just my atheist self. I'm like, oh, bald, bald dude, like beard. I just couldn't, I couldn't, I couldn't commit to it. And then, uh, then Jordan had his Sam Harris talk. And then he was like, I'm going to be a good, I'm going to be a good, I'm going to be a good, I'm going to be a good, uh, then Jordan had his Sam Harris talks. And, you know, like people were treating like the whole, uh, Peterson and Zizek thing. Like that was the debate of the century. But for me, I just, Tim, for me, it was Harrison Peterson. Yeah. That was the big deal for me. Yeah. Yeah. And I was like, all right, like, well, let's listen to this guy, like, you know, your channel, like, and, um, you know, when I started listening to your channel, that's when everything, you know, that's when everything clicked because it was, it's, it was like, uh, with, with Peterson, his religious views, you know, it was like with, um, Pajow, how he talks about how people have no idea what he's talking about for like two years. And it was the same thing with me and Peterson, with my view on Peterson. I didn't know what he was talking about really, but I didn't, he didn't, he never sounded like, I just thought, well, I'm just too dumb. Like I'm not sophisticated enough. And like this guy is a professional and I got to know what I'm so he, you know, I always believe that he was saying he was being honest, you know, and it wasn't nonsense. Yeah. And so that's how I came across your channel because then like everything just started, everything just came together with the, like how you were just summarizing it. And so that's when, that's when I learned, like that, that's when I learned, like, this is the way, like, this is, you know, this, this is the way, this is, this is the way out. Yeah. Um, and, you know, it's not like Christianity, it's really something not to go in alone. Like, it can be really deadly, like really dangerous, like it's a really dangerous thing. So, you know, I started, I wasn't going to church until I was like, I'm 29 now and I wasn't going to church. I didn't first start going to church until I was like 27, but I started calling myself a Christian when I was about 25. And, you know, I've been working all these odd jobs, like just in factories continuously, because the goal was to save up to go to a trade school, which eventually I would be able to do. But I just had such, I was so bad at holding a job because I was just irresponsible, like just kind of this, like, you know, just this beta, like, yeah. And, um, I worked at this one greenhouse and like, this is when the Christian faith, like, this is when it was really, uh, this is when I felt like the real weight of it. Like, you've made the point before that when people first get into it, like it's, it's the, every, it consumes all of their attention, you know, and then they just, um, like they just devote themselves to whatever, it's just like I said, you know, and, um, I, like, I wasn't praying, like I, I was praying, but it was getting, like this job that I was working in was multi-ethnic and multicultural. Yeah. Because it's Canada and like these lower income jobs, like a lot of these factories, they're all like that. Oh, definitely. And one of the things about multiculturalism is just how depressing it can be because of how alienating it is because you're just too, you're surrounded by just too many people who you just don't have enough in common with. And, uh, and, uh, this job, um, like, there were a couple of Arabs that worked there, like Muslim dudes. And I always really envied the fact that like they were just, uh, they're, they just seem like allowed, like this, this real traditional masculine identity. And you just felt totally denied that. And like there's all this, this, this workplace I was working in was like, it was just a mess. It was just a total mess. Like they'd hire these Mexicans, um, uh, like they were just like, you know, hired by some temp agency working for like, like freaking $9, $11 an hour or something like that. But of course back home, they're making like 25, you know, but they didn't speak any English and like, you know, they weren't, they weren't competent and like, they just, it's just like, I can't handle, I'm just like, I, and, you know, at the time I'm, I'm trying to be a good Christian, you know, but I'm not going to church, you know, cause I was just being, I don't know, I was just so naive and, and, and, you know, it was the pride, like it was just filled with the, there was that, there was that always that like, that part of your spine that doesn't want to leave kind of feeling like that you can do it on your own kind of thing, sort of. And it was just an unbearable weight at times. And, you know, like I'd been dealing with suicidal ideation, like all throughout my twenties, you know, like it has been just this threat all throughout my twenties. And so at this, during this time at this, at this greenhouse, I developed like, you know, there'd be nights where I just developed a lot of resentment towards him, you know, and I'd be laying in my bed and everything. Yeah. Towards God, towards Jesus, you know, and I'd just be saying like, I, you know, I'd be, crying, like just really crying and, you know, cursing him with every vile thing I could say, because I was just like, you know, what do you want from me? Like I freaking surrender, like I've done everything, like what more do I need to be put up? What more do you need to put me through? You know, I mean, like, are you freaking kidding me? Like, like why, like why me? Yeah. You know, it's, and eventually, you know, freak, it's so hard to talk about it because like there's, there's so many different like relational experiences you have with God, like, and it's, it's, eventually I got over that. Now I got out of that job, I quit, because it was a mess. And there was some, there was things that went on there that was just like, time to leave. And I tried to join the army as a reserve, like, because reserves are just part-time training, you know, and, you know, it's sort of voluntary, like if you're called to duty or whatever, you can volunteer rather than being, you know, rather than it being by Fiat. And, you know, I tried that, but I didn't make the cut, because, you know, I had all this drug history, I had all this, this history of alcoholism, and, you know, I used to be on antidepressants, and I haven't been on antidepressants in years, like I just haven't needed them. And because after I called myself a Christian, I just didn't need them anymore, even in all of that, like despair and kind of nihilistic, whatever, this kind of nihilistic thinking. And I didn't, with God in my life, like, even if it felt like he was just spitting on me, I didn't need it. Anyway, I got denied, like, I didn't, I got denied by the army, and to me, this is before the truckers convoy, so this is before all of that. And like, at the time, I was like, just, to me, it just felt like a betrayal, because initially going into it, I thought, oh, well, for guys that have no hope left, and there's nothing left, they join the army. That's what they do. And then, you know, you sign up and try to get into the reserves, and then they just, they're just like, no, sorry, you know, you're not allowed to join the army, and then you're like, well, no, sorry, you're not clean. You know, because I, and so I just saw that as a betrayal, like, it was like my country, like betraying me. That's how it felt. So I'm like, oh, like, what the hell, there's nothing, there's no hope, and well, there's no hope for the military. And after that, I got a job working at Canada Post, which is our postal, national postal service, and I've been working there ever since. So. Oh, you're holding down a job. That's a good thing. Yeah. Yeah, it keeps, you know, it keeps me living. It keeps me off the street. Yeah, you know, there's a lot of homeless here. Yeah. And housing is really expensive in Canada. Yeah, you can't afford anything. Yeah, then it's not going to change, right? Like, it's just something I accept. Yeah. You know, it's like how people talk about retirement here, because at Canada Post, we have good pensions. Yeah, good pension, but it's like, like, look at our economy. This isn't going to mean anything in 20 years. So retirement to me. And the thing is, too, is like, what am I, what are you going to do? Like, what are you going to do for retirement? Like, I just, I've thought about it that, you know, it's like, you know, all these retired people just die in a hospital bed. Like, I'd rather be dying on my feet. Like, if I have to work till I die, it's not such a big deal to me. You know, like, it's, so I'd rather die that way than as a vegetable. Yeah. So did you find a church? I did. I did. I did find a church. How'd that go? Well, I took your advice, because you said that, you know, if you're going to join a church, join a small church. And so I looked around and I, you know, I had a bias towards Anglicanism, because, you know, it's Canada and, you know, our British tradition. So I went for an Anglican church, this high Anglican church, the small church. And I've been there. I started going there in, I think it was 2022. 2022, I started going there for maybe a couple months. And then I took a long break, which was a mistake. But then I came back and ever since then, I haven't taken any of these really long breaks. And I've been back to that. I've been going to that church for, yeah, roughly over a year now. Okay. Does the priest know you? Yeah, we have, yeah, we have like regular, not regular, but we've actually had some like personal conversations, like meetups. Good. Because it turns out that he actually knew about Jordan Pearson and John Reveke. And he's actually watched Awakening from the Meeting Crisis twice. How's church going? It's, I feel held down. Like when I'm in there, I feel like anchored. I love it. Like, you know, it's like, it's Catholic. Like, because I learned on Discord, like Burgess of Meaning, that there's some people who get triggered by saying Anglo-Catholic. They're like, well, there's only one. What do you mean Anglo-Catholic? There's no such thing. Because people in my church will say that. They'll say, oh, you know, Anglo-Catholic. So I thought, oh, okay, that's kind of, that makes sense. You know, but it's just like, it's, you know, and I have a rosary. Like, I try, you know, I try to pray with the rosary twice a day. And but it's, I mean, it's the thing about our church is it's dying fast. I'm the youngest. Yeah. And there's like three, there's, I don't know, a regular of like 35 heads. Yeah. You know? And so when I came in there, they saw me as like, hope, hope. Yeah. I'm like Paul Atreides from Dune or something. That's right. Your validation. It's like, we're still in church. Look at this guys come in. You're, you're special to them. I'll tell you, you are special to them. They probably don't quite know what to do with you or how to love you, but you are special to them. Yeah. Yeah. It's just, it's, it's strange. Cause there's a lot to, you know, there's a lot you don't reveal. Yeah. No, I know when you're in there, cause you don't want to. Right. Right. No, you might be surprised though. I mean, and I wouldn't just say everything to anyone, but there will be people there that you see that you might look at them and think, Oh, they have their life together. They never done anything wrong. They've never, you'd be surprised if you learned their story that they might not have had the exact same things, but they've dealt with stuff because I know that, like I've said, I've baptized men in their seventies and those men that have baptized in their seventies, they've lived life. And again, there weren't computer games that maybe there wasn't pop, but there was alcohol and there was war and there were women and there were divorces and there were, I mean, some old people have lived very nice, stable sheltered lives. God bless them. Some old people have been through wars and you look at them now and they look peaceful and calm. Part of that is old age because the thing is when your body gets into the seventies and eighties, it can't handle much stuff anymore. So they have to live routines just because if you don't live routines, you just feel so awful. That's the thing about youth. Youth, you can get away with your body, let you get away with stuff. But as you get older, it's like, no, you better eat right. You better go to bed on time. You better get enough sleep or that body is going to punish you and you don't want to feel that bad. So, but you'd be surprised. There are some people in your church who are older. You could ask your priest, your priest would probably know that have lived through some life. And there's probably some people there that you could talk to. This is part of the reason I started Estuary at church because I knew some of the younger people coming in would look at the older people and say, they can't relate to me because they've got their life together. But I know, especially in a church like mine, where you have a significant African American population, I mean, if you were growing up African American, African American in America, in like the thirties, forties, fifties, sixties, seventies, it was hard. I mean, people talk about racism today. Yeah, there's still racism, but it had teeth in Jim Crow. And these people knew poverty. These people knew suffering and they have endured. And if they got into their eighties and they're not bitter or resentful, but they're kind, it means that they've overcome. And many of them have only overcome because again, on one hand, they had bitter racism, but on the other hand, they did have the church and they did have community. And what's happening now is that people don't have community. They don't have family. They don't have church. Boy, yeah. And everything you've just described. I mean, I could, I can't, I've got so many randos conversations that have never been shared. And I don't know what we'll do with this one, but you are by no means alone in telling your story. Your story is quite common. Everybody's story is different, but yeah, you might be surprised by some of the people in your church and what they've endured and how they've overcome. So they're there. But if you just look at them, you might not guess it because they're wearing clothes, they drive a car, they have a house, they don't cuss, they don't do drugs. They look normal, but that normality has been earned with a lot by some of them probably. Yeah. Yeah. It's the funny thing you say about like racism in the United States, because like, you know, on places like 4chan, which I don't go on anymore, but you know, between the black, white dynamic in America from an outsider, even if like C words and N words are thrown, like it kind of just seems like a sporting match, because it's kind of like, yeah, but you guys, you share like 400 years of history with each other and like real racism is when there's a foreign entity come, like that's when you feel it, because you don't recognize these people. You don't know who they are, this music that they're playing. Like, because I want to, there's a bunch of videos I want to do. I do want to start a YouTube channel, like I actually have a couple, but they only have a video, one video on there each. And, you know, it's not really that they're just not like sophisticated videos, which is okay. Like, I don't really care, but now there's a bunch of, there's a lot of stuff I want to talk about, like, because the Van Gogh's year, like, that's the channel for the TLC. I don't want that, like, I don't really want anything political on that channel, like, like the stuff regarding Canada, for example, like the situation here, that's just not being talked about. I don't want any of that there, like, you know, I want that more specific to TLC stuff and just like cultural stuff too, like, you know, like, yeah, I mean, there's gifts God gave me along the way. And one of those gifts was burn powers and an adjumist channel, because when I was working at Bayview Greenhouses, or Bayview, the greenhouse I was working at, that's when I came across his channel. And he was it was through the Randall's the first Randall's conversation, I think you had with him. And I go on his channel. And like, right there is like how we got here, the 1970s, how we got here, the 1960s. And I was just like, why I was like, finally, because no one was talking about this stuff. And for years, I thought this stuff was so important. Like, there's a, you know, there was one conversation Eric Weinstein had on his portal podcast a while back with that writer, Brady Stenellis. And like, for half the talk, all they did was talk about what LA was like in the 80s. That's all I wanted to hear them talk about, because they were just bringing in this perspective that no one actually remembers or knows about anymore. Like, this stuff is really important, guys, you know, like, I mean, I don't want to get preachy about it, like, you know, ramming down people's throats or whatever. But man, like his channel, like burn, like, like, that guy's a genius, like, like, he's, like his his whole time series, too, like, yeah, you know, like, he basically came up with, I guess, what you call his own like metaphysics on time, like, it was just, you know, and he's so creative, like, it was just like, Frank, it felt like a blessing, because it was the kind of quality. It was a kind of, you know, video, it was the kind of information I needed. So yeah. What else? Is there is there any kind of estuary at your church? Um, no, not really. I mean, it's basically just between me and my minister. Well, we will, I mean, you'll have to show this video to your minister and tell him to, he wants to start an estuary, let me know. I there's, we've had difficulty getting him going in Canada, but there I got some other clergy in Canada who kind of want to start one and they don't quite have enough people show up. But if we can maybe get enough together, because to me, you know, what you just described in terms of burns channel and, and, and, you know, it's one thing to start a YouTube channel and to do some virtually not alone TLC stuff, but it's YouTube is pretty, it's a much bigger deal. If a much bigger deal, if you're talking in a room and there's no camera on and you can speak freely and then you can, you can begin to, because you need a community because I mean, all of the stuff that you're many of the stuff that you're talking about, I mean, we go all the way back to where this conversation started. It was the breakdown of your family. You were, so I'm, I'm the same way I have an older sister and a younger sister, but there wasn't a breakdown of my family. And when I was growing up, there were no video games. Yeah. There are kids in my Christian school that did pop, but that had no attraction for me. We had church. I had my father and my mother. I had my extended family. I had friends and you know, me and my friends, we'd play Avalon hill games. We play risk. We eventually found Dungeons and Dragons. We didn't mess around with girls because we were too nerdy. We didn't know what to do anyway. That would have to wait. But you know, I had all of that to sort of hold me. And what happened really early on was there was nothing to hold you. And so what happened were things captured you. And, and instead of being held by something, something good, you were captured by something a lot less good. And because everybody needs a container, because if you don't have a, it's like having a body without skin. I mean, you, you, you, you're, your intestines are, you know, dozens of feet long and you know, you'd be all over the place. You need skin to contain you, but a human being is not just something contained in skin. You need something to contain you. And so, you know, again, a church is something to contain you. And it's not a perfect container and churches struggle, but it at least is something to contain you. And so your, your relationship with your priest, with your minister, well, there's, there's a container because, you know, if you, if you go off the deep end one way or another, you've got that relationship with him. And, and, and that even, even, even if that relationship is thin, it's a container and you need that. And then what you really want to do is you want to grow that container to include other people so that there's a network of relationships. And every person in that relationship is important, but the network grows. And so YouTube does this a little bit and that's sort of the virtually not alone network with, with burn powers and sort of, and everybody sort of pieces together their own little network. They might not watch this one over here, that one over here, but they do find some like, like burn or someone else that sort of contains them. And then they find some joy. And then, you know, I just, the video I just released this morning, just noticing people out there in YouTube that are, they're just out there in YouTube. They don't have a container. You need a container. And so, and you've started, I mean, going to church now, however, however that's going, and it's never perfect. It's never enough. It's never, but it's, you've got something. And now that you've got something, now you can really begin to build and, you know, and the whole, you know, people, people think it's silly, but like when you have two parents in a functioning household, you have a bedtime and mom or dad has breakfast on the table. Those are containers. And, and, and so now, okay, so now you're going to bed and you're keeping a normal rhythm. And then you're eating breakfast in the morning. And then, then you've got the structure of school. And then you've got structure after school. And I mean, all of those are containers. And so like what happened with you early on, those containers just withered. And so, so now you're building containers. And like I said, those old people in your church, they've had a lifetime to construct containers around them. So when you see them and there's order, they've got some raggedy ends. Trust me. I know old people too, but they've got something. And so now, you know, now you're getting to the end of your twenties. In my experience, when people get into their thirties, some of the, some of the debts, some of the bills do from early childhood come due in their thirties. And so that's when, okay, now, now I'm really going to think about, but you're a little accelerated again, because of what you described with respect to college. So now it's like, I, I've got, I've got wounds, I've got trauma. I've, I, I, I, I made some debts in my body and in my psyche and in my person. And I've got to come to terms with those things. It sounds like you've already been doing that. So, you know, as you get into your thirties, again, the fact that even if it's Canada post and whatever that job is like, it's a container and you're holding it down and you're doing it. And, and what might happen is at some point you might decide to, you're going to grow in competence in with Canada post, or maybe you'll get something that's a next step up. But you, I mean, you're, you've already, you've been putting yourself together for a while now, and it's been slow and painstaking, but you've been doing it. And that's, that's not nothing. So you should have some pride in that. Well, I remember the school of life did this video a while back, that YouTube channel and they call it, it was called self-sabotage. And they brought up this really great point about the reason people don't like work hard to improve themselves is because things like happiness are so foreign to them. Like it's, you know, like those. And so throughout my twenties, it was like, I was just really scared about like, like with Jordan Peterson's advice and all his wisdom and all this stuff. Because the thing about him is that he could act it out. And that's what separated. That's what made him so unique. Is that like, he actually could live by this stuff that he was saying. And it's the first thing, you know, you acknowledged about him. But for me, it was just too scary. Like, and I couldn't admit that to myself. Because it was just like, I don't even know what this is going to do to me. Like, what am I supposed to do if I actually start feeling these great feelings? Like, I don't know how to handle this. You know, I'm just, I was too scared that it's like, I'm just going to throw it all away again. Like it happened before, you know, and then I'm just going to tumble down the mountain. Like, I'm just going to just fall down into a pit. You know, like I get, yeah, get to the top and then you fall down. And I was like, you know, so I think it was, I couldn't do without God. Like, you know, and the other reason for surrender was just like, Jordan Peterson wasn't going to be enough. You know, the guy's still just a mere human being. Like, you can't worship him. You can't do that stuff, right? So it just wasn't going to be enough. Yeah. And so, yeah, I, you know, and I just thought in, you know, in things like Christianity, if you don't have, like you said, if you don't have all the containers, like, you can't thrive as an intelligent man, which sounds, which may sound arrogant or pompous, but I don't really care because it's, to me, it's true. Like, why should I be trying to like starve what I'm capable of? You know, like I, I, that feeling is, is a horrible feeling. You know, so. But you, I, I mean, I see potential in you. You, for the last hour or so, you told your story. Now I gave you a little helps, but you told it well. You're self-reflective. You're intelligent. You're learning discipline. You haven't, I mean, you, you haven't, you're not in prison. I, I, so my, my father's ministry, my ministry has always been in a context, except for my overseas ministry, which was a different kind of thing. But I know families I know families where every guy is either dead or in jail. You are not dead and you're not in jail. That's an accomplishment. You're holding down a job. That's an accomplishment. And you've got, and so then in this one family, I know the one guy who he sat, he, he talked to me in my office, just, I've just got days of him talking to me in my office. I'm just talking. And his brothers are all dead or in jail and he grew up in gangs. You know, but he's, you know, he's, he's made it. He's, you know, he holds down jobs. He's, he's fairly successful now with jobs. He still has lots of demons to fight, internal demons. And he's going to have a lot of these till the day he dies. I know he will, but, you know, an advantage you have, you don't have, you don't have a trail of women with two or three kids each that you are the father of and haven't been able to father. I mean, so in that sense, you haven't multiplied your legacy, a legacy of pain. So that's a good thing too. But, you know, you've, you've got potential. Your, your thirties and forties are not going to be your teens and your twenties. And you're already starting to build it. And the truth is, I don't know how far it will go or even really society has these measurements that it puts on. And the measurements include, you know, your, your, your gross, your, your net worth, your, I mean, all of these kind of, kind of crap, but the real, the real legacies we leave behind are in the relationships and the generations. So you've got potential and I can see it. And God has been working with you and in you. And I know it's slow and I know you haven't arrived or achieved. And I know that there will always be struggles. I mean, just by listening to you, you, you, you sound like you've got something of a restless spirit, which is a, a curse and a blessing, a restless spirit means you won't get stalled someplace, but it's a curse because you'll always be restless. And if you can channel that restless spirit, you know, you can achieve things, you can accomplish things. And I can see that. Yeah. Yeah. Well, there was a comment I read on one of your videos that some, I may have been a woman, but she, she made the point about her 44 year old son and how, you know, he just tries and tries and tries when, while he's still like trying to be a faithful Christian and all the rest of it. And it's like, God just smacks them down. And, you know, she said that the only lesson you come away is that God has it out for you. Now, I read this book called, it was one of Jacques Salou's book called hope and time of abandonment. And it was actually, it was, it was recommended by Byrne. But in that book, Jacques, he makes the point that like real hope comes when there isn't any hope, because he makes this book was written in published in the early seventies. And he makes the point that it's not that God is dead is that God has abandoned us and is ignoring us. And I like, that's what I think about my life. And that's also what I think about Canada. Like, I really think God is just really like, I mean, I think other countries would say the same, but anyway, like, that's, that's the only conclusion I come across. Because recently, Grimm, he did it, he wrote a sub stack article, like, I think it was like yesterday or something. And he was making the point about, I think it was at the end of the article that like, God only cares for those who care about themselves or take care of themselves with something like that, like in his article. So I don't know, I think that kind of ties into it. But like, you know, it, when I read that comment, like it really, because you hearted it too. And I'm like, Oh, what, what is he really does have it out for people? Like, no, he doesn't. He does have it out for people. Like, no, no, but, but that's how it feels. Yeah. And if you can't say that that's how it feels when it feels that way, then I mean, that's when church gets really hard. Because when you go to church and everybody says, well, God wants the best for you, and he's going to give you everything. And there you are, and you're feeling like God has abandoned you. Yeah. Well, that makes church really hard, but read the Psalms. I mean, if you just read the Psalms, it, they're right there in the Bible. My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Jesus says that from the cross, you know? And so if, if you, there is place in the Christian life to say, this is what it feels right now. And if Jesus Christ could say that on the cross, while he was doing the heavy lifting for the salvation of the world, then there had better be a place in church to say that. It's in the Bible. It's in the Psalms. It's in Jesus' mouth. So that's why I heard a statement like that, because that's how it feels. And I can't explain, I can't sit there and diagnose everything and say, God is doing this. God is doing that. So point to the book of Job. And what's amazing about the book of Job is it's explained in the first, at the beginning of the book. The whole book is explained in the beginning of the book, but Job doesn't see it. And so God doesn't say, oh, I did, I had a little wager. No, God doesn't explain himself. God just says, you have to trust me. Peterson says this actually in his Bishop Barron talk. And when he talks about Job, it's a really good section. And because this is what the life of faith is, because you're not seeing the love, but you're trusting that it's there. So I should find that book. A friend of mine, or a guy I know, wrote this book on Mother Teresa. And then he says to me, I didn't know the guy well, he's just in the same denomination. He says, I want you to write a blurb for the back of the book. It's like, I'm not sure I'm a real help in terms of publishing. I said, well, send me the book. So he sent me the book. And I didn't know much about Mother Teresa, except what she did in Calcutta. And that's the famous stuff, because everybody looks and says, oh, she's so giving. Oh, she's so helpful. And then the book blew me away. It's a tiny little thin book. And this guy read her diaries, you know, after she died, her letters and diaries. And what you just described is how she felt all the time. And yet, she cared for the people that are considered garbage. I mean, they were not only considered garbage, they were treated like garbage in the streets of India. And she couldn't save them. So she just fed them, gave them a little bit of water, a little bit of food in their dying day. But she felt what you just said. So there has to be a place for this in the church. And so, and I think if you want to talk about great faith, I don't see it until evangelists who are claiming, you know, divine healings and all of this stuff. I see this in people who feel like you feel and say, okay, God, you might, you might, you might have given me a shitty lot in life, but I'm going to love you still. And I'm going to be faithful to you still. And I'm not leaving you still. To me, that's the heart of faith. And that's why it's in Psalms. And that's why it's in Jesus' mouth. So, you know, yet though he slay me, I will trust in him. That's what Job says. And you know, his wife says, curse God and die. This is what his wife says. It's like, great. How even my wife wants me to give into the darkness in magic missiles. Then it becomes, then it becomes the most tempting. Yeah. Give up. Yeah. So, so I think, I think you attack the darkness with faith. And even when there isn't a glimmer of the presence of God, like Jesus on that cross and, and, and Jesus, the perfect man cries, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? And just read the rest of Psalm 22. I mean, it's a brutal Psalm and it's not the only one, but there's lots of them in there that are like that. And, and that is the path of faith. And you're walking it. And yeah, there's, there's work to be done. I get that. You know, there's always work to be done. I got a ton of work to do in me. Every, everyone on this side of the grave has a whole lot of work to do. That's just true. And people are in different places. That's just true. But to me, you know, what, what you can say, you know, that there's this, there's this old evangelism explosion trick where you would knock on a door and you would say to someone, you know, if you were to die tonight, why, and you, and God would ask you, why should I let you into my kingdom? And the correct answer to that is because you sent your son into this world and he suffered. And I'm going to appeal, you know, this is the thief on the cross, you know, it's funny because in one gospel, they're both sort of, you know, mocking Jesus. And in Luke, one of them turns and is it Luke or Matthew? I don't know, but one of them turns and, and, and defends Jesus and says, Hey, look, you know, we, you and I, we, we're brigands. We've been trying to bring down the Roman empire and killing people to do it and robbing and stealing. But he just says the truth. This guy hasn't done any of that. I mean, he's done none of that. And, and all he does is says, says to Jesus, remember me when you come into his, your kingdom, and he has no time to do any good works for the rest of his life because he has no rest of his life. And Jesus says to him, surely you will be with me in paradise. I mean, to me, that is the gospel. It's right there. And now God is giving you more time. Probably you never know. We don't give you could either one of us could die 10 minutes after we stopped recording this, but you just look to him and, and even if you feel like he's turned his back on you, you just tell him, no, no, you should don't turn your back on me. If you sent your son for me, you're going to, you know, and you, and he came down to live in this mess. You're not going to abandon me. And, you know, and let's just look at how Job's does this. Abraham does this. Paul does this and Jesus does this. And so if, if you think God is, is turning his back on you, just tell him, no, you go ahead. May not have the feels, but I absolutely deny that you will abandon me. I'm going to hold you to your son. And Abraham had less to hold God to, but he still did it with respect to Sodom and Gomorrah. Just didn't go far enough. And Job holds him to it. So that's the kind of faith he can build in you. Well, the thing is, is like, so I'm taking, I'm taking HVAC courses. Yeah. Like I'm in an HVAC course because I, there's no future Canada post. It's a crown corporation. So just forget about it. But, you know, in this course, there's some, there's some younger guys like 18, 19. Yeah. And you know, when you, when you talk to zoomers, like I, if you talk to them and ask them their opinions on marriage, the general, the general thinking is, is like zoomer guys. Like they, they basically just say, what do they say? Oh, well, no, man, are you kidding me? All the free time, like all the time spent, they have to be with her and all the time wasted and blah, blah, blah. And like, all like being able to have the place to yourself and like, you know, like it's an obvious cope because they don't know, they don't know. They're 18 or 19 years old. They don't know shit. Yeah. And it's, but the thing is, it's like, it's not even true. Like I don't actually believe that's what they believe. What they, what they think is like, you know, it's like, and be humiliated even more. Cause I think that's my, might be what they want to say is like, why am I going to want to be in a relationship where I get to be humiliated already more than I already am? Cause you look at these fricking kids and it's like, I'm at the point where it's like, like, I just feel so fricking bad for them. Yeah. You know, it's just like, just the heaps of shit that they've had, like, I mean, we had to deal with Facebook. We didn't have to deal with any of this woke propaganda. We didn't have to deal with any of this emasculating crap that were all, you know, and, and, you know, that were evil white males and all this, this stuff too, because like in Canada, like that stuff has been so demoralizing to so many guys, like, and, and it just fricking, just like, you know, like I don't, I don't stay in contact with my sisters or my mom. Like, like me and my older sister are basically estranged from one another. And the reason is, is because we just had these serious, like we used to scream at each other back in the late teens, like 2016, 20, like the hot years, you know, and we just, and, and, and she just said things that like, I needed your, like, I needed their help. Like I'm fricking, you know, ready to fricking blow my goddamn brains out. I got all the, all this shit that like, I don't want to deal with, like women want nothing to do with me. And then you go ahead and you say all this fricking stuff about me being a privileged white male. Like it wasn't, it's, that wasn't the only thing. There was a few other things in there thrown in there. I'm like, are you fricking kidding me? Like, and, and so, you know, and they, they kind of want to, yeah, I know you have to forgive, like I get that, but it's like, you know, I, I just, she just to this, like to this day, there's still like my older sister and like my younger sister and I, I can't, I just can't, I just don't want to deal with it anymore. Like I, I just need time. Yeah. I just need time. Like I just need time in this faith and like to develop some real sexual discipline and it needs to be months. It takes months to develop this till you, till you become clean. Yeah. You become pure and your conscience becomes clean again. Yeah. Like, you know, so, because I felt it before. Yeah. Like I felt the, like I felt the freedom of when your days are filled, you know, because they're filled with good things. Yeah. Yeah. You're, you're living productively through the faith. Yeah. Time slows down. Yeah. You know, so I want that back, you know, and then I, I, one day, yeah, it's, it's kind of, I, you're gonna, I, I think you're gonna get there, my friend. I think you're gonna get there. I see the signs. You've, you've come a long way already. You really have. It might not feel that way when you're working at Canada Post and your downstairs apartment, but you're holding a job, you're paying your rent, you're going to church, a priest knows you, a minister knows you. It's not just, you know, a minister on YouTube, a minister knows you. These are, these are all big deals and you're doing it. And so I really think you're going to keep doing it. Yeah, I hope so. Yeah. Just pray, pray for it. And so, well, let me pray for you. I want to pray for you. Okay. Thank you. Lord, from the time he was conceived, you've known Jack. You knew everything around as, as he was just a boy and didn't know anything. And you know, back generations. And you know, you see all, you see all, you see all the dynamics, you see all the interrelationships, you see, you see all the pain, you see all the, the failures and shortcomings, generations back, you know it all. You know it all. And Lord, you, you have, you have been with this young man and, and you have, you have brought him to yourself and you have brought him into your church. And you are working through that church, you are working through, you're working through Jordan Peterson, you're working through this little corner, you're working through all of these layers. And Lord, and, and Jack has come to the point where he is now, well, he's now here and the work isn't done, but the work in none of us is done because we all have, have far to go. And so Lord, I pray that you give him the, the purity that he desires. I pray that you give him the, the self-discipline that he really wants. I pray Lord that you give him the, even just the self-discipline and small things to go to bed on time, to get up on time, to say no to the things that, that capture him and tastes to say yes to the good containers, to, to show up at work on time, to show up at church on time, to keep meeting with his, with his minister, to, to, to make friends, to find that one or two people in that little church of his that has lived a life that, that can teach Jack what, what you've made it to teach him. And I pray Lord that you will give him a sense that he is in your hand, that you are the great container and that no matter how he feels, if he's angry with you, he can, he can cry out. The words are all there in the Psalms if he needs words to say, and many of those words in the Psalms he might read and think, oh, I wouldn't dare say that, but Lord, you can take it because it's right there and we know it. And your only son cried out from this 22nd Psalm and we know this Lord. So I pray Lord that you give him your spirit, that you put your hand upon him, and that you bless his church, that you bless his priest, and that you bless his job, and that you, you bring around him the people that he needs to, to take whatever next step he needs to take and whatever life he needs and that he in time will develop, be able to develop the vision that says you will never leave him nor forsake him. Lord, I pray this for him and I ask that you give him this Lord. And we ask this in the name of Jesus because this is, this is why Jesus came because Jesus came for him. And I pray Lord that he would not only know this in an intellectual way, but there, that there might be moments when he knows it emotionally as well. And I know Lord that those feelings, they never last all the time. We go up and down and there are dark days and maybe even dark periods, long nights of the soul, but we know Lord that this is how you make saints. This is how you make saints. You make saints through suffering and hardship and he knows these things. And so, Lord, I pray that you bless him and that you give him strength and then you make him into the man that you know he is able to become. So hear my prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Amen. Thank you for that. Oh, my pleasure. It's my pleasure. Thank you for your story. And I will, I will send you the copy of this. I don't know, do I? Yeah, I have an email for you. Okay. I'll send you a copy of this and you can decide what we should do with it. If you want to just keep it between us, that's fine. If you want to just share it with your priest, that's fine. If you want it in the memberships, that's fine. People want different things for their stories. And so it's up to you what you want to do with it. So, okay. Okay. All right. Thanks again. This is, this was, it was such a pleasure to finally meet you. It's like years on end. The pleasure is all mine. Yeah. It's your boomer moment with Calendly. I knew, I thought, well, I, you know, God arranges, God arranges things even in our accidents. So. Yeah. Yeah. All right. All right. Take care. I'll be in touch. Yeah. Take care. See you, Paul. All right. Bye-bye. See you.