https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pNoU02XgZQY

 Hey, well, we've never met. So why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Uh, yeah. Well, um, I guess first just I'm glad to be doing this. Thank you for doing these. It's so, uh, encouraging that you just want to have conversations with randos on the internet, I guess. Uh, it's, it's a lot of fun. I wish I could do it. I wish I could add more slots each week. Uh, well you already do so much. I don't know how you put out all that you do all the time and still manage to talk with people. Well, this is actually a, it's a very helpful part of the process for me because good feedback is remarkably difficult to get. And so whether people are actually know they're giving me feedback, you are. So that's part of why I do this too. Helps me kind of have a sense of, okay, well I'm sending stuff out there. What's happening to it. And so that's what I learned from you. Yeah. Well, I'd say for me, at least it's tremendously encouraging. I, I wanted to sign up for a slot just on a whim. I checked it. Your sound suddenly degraded significantly. That better? Not much. Um, stick close to your computer. Computer computer bikes can be really funny like this. I have some friends in church. Absolutely. Some leaders in church, if they're right in front of their computer and zoom, I can hear them if they're right over here, they're gone. So which, which Mike is the, if you look at, um, yeah, well I, I wanted to get a slot just, you know, for a while, but I would just check kind of occasionally. And then, uh, um, about a month or so ago, I just checked it for the first time in a month or so, and there was a slot. And I sat on it for a while. I didn't know if I really want to talk with you, if it was worth my time or not, or if it would be worthwhile to you or what I'd even talk about. And then, uh, it disappeared. So I've been watching it like a hawk ever since they're gone. When I opened them up, they're usually gone within an hour or two. So they go pretty fast. If you see one and you want one, you better grab it. Yeah. Well, uh, yeah, I guess you asked for my story. Um, I, uh, I grew up in, I'm in Columbus, Ohio right now. Um, not Columbus proper, but outside of the city. Um, kind of a smaller community, but I grew up in rural Southern Southwestern, Ohio, um, around Cincinnati area. Um, my, uh, grew up in like a small Baptist church, real tiny. And both of my, both my parents were, their parents were divorced. So I think that made for my mom and dad just really caring about family. And we just had a really close knit tight family growing up and just me, my brother, um, spent a lot of time together, you know, uh, it was just really, really good. Really good. I guess the downside of that is you kind of like clung too close to family. And I was afraid to really adventure out beyond that. Um, I was really quite shy and anxious. I still am a little bit. I just afraid of engage and reach out often. I trying to get better at it, but it's, uh, always nerve wracking and unsettling to me. Um, I, yeah. So I guess I just, uh, the, uh, I think my childhood was very propositional heavy. Like when, when I came across your vacay's four P's that propositional knowing, I just thought, boy, I've been living my whole life in that head space. And it explained a lot of where I was and who I become. And, um, I think tying into that, I got into high school and the creation museum had opened up in Northern Kentucky. I was a kid. I remember Ken Ham swinging by the communities and the towns in the area. Interesting. Open it out. And he gave me a dinosaur card and he would swing by our church. Everyone's been a while. So yeah, that, I mean, when that came to town, I was in high school and it was all the rage and the Christian community. You know, if you've seen the creation museum, go down there and man, I, I think I wrote, I wanted to talk about fundamentalism and the, what do you want to talk about? Text box, but for all its strengths, it left me, I don't know, just to propositionally focus, like when I, when that came to town, I just glommed onto the creation museum and answers in Genesis. And, uh, I think, you know, that, that verse, first Peter three 15, um, always be prepared to give an answer for the hope that lies within you as a kid. I interpreted all that, uh, creation museum stuff and a lot of what I was going through in church and learning as just giving explanations and apologizing as in apologetics, I never just read that verse simply as just give an answer for the hope that lies within you. I don't really think I had that hope in me. You know, I was just fearful and afraid and shy and, um, it never manifested itself until recently it's been a wild ride the last few years. Really? Yeah. Um, so I mean, I, I went through, I got out of high school, went to college, Cedarville university. Yeah. You know where that's at? Yep. Um, I started off as a pre-law major, which is something I never would have managed to do. But, you know, I thought, Hey, I like all this answers and Genesis stuff and getting the answers. I want to be a lawyer and find the right answers. And now, so I went to another, you know, fact based career, which was accounting. So I'm a, I work in finance. I'm a corporate accountant right now and big business. Um, so it's been, it's been a good career. It's treated me well. Uh, but yeah, I mean, I think once I got to college, that's when my, I called her the deconstruction for a long time, but then I saw one of you get the, uh, he had somebody on and he referred to it as a renovation. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I started calling it a renovation. Um, so I, I met my wife, we got married, uh, you know, uh, that was in 2013 and then we moved to Texas, traveled all around, um, just had lots of fun, but the church and. Faith, my spirituality was just kind of forgotten about. I was just living life and, uh, um, I guess around 2016 or so, I had kind of reached the end of my propositional stick. Like I was, I got sucked into the Calvinism, Arminianism debate courtesy of John Piper, who I love him to death, but I felt like I had to be on his side and everything and my whole world was just this, you know, answers in Genesis. Propositional right wrong, you know, kind of thinking and boy, you get into that debate with Calvinism and that's all you can do. You're going to run out of gas real quick because there's no answer. Yeah. Um, and that's what happened. And I got real cynical kind of, it slowly happened. I just noticed cynicism cropping up. Um, I decided, you know, let me, when you didn't know where to turn, I kind of turned to tradition and I said, let me go back to a church, the wee church top for a while and, um, found a place I got baptized, tried to enforce myself to participate there. And I think a plus for effort, but I was, I was tyrannizing myself and I did it ironically. I was, my heart wasn't in it. Um, so that kind of, you know, piddled out and fell apart. Um, and then someone really close to me, um, suicide happened. That was late 2017. And I just, all my propositional acrobatics with theology and the Bible and God, and I really just. That food on it. It's done. And, uh, I, I glommed onto politics in early 2018, you know, if, if, uh, if theology and my, my, my tradition and growing up in church and all that I've learned isn't going to work. I might as well fight for what I think's right. Cause if I can't change the world, maybe a system can and I'll get on this team and we'll fight the others. Um, and then Jordan Peterson came up. I saw the Kathy Newman interview. Uh, and I, it's so funny. I saw him and thought, here's a guy that can set the world straight the way I think it should be. And, um, yeah. So I, I bought a book, read that, um, watch his Bible lectures, which for me was. Crazy. I was dabbling in heresy listening to a guy talk about evolution. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, so I was, that was a big jump for me. Like I was, I was just, okay, this is it. No turning back, I guess. No tolerance for him. Otherwise it's what I've been, what I've come to believe. Um, yeah. And then there's this funny interview. It's not funny, but, um, I don't see many people talk about it, but it was Pazzo Peterson, um, a guy named John Patrick, I think he was at this. I just looked his name up because I had no clue who he was, but he was on a panel on early 2018 and John Patrick, I think is some Catholic. I don't, he's related to the Catholic church. Yeah, I think so. Um, he gave this beautiful description of the Beatitudes and how if you go through them step by step in the morning and then process yourself through that every day, I mean, if there's the procedural knowing it's the next step, um, it changes your life. And Peterson responded to it. And I thought, boy, this guy's more than just the political flame. Like there's something deep here. And I just, over the next few months, I saw my life start to turn change around. Like my marriage was on the mend. I had completely broken it, but in the dumbest way possible by like being the leader of the house and, you know, trying to set things right in an order. I was tyrannizing there just the way I tyrannized myself. And, um, yeah, I mean, it was great. Like I felt more confident to myself at work personally with neighbors, strangers. Um, I started lifting some weights, which the physical activity just, it's amazing how mind and body are so connected tremendously. You got to take care of that too. Um, so yeah, I mean, that, that took me along and then 20, uh, late 2019 came around and we started seriously trying for a kid. I have a six month old boy now. Yeah. Um, that's been an absolute delight and a, uh, a perspective shift. So there's the next, like the four P, um, I, I found Verbecky's four P's just to be so true in telling story and understanding myself in situations. But, um, yeah. And I found him thanks to you. I think I saw your initial Peterson interview. So you were in the algorithm mix somehow, but I didn't follow you permanently. And then in late 2019, something came up and you got recommended to me. So I watched it. Um, I think it was the Peterson Harris stuff, which was way over my head. I didn't get it. I was so black and white. I couldn't understand Peterson. I walked away from that thinking, boy, Sam Harris crushed it. And then I had to listen to you to understand. And, uh, yeah, so that was just mind opening. And then Verbecky was on your mind a lot then I think. I took in the awakening from the meeting crisis and I think the best time anyone could have done it. I consumed it and ended the day the pandemic struck. Wow. Yeah. And so I'm in an empty office by myself. I didn't have a fast internet at my house. So I just went to the office every day. I was an essential worker. That was nice. Um, but it was weird being an empty office and around that same time, like within a few days, we found out we were pregnant. So that was a crazy change of pace. Yeah. And I, I also had just started attending one or two weeks into this church, um, the Bible church here in my town. Funny thing is I had visited five years ago and sat in there and said, ah, they're too, they're too fundamentalist and I, they're not, we're not, they're not going to get along with smart me and all, you know, I just, I avoided it. And then I went back and listened to the same preacher, all the same people and talk about just having new eyes. I, I saw a differently new perspective. Um, so when the pandemic hit, it was weird, just odd. And I then Vervecki started meditating with a Reiki series. And I thought, oh, what the, Hey, I've talked with an evolution that, you know, Jordan Peterson, that evolution thought, um, I just went through a Reiki thing. It was so informative. I'll just sit with his meditation series. I did that and, uh, it made his lectures shine brighter. Okay. I want to do that experience, learning the practices, the body embodied practices of what he does. Yep. You can see the meaning in his words a lot more clearly, I think. Um, so yeah, I mean that, and then my son came at Thanksgiving. Um, I just spent the whole pregnancy cleaning up my room, you know, we're just finishing all that. It's just, it was 2020 was a wonderful year for even in the midst of all the craziness around us. Wow. Um, so yeah, and I just, you've been tremendously helpful in this whole process. And I just have to say thank you. Oh, well, thank you. Thank you. What what's been helpful for you? Like I said, I, a lot of this for me is feedback. So what, what, what's been helpful? Um, yeah, I don't the, uh, seeing your openness and engagement with all types of people. And then saying it, it's not by your power, it's by the power of cross and Jesus and what he's done. Um, I mean, I think he wrote, you said something the other day that I wrote down. It was, uh, he said the resurrection is moving my lips, changing my heart and forming my soul. And I thought, man, that's, that's participatory. Uh, that is, that is, yeah. And you just, you do that. Um, I got it. I got an inkling of it. When I stumbled across Joe Rogan around the time, probably a little before Peterson came onto my radar and, um, I just thought, man, this guy knows how to be a friend, you know? And that was something I did not know how to do. My family life was so strong growing up, deep family life. So, you know, the church was good, although it was a dying church. I think it's because we were so, I mean, you can't blame people for doing that because when the world's crazy, you got to protect what's sacred. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, I just, Peterson, when he talks about, you know, resurrecting or, um, you know, the spirit of your father from the abyss, that just strikes me deeply every time I go back to that over and over again. Yeah. I mean, so yeah, it's just your, your friendship and how you truly, um, have fellowship and partake and share in what you're learning and others are going in, it's just, I'd never seen that, you know? So. Thank you. Thank you. It's, it's helpful for me to know, cause I don't, I don't know. I, I, I put out this crazy, this crazy quantity of video, which for me is just sharing what's on my mind and that people watch and find it helpful is, is deeply gratifying. And, but I, I don't honestly quite know what's going on, but it's, it's fun. So I'm going to keep doing it. Well, I think that's, um, I'm a big baseball fan and Ken Griffey Jr. when he came to Cincinnati, I was young and I still love the guy. I think he's a great guy from what I know about him, but he said he has a quote where he says, um, when you're having fun, it turns all the pressure into pleasure. That's a good quote. Yeah. I love it. And I just, I keep using the word tyrannized, but I don't know what else to say. I had tyrannized myself out of having fun and playing and you and Verbecky and Peterson and it's just plain. I mean, you have so many other people on, um, I, the, uh, they come into the estuary and, um, I follow them down their channels and watch them. Yeah. They all opt the little tributaries. Yeah, it's true. That's true. That's been, that's been a, there's a new one too. Now Sherry, Sherry Harkin did a, um, you know, did a video with me not too long ago and she wanted to start a, uh, artist's guild and so she's now started a channel and, um, and she's having some people on. So that, that to me is also deeply gratifying just to watch, um, just to watch these tools, cause you know, what, what is this YouTube tool? We don't really know, but just to watch these things be helpful to people and bring a little bit more joy into the world. Joy is really the, um, there I got, I got this quote out of a church growth book in the late nineties. In the 21st century duty motivates nothing. Joy motivates everything. And I, I really liked that. I was from William Eason, who's writing these church growth books, but that's, you know, when you talk about tyranny, the opposite of tyranny is joy. And, you know, gosh, you shouldn't have, you shouldn't have tyranny between you and your wife. You want joy. And now that your, your child is born, you know, that's great joy. And a six month old, that's just this, um, this Saturday, my wife and I went to a birthday party of some friends of hers. And now, um, they're my wife's friends. Nice is now dating one of my sons and it was a birthday party for a two year old. And so there was just this whole, we were kind of the oddballs at the party. Cause we're older and our kids are grown, but you know, there was just a whole clutch of young parents with two year old children and just watching those little, those little two year olds running around. I thought, yeah, there's, this is joy. And of course, two year olds, it's pretty chaotic joy, but it is joy. And sometimes sorrow, it goes from joy to sorrow, you know, lickety split, but, um, so nothing like, uh, you know, a six month old, um, and all the new learnings that come, you know, and, and I mean, especially at this age, I mean, between six years, between six months and four years, Oh, it's a, it's a rocket ride. And in terms of progress, I mean, now you're seeing it already. This little six month old can do so much more than the newborn and wait another six months. You're going to be, you know, first rolling and scooching and crawling and pulling him up himself up and grabbing and you got a child proof, the house and it's terrific. Yeah. You're, uh, your salience landscape chains when there's a little one crawling around. But it does, you bet it does the whole world. You see the whole world differently through that prism. And, um, yeah, it's a, I, I, I, you know, you look at the numbers of people deciding that they don't want to have children because why, cause you can watch movies and go out to bars and stuff that versus that versus raising a child. It's not, it's, it's not even in the same league. They have no idea what they're, what they're missing out on. Yeah. It's, it's, it's the, uh, it's weird. Peterson's push for responsibility and speaking that into the culture. It's, um, it's fun. It is. It's, um, yeah. Finding meaning is this fun and it's, uh, yeah, I don't, it's so hard to talk about. I don't like talking about Christianity as a large box. I just like to think of me and you know, what happened to me, what I've been through, because it's, I'm so, I see everything through my lens of my experience and what I'm learning. And, um, yeah, it's just for me, this responsibility growing up was not fun as much, you know, and, uh, it, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's it's weird that we worked and had fun. I did a lot of hands-on work with my dad and, uh, it's so weird having an office job right now, cause I grew up thinking work with something where you, you look back and we painted houses and the house was painted and it looks great. And you were tired, physically tired and being mentally tired is. It's hard to transition. Yeah. Especially in accounting, because the work just keeps coming. I mean, you don't, I mean, maybe when you finish the taxes or a quarterly report or something like that, it's like, whoosh accomplishment. There it is, but it's not like looking at a house. I painted houses for a summer and yeah, you know, at the end of the day, you're, you're tired and you've been in the sun and, um, but when that house is painted, you know, well, it's, you know, it's going to need painting again at some point, but it's done for a few years. And that's a good thing. Now you're very right. You're very right. And, and in my job too, I mean, Sunday comes every seven days. Um, there are weddings, there are funerals and those are sort of boundary markers. But, but often it's a lot of, and the pastoral vocation, you have the same conversations over and over and over with people, um, because they're, they're stuck in something and. You know, you're not, you don't have a tremendous lot. You don't have a tremendous amount of ability to help them get unstuck and moving forward again. And so there's a lot of conversations with stuck people and, but you, you know, it's, it's patient long work. People's stuckness is a lot more complex than a house that needs painting. This is true. Very true. Yeah. Um, I helping people with their stuckness and myself with my own stuckness, I think that's something I've learned watching you and, um, others. I, I think I mentioned etymology in the text box. So what do you want to talk about? That was, um, it's, it's amazing how, if you pay attention to the word people use. You, there's always something there that needs a little more nuance or there's reasoning why they picked that word and not another, and we usually mean a lot more with the words we're choosing than we even know and just being. Patient with people as they work through their words and listening and inquiring is such a useful skill that I'm trying to work on because I spent years getting triggered by evolution or all these, yeah, just, just red flags. Don't go there. That's the other side. Um, and yeah. And that's no, that's, that's a good, that's a good thing to think about because, you know, and, and so, and then some people are like, well, banish red flags, no, don't do that. You need red flags and, and, um, figure, figure out what the red flag is doing and why it's there. It's sort of like Chesterton's fence. You know, don't figure out what, what, what it's doing, why it's there. And, um, no, and, and in time continue to grow. And you're so right about words to, to listen to someone is, is a, is not an easy thing and then to understand them and then to be helpful to them. And then so often, you know, again, in their stuckness, okay, what do they need? And then people usually, especially certain church traditions major in confrontation and there is a time for confrontation, but I find confrontation is, is one of the most difficult things to attempt and people weighed into it. Not really in love, but much more in self-expression that their confrontation is self-expression and not really about helping the other. And all that that does is create hardened tribes. And so why did they choose this word? And, and can you, and, and, and almost every case, you know, I don't heal people, they, they much more heal themselves, but I sort of, and it's the same way with doctors. I mean, doctors don't really heal you. They may be a little adjustment here and there, but they try to set the condition for your body to heal itself. And, and that's pastoral work. That really is pastoral work. Yeah. Yeah. It's yeah. I mean, it's pastoral guiding, shepherding. It's keeping the fences up in the right places. Sometimes creating a new gate, sometimes locking another gate. Yeah. Yeah. It's I love that video of the sheep in the ditch. Yeah. Yeah. It's so true. I saw it and it was like, Oh, that's my job. You pull the sheep out of the ditch and they run back in and they call you pastor. Yeah. I know. I know you're back in a ditch. I'll get you out again. Yeah. I'll go talk to you about the ditch, but you're not going to hear. I'm going to go back at some point. At some point you're going to say, I've been in this ditch four times this year. Okay. What does that say? Yeah. Yeah. Paul might be getting tired of pulling me out and he showed me a couple of ways I can help myself a little bit. And maybe I'll stay to this side of the ditch for a while. Yeah. Jumping back. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's, that, that's engaging with others with love and patience and gentleness. And it's, uh, yeah, it's the fruits of the spirit that. Don't make sense in another world. Yeah. Unless you live in. Yep. And yet, you know, the apostle Paul also says, yet there's no law against this, which is so interesting because there's laws against all sorts of things. You know, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, gentleness, self-control. There's usually no law against self-control. There's no law against patients. There's laws against all kinds of things, but those things, even tyrannical countries. Well, you know, things are getting tyrannical when there's a law against patients when you don't think just obey. Oh, okay. I see some tyranny coming down the road here. You know? Yeah. It's yeah. Yeah. And that you need that governance, but I, you know, I just listened to Peterson talking about both of you need to be a monster conversation, but then you need to be a good monster, you know, need to know your, you need to know your strength and your capacity to tyrannize, but then wield it for good. Yeah. Well, what you got on, what you got on your list, you got a list of stuff that you wanted to talk about. I know you put some things in the notes. Yeah, I'm consulting it right now just to see. Oh, here's one. So I really enjoy the estuary topic. I've been, I'm actually been participating in the group of John Van Donk's. Oh, really? Yeah. Oh, good. And what, Oh, boy. Now, Oh, John is going to be, you know, John has, I mean, he's been on my videos a number of times, but he's been, you know, he's been on my videos a number of times, but he's been, you know, he's been on my videos a number of times, but he's been, you know, he's real, he's been a real partner in me with this. And for John, you know, estuary is sort of an important thing because he's, he's sort of a misfit in some ways, even though he's not as much of a misfit as he likes to pretend he is, but, so, so what have you gotten out of that group? Well, I'll, I'll give him a shout out. He's been tremendous. He's his, his, uh, sacrifice and doing that every couple of weeks is, uh, that's such a pleasure. Um, so he's got a lot of wisdom. He really does. He does. He's very insightful. He kind of, if the conversation stalls out, he can, he knows where to poke and prod. And that's good. Yeah. I think you say he's always got a scheme. I'm going to razz him about that next time. I, he does. He always has a scheme. He has many schemes for my life. Um, and he's, he's been, he's been, he's been more successful than many, but not as successful as he would like to be. Well, when the, you know, when my, when my channel took off, you know, he was, he was very quickly, he's like, Oh, you got to do a meetup. And he wasn't the only one that said that to me. There are a number of other people that said that to me, but, um, he's been very encouraging and, um, he, he sometimes. You know, I, I, I like my ruts. So in that way, I'm like the sheep. I like my ruts often. And he kind of gives me a kick every now and then to get out of a rut because he says, well, you know, you've done this and you've done this, but you're really should be doing some more of this. And I think it's like, yeah, he's right. I don't want to tell him he's right. Cause he enjoys, he enjoys it too much when I tell him he's right, but, uh, yeah, he really is. And so I should. And so, and so many of his schemes that, you know, he and Job cooked up the, the West coast tour, which got preempted by COVID and, um, and he's got more schemes up his sleeve and, and so then this, this, um, this estuary support group thing, um, you know, he, he cooked that up and I said, well, let's make a video and see how many people show. And, but I said, you know, I can't, I can't, I can't lead these groups. You're going to have to. And he said, oh, okay, I'll do it. So, and he has. Yeah. And it's, it's been very fruitful for me. Um, I mean, I'm, I'd love to meet with people that interact with your channel in my area that'd be fantastic. Um, but honestly, he's kind of, he's very much inspired me to get out of my, just to confront, you know, my fear of interacting with others and being wrong and just going out there and making friends. And we've been in the, uh, I've been participating in my church and it's just been fantastic. Um, and what I've learned, I think is that this estuary thing, yeah, it's a place. It can be a physical gathering of people. But man, I'm just learning that I think it's a way to describe the way of being. And I think it's a way to describe. Yeah. Way of being. Yeah. Um, yeah. Well, I think that's right. And, and John, you know, John has embodied that. And, you know, so I should put the, um, you know, if we share this, I should put the, the link to our first story where John really tells his story and he's lived, he's lived a quite, quite a remarkable life, you know, his, you know, his home of his, um, the home he grew up in his story with his father and his mother, and then sort of accidentally finding himself with a, a permanent visa to Canada, which was just the total clerical error on the part of someone and then, you know, finding himself in Christian reform churches, because that's where all the successful dairyman went and, you know, he wanted to be successful financially. And so he goes there and then he winds up becoming a minister in the Christian reform church, which is no quick or easy thing to do. And usually that's a, that's a, that's a, you know, the CRC, basically, if you become a CRC minister, the, the, the, basically it's a, it's a vow for your career. There's no, you can get out, but the expectation is you will be in this until you retire. And then even after you retire, you're still serving. And so it's a sort of a vow for life. And, and then, you know, he finds himself, you know, in a situation where he gets out of ministry and then he's divorced and he's raising his three daughters. And, you know, this church in Southern California just comes around him and holds him and loves him. And, you know, then, you know, every now, you know, there's some theological misfitting that he has there, but he's deeply a part of that church. And so then he gets into this competitive storytelling business and he finds his way onto CRC Voices, which is where he and I meet. And then the Jordan Peterson, he grabs onto Jordan Peterson, partly because he was a huge Richard Rohr played such a big part in his life. And, but John's got all of that in him. And, you know, he comes out in this crazy Dutch immigrant sort of way where you can still find some of them in the Christian Reformed Church in North America. Many of them are gone, but he's not, he's really quite a remarkable man. And so he doesn't, he doesn't appreciate that about himself enough, but, but I know it's true. Yeah. Yeah. He's a, yeah, it says life's taken him on a crazy story so far, but that story's made, it's rich and there's a lot to share. You know, and he's, and he's very generous in sharing it. Yeah, that's, that's hard to do too. A lot of times, you know, just to share your story, or at least how you see it. Cause others might not see it as you do. And that's, you're putting it out there to, uh, to be, I want to say, you know, refined and trained and to make, yeah, it's, it's honestly, you're putting it out there to train your own storytelling process of your own now in here experience. Yep. Yep. Was I thinking about that properly in the past or not? Um, you know, I asked you a question, I think on the Q and a, I wasn't able to be there live last week. Oh, okay. Well, which question was it? Oh, it was about this, I think story and Verbecky's. Um, we're wearing this around narrative. Oh yeah. Yeah. Um, I, I'm really trying to understand is a approach to narrative and story. I, I think I can get it somewhat, but I don't want to claim to know it fully, but I just can't, I can't get out of the thought that it, it's, it's just, it's a, almost necessary to live. We tell ourselves stories all day long. And I, this occurred to me this morning, actually thinking about this whole topic. Um, Verbecky is hesitant and it not hesitant. He's a, I think he warns people he cares about. About the dangers of story, the way that a lot of Christians warn about the dangers of sin. Verbecky is just going, Hey, be very careful because you're, you, you can really deceive yourself and you can become arrogant and don't become resentful if your story is not what you thought it was going to be. Um, yeah. And that totally fits in with, you know, um, pursuing Socrates and setting them up as his sage, cause that's what Socrates did. He is a midwife and one of the draw out of people wisdom, I suppose. I just find, I mean, asking people to, I understand being wary of stories because against in a pastoral vocation, a lot of what I do is, is help people curate and manage their stories because that's, that's sort of the way they manage their lives already. You know, therapists do a similar thing to try and help people change their story into a better story, but even the navigation of better or worse is, is so story, story is just this ubiquitous tool. It's almost as if telling our civilization, warning them about the wheel, you know, tires are dangerous. They, you go fast with them and, and, and you, they can run over you. And you can, once you, when you put, you put a, you put something on four wheels and you can hurt a lot of people. And all of that is true, but I don't think the wheel is going anywhere. It's just too darn practical. And, you know, if you, and, and I think part of, you know, he, you know, he, he reminds me, he says, well, you know, this, this autobiography that we do. Isn't, you know, we, we, we wait till we get to this developmental period when we start doing it, but I, I have difficulty and I have difficulty imagining anyone on the planet who is living functionally without it now. Okay. There are limits to it and those limits should be paid attention to, but. It's again, it's sort of like getting rid of the wheel. I, I don't see it. Yeah. Yeah. And it's so hard because I, you know, you, I, it seems to me that I'm living my life and looking to Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith. And telling myself, reading that story, you know, running that story over and over in my head, and eventually it's like, you know, becoming a dad, the story you tell yourself fall away and it's just reality. And he talks about parasitic processing, how we can narrow ourselves down to where the world can't be anything else than what it is and we can't be anything other than what we are to the world that we're in. And I just, I think that's the danger of stories. We can tell ourselves the wrong stories. And I certainly did for a long time. And yeah, by the grace of God, it's, I don't know where that insight comes from. That gets you out of a story that eventually will prove horrifying because it was wrong. But I can't imagine you communicating to me any of this without story. Yeah. Because that's instantly how you conceptual, even changing the story is in a story framework. We just can't escape this thing. And yeah, it's like at the end of the great divorce, CS Lewis, it's so great. And then he goes, and then it's a dude. I know I like so much about that book and I get to the end and I want to throw the book across the room and say, what you, that is the weenie way out of this book. And that is, sorry, St. Clive, St. Jack, do it better. Dream. Yeah. I thought the same when I got to the end of that. Yeah. I'm so glad. One of these days, and John and I talk about this because at some point, I want to visit his groups and I want to listen to your stories and I want to see what's going on in this. But I also don't want to mess it up because my sense is that it's grown nicely and organically. And, but it does, I mean, decadence is something to be, it's something to be cognizant of because just like you described, churches, they can become these little holy huddles and then they become decadent and small and insular. And these groups are created in order to, at some point, have more groups. I mean, this is, if they don't, I mean, it's sort of, I've been thinking about this a lot and I've been thinking about making a video about this, but I haven't done it yet. There is sort of a progression. You know, ideally, that can't happen in this life or in this world, but ideally, every satisfying conversation progresses into a relationship and the relationship progresses into a friendship. And now there are natural, you know, ends to these things that are right and good, but then there are also hierarchies because let's say a conversation between a man and a woman can develop into a friendship and then a relationship and then a marriage. And then the fruit of that marriage is, you know, a child and then children. And there's sort of a natural progression that goes with this. And so, you know, with John's Estuary Support Network, which he and I have joked a lot about the title of that, but it's, you know, it's made so that, you know, the group that you have, kind of, you're anticipating the fruit of the group that you have will be another group, which will be more people around the table. And, you know, part of what's so fun about having a child is you begin to see the world through the eyes of that child. Peterson notes that, that a toddler is delightful because via the toddler, we see the world through them. And so even though, you know, none of the children were mine at this two-year-old's birthday party, and, you know, I have no grandchildren yet, I very much hope to someday have some. But, you know, just watching the world through the eyes of those two-year-olds was deeply rich. Yeah, yeah, it certainly is. And it's the accountant in me, I think, maybe I'm a little cynical towards the whole county industry. I saw the, you know, I think I saw Pajo's video on the symbolism of 666. And it's all about having complete orderly accounted numbers. And I think as an aspect of this S<|es|>-to-A-HOST support network thing, and the whole S-to-A concept that you put out and try to live out in what you're doing, it's going to have things that are unaccounted for, you know? I mean, I almost never talk to you, but you've had an impact across the country, you know? And it, yeah, it's, you just live and do things, and God weaves it. Yeah. And things come together. That's what the New Testament says, you know, Apostle Paul, the Apostle Paul, who wrote so much of the New Testament, he says, hey, you know, someone sees, someone sows, someone waters, you know, we play these little parts in each other's lives. And often, oh, and you'll discover this as a young father. I mean, that little, it's a boy, right? Yeah. That little boy is just, that is, he is a massive sponge, and you are imprinting on him in terrifying, terrifying ways right now, and none of you know it, and it'll all be revealed decades later, but it is, it is, I mean, we are, we are along for the ride of a, of an amazing thing, which is this world that we are just cognizant of and only glimpses now and then. And, and again, to me, part of why I'm a Christian is that via this story, I have faith that this, this amazing thing that we're a part of is finally a good story. And it's a story of joy and glory, and, and even the suffering bits, which are crushing at times, will somehow feed into the joy and glory that is yet to be revealed. And I find that just to be such an enormously compelling story that I don't want to give it up. And so maybe, you know, John says, give up your stories and say, no, I ain't giving it up, John. Sorry, it's not happening. I know. It's just, yeah, it's too fundamental to how we operate. I was just thinking about, you have a, you know, we're never forsaken. And the thing Jesus says in the cross is, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? That's something we never have to say. And having a little boy, you know, I, it makes you want to, you know, not be cynical and arrogant. I think you're, you can move on from your father, but to justify that and be responsible and, you know, resurrect that, you know, tradition. And then your boy, you just look to him and say, man, I'm going to wrong you. I know. And I have faith that I'm going to instill faith in you that I believe you can, you know, be responsible and, you know, be responsible for your own life. And I have faith in you that I believe you can, you'll get through even all my bumblings. And I'm never going to leave you nor forsake you. And that's a story of how, yeah. I think that's a good place to land the plane. That's really beautiful. Yeah, it's three. The hour goes by quick. It does. So, well, anyway, Quinton, this has been a joy. I will send you this video and you can share it with your wife and decide, you know, if this is something that's okay to share with the world. But it's, it's, it's been a delight talking to you. Thank you so much for finding a slot. Yeah. Well, thank you. I'll let you know and appreciate your time. Okay. Sounds good. Take care. Bye.