https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=9V-D1P9YrmE

 Hi, this is Paul. I haven't done much with Jordan Peterson lately. Hasn't been a lot of new material and some of the material that he's put out isn't of that much interest to me. I'm not as interested in the political as I am in the symbolic religious, let's say. But two new videos came out. One where he spoke with a couple of scholars. Now James Orr, if you search for James Orr and you look for the 19th century fundamentalist theologian, who's a pretty big name and pretty important. You've got another James Orr who's teaching at a divinity school, but not the same James Orr. A good century later. And then another professor. And sort of with a tantalizing, teasing, searching for God within Harvard and Cambridge. I listened to that video and it was interesting and I almost did some commentary on it, especially the second half of the video. But it didn't really compel me. The more interesting video I thought was the telegraph conversation with Peterson. So let's talk about this one a little bit. The first one, searching for God within Cambridge and Oxford, it sounds like from the telegraph video that Peterson will actually get a chance to head there. And it sounds like he's going to start traveling again November, December, maybe do some lectures January. That sounds like that's the plan. So if his health holds, could be interesting. Will it be interesting? I'm not sure, but could be interesting. Now the date, I really appreciative that they're putting some of the dates on these interviews because those dates are very helpful in terms of sort of getting a sense of Peterson. And the date on that Oxford Cambridge interview was June 2, which was only a few days after the conversation with John Vervecky, which was so insane. And you could very much again see the Oxford Cambridge interview with Peterson. He's not at his best. He's obviously more subdued in that. I'm not going to go back into that whole conversation. He sort of takes over the interview in the second half. And there was some good stuff in there. You could see glimpses of the old Peterson, but he seemed diminished. And again, that has to be because of the health stuff. And I frankly found some of it sort of sad in the way that you'll talk to someone who's getting up there in years and you can still see glimmers of their, let's say you see glimmers of where they were at their peak, but it's clearly diminished. There's an interesting section early on in terms of identity and authenticity. Part of, and this is something you always have with Peterson, he's, and this comes through in the Telegraph interview where I am going to do some playing of that and get into that a little bit. He very self consciously sticks to the psychological. That's where he wants to be. And so when he starts getting into questions of authenticity, his categories of authenticity are going to tend to be psychological and not metaphysical and not theological. So that's part of the discussion between the theologians and Peterson in that section. I thought a nice little section on identity where the theologians rightly said, Augustine wouldn't have any idea what you're talking about. That sort of gets into some of my thinking around the ContraPoints video that I just released today. I know some of you get into the whole gender pronouns. Of course, this is where Jordan Peterson, why do you keep calling her she? Why do you keep, well that's the identity, that's the persona, that's the face to the public and the disconnect between, you know, part of me understanding the disconnect between the story of this person from birth, from youth, the transformation, the addition of a persona, understanding that in Barfieldian terms as a loss of participation and then understanding the development of this persona. I mean, the treating envy, I still think about that at all the different levels and I'm just in awe. But the hunger and the desire for final participation, for the final merger, it's really the merger of heaven and earth, it's the resurrection, it's all of those things and that was the video I put out on ContraPoints. So authenticity, identity, those were some interesting little snippets from the first part of the conversation. The second part of the conversation I thought was quite good and I thought about doing a commentary on it, still might, but there's so much content coming my way and I'm so ADHD that I often just move on. But just looking at this other video and I'm always suspicious when, because of course what I put out on my channel and what I've watched, YouTube always dishes up for me new Jordan Peterson content into the feed. But whenever I see one, especially with a media outlet, I'm a little suspicious that this is old material, that it's a retread. But no, this seems very much to have been a very recent interview and with the press, I think probably did some vetting to make sure that the interview was going to be a friendly interview, which it was, and I thought it was a good interview and Peterson comments that he's up north by the lake. I don't know exactly what that means and I don't need to know, but what's clear is that he's out of the city and he's much stronger, he's much clearer, he seems quite a bit healthier, and he's closer to his old self and all of this is really good to see. Now then they get into the section, are you a prophet? Which is, we're gonna have to talk about even that question because what on earth does someone mean by that? What on earth does someone mean by that in this frame? Well what do I mean by in this frame? Here you have a secular reporter, he's not talking to me. If I were to ask Jordan Peterson if he were a prophet, that would mean something totally different. What does it mean for a secular reporter to call him a prophet? What is a prophet in the popular imaginary? And what that to me sort of boils down to, and even in a Canadian context rather than an American context, because again Canadians are more secular, you know Canada is sort of halfway between the US and the UK in some ways, even though they're America's hat. I don't mean any disrespect, it's just something that's sometimes said. But what on earth do you mean by a prophet? You're a secular journalist and you have to look at that in sort of a phenomenological way because the self is buffered. Do you really? See this is this is part of some of the duplicity in our secular culture is that retain, we retain some of the genetic material of our past and there's sort of a longing and a terror and a desire for God to break through. Would that you would part the skies, the Old Testament says. Would that you would part the skies and come down Lord. Are you a prophet? Are you someone who is going to start something new religiously? And really nothing Jordan said in this conversation surprised me, but I thought he was, you know part of what I've been hoping for in the second wave has been, okay he's been in the underworld, what have you learned? Are you more sure of yourself? Are you more solid? And I think we were starting to hear some of that in this interview. I liked his answers. Your life is one roller coaster of pure surreal events I think to be fair. Yes it's it's for that would also exacerbated my illness to some degree because I literally could not believe the things that were happening to me. They were so they're so absurd, they're so over the top that it's jaw-dropping and in both directions right terrible things and absolutely wonderful things to the whole expanse. Sure and you know I'm just going back onto this issue of you sort of almost being a prophet in a way. Do you view yourself as that? I mean as religion declines. I misspoke they're not Canadian he's he's from the UK so that that makes even the difference between the new world and the old world that makes the resonance of this even more interesting you know more of a deeply secular society and there's there's a little bit of a yeah I think it's a friendly interview so I don't think any mockery is intended but in a deeply secular frame to self-consciously embrace the mantle of a prophet would be mockable so yeah why was I thinking he's Canadian? You go on this world tour millions of people read your books billions of people probably watching videos online do you see yourself as sort of new religious phenomenon for people and of course you would have to ask the interviewer what do you mean by religious because secular the secular frame sort of wants to know and segment and push the religious over to the side so I think that would have been a fair question to ask back what do you mean by religious? Not new not new and online do you see yourself as sort of new religious phenomenon for people? Not new not new and I see myself as fortunate that's how I see myself that I have the opportunity to do this but are you a prophet? At the same time it's a if you're if you want to do a good interview with Jordan Peterson it's a good question to ask him because of course Allah the colleague who brought him into the department and was horrified at his rise and wrote that piece in the Toronto Star and showed us that Jordan had been looking around Toronto for a perhaps an unused church building that he could buy on the cheap in order to give lectures this is of course before the Bader theater in the biblical series and you know to buy a little place that would seat a hundred or two people now would be ridiculous but this is a this is a testing question. See to say yes or no I have to think about how I think I have to think about how I might be conceptualized. Tell the truth or at least don't lie. Come on what do you think and and I think he I mean to what degree is it's absolutely responsible to work on your response based on how it will be heard that's just good faith communication but that's interesting. What I'm doing might be conceptualized. No I think I see myself as a psychologist and fundamentally I am a psychologist I'm a behavioral psychologist. And glad real did you pass the test and I think it's a good answer I think it's a good answer I think it's the right answer so but it's it's just so Jordan Peterson that moment right there I mean I'm not saying he's being dishonest at all I think he's truly wrestling with the question and he is as Peugeot said with his conversation with Peugeot Jordan has one feet on either on both land masses and they're going apart and this question is like well are those hamstrings hurting Jordan that the land masses modernity is moving away are you gonna continue to stick in modernity and to say I'm a psychologist okay modernity and again because modernity is also I keep I keep the public frame is for things that can fit in the scientific box the public frame is not for my metaphysical ideas and if you listen to the conversation with James Orr and Nigel I forget the name Oxford and Cambridge conversation similar thing this is this is where he sticks maybe this is where he's going to stick but part of the difficulty with all of this is he's sticking to the modernist land mass and he keeps pointing to the new world which is the old world and that's part of the reason why I said new prophet no not new that's for sure because what he's do is continuing to stand on modernity but pointing to what's coming beyond modernity and he doesn't mean bloody postmodernism cultural Marxism okay then I'm very interested in I got very interested in psychoanalytic thinking especially the Jungian variants and and I'm a professor and I'm doing that you know on a much larger stage let's say but that's really what I'm doing now that too is interesting because again his I you know some people pushed back on this previous times that I've said it his profession was has been denied him and and in that way he's he's sort of like Brett Weinstein and Heather Hying could he go back to the university probably not there's there's no way he could just stroll in at least maybe five years from now but you know and he's pushing retirement could he just stroll back into the university class could he continue to work with grad students well maybe but this finished his career and you get the sense that you know he before c16 it was quite satisfied with his life he had you know dabbled in politics early on of course he had he had built his career he had published a ton of stuff he was happy working with grad students he was a popular professor who's getting views you know getting reviews from his class this class has changed my life and then of course c16 and boom and I I feel for him because part of me can understand this because it would be as if something I say on some thing would my channel would blow up and suddenly I would have a million subscribers I don't think that's a good thing because I've got my church I've got my family I've got my meetup I've got estuary I've got all these things and God bless small things that's my channel is is a nice size it's it's sometimes more than I can handle even the size it is I don't really need it to it needs to the numbers the subscribers probably keep needing to just inch up slowly because fresh people in the mix are are almost always a good thing and people do watch I become map territory for people and they drop out that's all just completely normal and in many ways as it should be but if something would happen to me and I could no longer be a local minister if I could no longer preach on Sunday if I could no longer relate to the people here at Living Stones like I can relate to them coffee break has started up in person again I get to see the ladies they give me their treats you know I get to I give them you know I give them my hugs now all these women are my mother's age if not older so I'm the pastor of a small local church that's a beautiful thing to have that ripped from me because of celebrity or popularity or controversy that's a painful thing so now he I'm a psychologist but he can't have a practice anymore and he can't teach in the classroom anymore and he can't have grad students anymore so now and he's doing it on a bigger stage but is it the same thing because fame popularity can you really connect with people and the answers that come through this are one on one this is what I this is what I want to to connect with people and to and to have this to have this go and so it's a combination of those two things and there's a I mean I speak about religious matters but I don't see myself as a religious leader I don't want to make that although I speak about those things are you what and you know it's interesting because you very much get the sense that he's things have settled down in a sense because of his illness the feeding frenzy is not around him like it was up now if he would go on Fox News or MSNBC or do it New York Times interviews or things like that some of that feeding frenzy would come up but it's not 2016 anymore it's not even 2018 the the world has changed and moved on I was amazed that when we restarted now the rebranded estuary not the Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup how many people came and the first thing out of their mouths was Jordan Peterson I was very interesting to me but he's things are settling down now he's been ill he's had now he's getting time to say okay who am I what am I about what is the rest of my life gonna be about am I going to keep selling books don't know how don't really know how well this book has done certainly not as well as the first one we need to do a biblical series I'm gonna talk to people on my channel this is my new life and so he's a year older than I am so he's 59 and he's looking at okay what is the next five six years if I regain my strength if I regain my health so he's he's he's at a point now where he's reassessing okay what what's my life gonna look like now after this storm that shit that destroyed my the life that I had put together before are you worried that that could happen those things are you worried that that could happen that you could become a kind of a sort of pseudo religious figure to people now again okay so I correct myself the UK what on earth do you mean by that and again I go back to I wanted to start maybe with Tara's point about sort of the you know the durability of this kind of I'll conflate your two points and say the durability of imminent individualist religion in American life right and the fact that you have plenty of you know divination and God within spirituality going back to the 18th century so when this interviewer asks if he's a prophet if he's a new religious figure it's sort of in the strange rights Tara Isabel Burton realm of this is this is new religion it's religion on YouTube it's he's a guru and people are going to he's got a mass following and people are going to hang on his every word because he's the light bringer there's another word for that he's the light bringer he's the one that that owns the libs and exposes the corruption and saves Western civilization and so it seems to me that if you look at sort of the historical pattern in American life you have sort of either surges of that kind of spirituality or particular religious geniuses who manifest it and then the is he a religious genius that manifests it now I would think he sees himself in the line of Iliad and Jung and hero of a thousand faces that's who's gonna name a little later in the video movements and institutions that they build have historically then been sort of pulled back towards a kind of normative Christian structure or framework to to use Steve's account right so you know to take to take the examples of the two biggest 19th century examples maybe are Christian science which comes out of new thought in certain ways and Mormonism which gets its start in the sort of in you know the kind of divination happy world of upstate New York and in the in the in the early 19th century and both of those you know if you if you look at them from a sort of you know how Christian are they perspective at the outset you could which is exactly what I've done what these Roman Catholic scholars have done in their new book out on Jordan Peterson how Christian is he that's exactly the questions being asked of him and make a case that they're both pretty stark departures maybe not getting all the way to something we call paganism or post Christianity but clearly really stark departures you know in Mormonism's case you know you mentioned polyamory right as a feature of the contemporary political landscape early Mormonism goes all the way to polygamy and then over the course of the next hundred years you get to a point where by the time of the 1950s and 1960s both Christian science and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints while they're still regarded as heretical or dangerous or cultic by some other Christian denominations are I think reasonably seen as connected to a kind of you know a kind of Christian tradition in American life and there's clearly an aspiration at least among parts of the leadership of those of those what become those churches to move in that direction and what that hasn't it seems to me one thing that's been different since the 60s and 70s right is that that hasn't happened to the same degree right so we've gone through the sort of Mary Ann Williamson presidential campaign which unfortunately has not won enough support to merit the fascination that I've applied to it but I feel like a 19th century version of Mary Ann Williamson would have started a church right and would have you know and and over the course of 50 years there would be a sort of William Sonian denomination that had some sort of ambiguous relationship to the Protestant Center in American life and you know Williamson has some kind of institution now but it's very clear that she doesn't regard herself as in that light and the same goes for you know figures ranging from Deepak Chopra to Oprah Winfrey and so on and so I'm curious what you think and this sort of brings into the megachurch now Peterson hasn't started an institution and he's gonna say that in a minute but spending time in these religious worlds what happens when that doesn't happen right like what happens to this kind of spiritual energy if there isn't one institution building or to a sort of pull back towards a kind of you know quasi normative Christian framework does it just continue are we in just a sort of endless cycle right where astrology was big when my parents were young and when I was growing up you know I knew what my parents sign was and then by the time I got to college in the 1990s nobody talked about astrology anymore but now it's back like do we just run a cycle or is there what do you think happens so I think I would motion that I mean you mentioned Oprah and I could think of good at the fault row that the the lifestyle brand may have perhaps in some senses replaced the the church as the kind of institutionalization of a certain kind of spiritual trend which is to say sure Oprah doesn't have a church exactly but at the same time there is a degree in which sort of with enough money with enough of a following the sort of grassroots fringe traditions do become we don't like astrology like psychics which are now at you know goop summits do you become codified in some way are you worried that that could happen that you could become a kind of a sort of pseudo religious figure to people well you know this has been going on for quite a while and I don't think it has happened and so no I don't think it'll happen and and and and I think there's I'm less I'm hasn't it though to a degree ways of mitigating that if with careful attention and careful speech I mean it's and I don't want it that which is also something because if I wanted it then you know that unconscious desire would or conscious desire even would shape the way that I speak but but I don't want that and and and I'm trying to point to things that are clearly beyond me they're clear and I know they're beyond me and that's what I want and and and I want the thing I think part of what protects me against that I suppose is that I'm not trying to produce followers I am actually trying to help people discover what it is their relationship with that that part of them that all calls out and I believe that exists in everyone I really do believe that and so but locating the part that calls in oneself instead of from above doesn't mean that you that religious figure and and this is where again going back to the Oxford and Cambridge conversation ostensibly about God which the conversation wasn't a lot about and and where Peterson locates you know in that sense see part of this also is the weird Jungian definitions of self and God those don't really map on to most of the assumptions that are out there in the English language world at least UK US Canada Australia to a degree Germany and the Netherlands those mappings are much more Christian than the sort of definition of God in Jung the definition of self in Jung this I he's answering carefully but I'm not so sure he's right in and so in that sense I'm I'm I'm on equal footing with everyone that I'm talking to and I do believe that if they brought that out into the world they can bring that out into the world and if they did that would be immensely beneficial for everyone and so so it's not that easy to produce a cult of individuals and and so I think the fact that my focus is the individual is the best protection against that I'm not asking for people to follow partly because they need to figure out where to go for themselves they really need now yes but the self-authoring program the big five personality profile the podcast the books all of the I mean this is this is self-help I mean that's I'm pretty sure somewhere in the bookstore that's exactly where this book would be located as self-help so maybe not religion s but certainly religion w need that and I don't know where each person should go because each person is different importantly different so no I don't I don't think I don't think that that's if that was a real danger I think it would have already happened it's quite a while now I mean this has been going on for five years and it does in some sense continue to get bigger I think it's not that easy to see especially during kovat but I don't think that that's going to happen you mentioned kovat there and I think it's a really interesting topic to move on to were you surprised okay we'll probably just skip the kovat stuff if you if you're curious about what he has to say about kovat just watch the whole interview so he's getting asked questions about lockdowns vaccine passports government responses to kovat Peterson will give the answers that if you watch enough Jordan Peterson you understand the kinds of answers he'll give but then he takes the question this way you've got other Democrats well he's a Republican but Democrats comparing Trump supporters to terrorists and calling for a second domestic this time domestic war on terror are you concerned about this this rhetoric of describing your political very concerned about it well part of the reason part of the argument that I want to outline in my new book and I'm going to talk about this at Cambridge and Oxford because I'm also going to Oxford at the end of November so how much fun is that I can't believe I have those two invitations it's so wonderful my daughter is also going to speak at Oxford we're gonna speak at the same on the same day so that's now notice new book and this is the subject that he's been talking about quite a bit which probably means he's writing his book and it's on his mind a lot about the transposition of the religion and the political and again I'm really happy about this I'm I'm a fan I'm a supporter but these I'm not when he answers like he does these questions about whether or not he's religious I'm not so sure gosh how do I want to say this I'm not so sure the full impact and import of what's going on it's a little bit of a dodge and some of my friends out there will know I dodge questions too and maybe that's wise but you know I completely agree that with the religious displaced the political grows outside and in terms of the conversations and the attention that I'm giving to the progression of progressive Christianity out of the category of Christianity it very much is a a secularized and a secular rising movement where the church as organism is unnecessary and displaced and in that sense the state so again in the Protestant world those of you have been following my videos riffing off Charles Taylor and the Protestant Charles Taylor complains that in the in the pre Protestant Reformation you had to speed religion and Catholicism you had the monastery where the athletes and then the regular folks in the church and and you had Christendom so in some ways three speeds and then he says well Protestantism is sort of a one speed because you want a holy city you want in a sense to manifest the vision of Jeremiah in the city of Zurich or the city of Geneva or the city of New Haven or Plymouth or America and that very much you know that very much takes part in the United States and when it comes to the Civil War you know just listen to the battle hymn of the Republic this is this is God's truth is marching on the American government all of this stuff gets mixed through and so then you come to during the Cold War where church attendance reaches its peak in American history and but there is moral alignment and so once again you sort of have a two-speed religion where church people and church Christians are the athletes they sort of stand in for the monasteries and then the government and the state is sort of the second speed and then of course the counterculture and the 1960s comes through and just sort of deeply asked questions in that and the article that I've read a number of times how white members of the main line this calls this causes a crisis among white mainline Protestants and what happens is is there's sort of an inversion and the state itself takes on the global role or the primary role and in that way somebody was asking in the comments about Jesus and John Wayne in some ways in the American story you see this at the Civil War at the at the victory of the north over the south in the Civil War where and you see this in the progressive era that's the period following the Civil War where you have you know women's movements and child labor laws and the temperance movement I mean the temperance movement is fundamental because you're going to you're going to try to Drake take consumption of alcohol out of the culture in order to protect women and children that is the reason that is the cause and it is you know to make all of a safe space that's what's behind the temperance movement and and some ways what you're seeing now in the rise of the woke and the Imperial Blue Church is that it's it's in a sense the the ambition of the victory on the Civil War is that we can finally do this we can build better you know we can build back better we can you can have the great reset now after the little tiny crisis of COVID and after the Trumpster has been put away now we can arrive and and in that way all those darn masculine Republican voting evangelical Christians out there are a huge impediment to the coming of the kingdom and so those who still so then you have the again the new atheists have always had American evangelical evolution resistant Christians in their sight if you don't believe me listen to Richard Dawkins appearance on Unbelieveable where Dawkins basically just says it to the to the the Jewish leader and the Christian leader that he is interviewing he says it's not you people I have a problem with it's those and because America sort of comes into its own now in the 21st century in a way it couldn't in the 19th century with the victory over the South at the end of the Civil War the United States was still you know this this nation in a faraway place even though Americans believe just read 19th century religious and political imaginings you know we are we are the we are the vanguard we are the frontier we are the the people that are going to remake the world and of course that comes to full flourishing with Woodrow Wilson who ironically saw you know watched Jefferson Davis you know in a sort of post Civil War triumph taken away in chains when when Woodrow Wilson was a little boy so Woodrow Wilson of course goes to Europe for the Treaty of Versailles and at this point he wants America and the progressive era to to the birth of the eschaton as it were but what Wilson doesn't understand is that his timing is wrong and the this post millennial this post millennial eschaton was crushed in the killing fields of France and Belgium in the First World War and of course then you have the roaring 20s and you have the Great Depression and then you have the conclusion of the First World War and the Second World War and that again brings in the American century and now then in a way in God we trust goes on the money and American church attendance reaches its peak but the main line is in alignment with the values of America only to be shattered first trembled by the civil rights movement which in many ways is Dr. King acting like a prophet telling Americans okay I'm on board with you now let's finish the job and make African Americans equal heirs in the eschaton of the kingdom but he is of course assassinated and himself becomes a saint a martyr he is now of course represented in granite on the Capitol Mall and the 70s and in some ways the Joker movie set in the 70s I remember the 70s in New York but they had to find a little piece of Newark because Newark and Patterson are not gentrified like Manhattan and Brooklyn and Queens so he finds a little piece of Newark so there's a long history of this and are you a prophet Jordan well where does Jordan fit into that bigger picture it's ridiculously improbable see I'm interested in what in what's underneath those problems I'm really and one one of the things that's happened to us is happening to us is the religious the political has collapsed into the religious so there's this new now right there the political has collapsed into the religious little Jordan Peterson taken to the United Church of Canada the the older he gets increasingly uncompelling gets very interested in politics okay Jordan you want your little you want to keep taking it to the individual and now you're going to use the platforms of YouTube and and and you want to continue to do this work but it's going to be awfully hard to complain about the religious collapsing into the political if and and it's going to be awfully hard to not become a religious figure yourself unless you are part of a religious institution that is obviously not political so you know listening to him there there's some there's some deep conflicts going on down here below the surface you're interested below the surface you're gonna have to look at this now I know the comments are gonna come no Jordan can't join a church because if Jordan joins a church then he loses the evangelistic the strange evangelistic power that he has in what he's doing fair enough maybe but it makes it harder and harder and harder to continue to deny your place I have to turn down my mic I see here because the video levels and some of these are a little lower it makes it harder and I'm loud it makes it harder and harder to keep denying that you're a religious figure when you're acting religiously outside of religious institutions and it makes it harder and harder to imagine you're not you won't appear in some and whatever the successor for Tara Isabel Burton strange rights book is 30 years from now writing about the Jordan Peterson movement between 2016 and 2021 New Testament statement that Christ make it's it's an unbelievably impactful statement it's it's it's a statement that is in some sense miraculous in its effects render unto Caesar what is Caesar's and unto God what is God's and you know the entire the entire formal separation of church and state in the Western world is a consequence of that statement you just think of that how impactful that statement was that's literally the case I don't care if you're religious or not it's irrelevant I'm not so sure about that I understand how that is definitely an application for that verse but the separation of church and state that has a very specific history too historically that's the case that statement did that so that's a that's that's a miracle you know in some real sense well remember this is an answer to a political question after we've been talking about whether or not he's a religious figure let's say that's true psychologically as far as I'm concerned as well as politically is that there's a there's a dough there's a domain that's sacred and there's a domain that's profane and that's true psychologically and if you don't keep those separate separate then the sacred contaminates the profane or alternatively the profane gets gets inflated into the sacred and that's that's not that's a catastrophe because then everything becomes emotionally overwrought because you're no longer a political enemy you're you're an emissary of Satan I mean that's essentially what happened to be with the red skull you know it got pushed that far it was right to the point of ultimate absurdity it's like really like Nazi isn't a bad enough epithet I have to be a magical super Nazi and really that's really necessary well what's going on well obviously because red skull you think of that red skull red skull is Satan for all intents and purposes it's a matter it's only a matter of nomenclature and so it's not like the Marvel universe is Christian but it is in a profound sense I mean all those movies have underlying religious themes fighting off the you know the the demonic extraterrestrial aliens that are invading the earth it's all it's all played out in the domain of religious ideation I mean great Thor is a god for God's sake it's not it's not like this is hard to see well if the profane becomes inflated with the sacred then you demonize your enemies you know and then maybe you saw you sacralize yourself as well and that's not so good you know you're an environmentalist it's like well you sure you're not the Messiah are you sure that's not what you're doing you're the savior of the planet it's like are you sure that's so good for your ego and it's not so another way to view this is he is basically taking his own advice are you a prophet long pause I have to think about how I'm gonna answer this because of how it's going to be heard long pause no why I'm not trying to be why because you've got to relieve the religious over there okay is that what you do can you can you have that be a functional part in society if no one is actually participating in it as a functional part of society you know Canada's a far more secular country as is the UK than the United States but it's it's not it's not you know the earth has to orbit the Sun in Jung's terminology or it if it falls into the Sun it's a catastrophe and all sorts of discussions we're having are becoming inflated with with religious concerns and then you know on the materialist atheist side this let's say the scientific side although it's not really that there's this insistence that religion is nothing but a set of mistaken scientific propositions about the nature of reality in which it's certainly that's that's not a very sophisticated analysis and I've seen this sort of thing start to happen to people like Richard Dawkins mean he's he's fallen prey he's become victim to the collapse of the religious into the political it's not good and this has nothing to do with arguments about you know do I believe in God or does God exist it's like that's not the point of this that's not the point that's not but it's not completely disconnected and maybe I am gonna do some commentary on that other video because one of the things that he says when asked about what time is it how much how long is this video going to be just wondering in terms of your encounter with young younger people at what point that does religious identification begin to gain traction well I think there's a there's a variety of answers to that one is that one pathway in is is the diagnosis that the desire for deep meaning and also deep responsibility is there and valid and in everyone and to be encouraged and recognized so there's that and then then that there's a serious discussion about I would say about love and truth and the and the pragmatic utility of both and and both as expressions of faith you know because you can't say well there's evidence that love in the broadest sense is the most effective manner in which to orient yourself in the world you could make a counter case that it's power for example and you can't prove that speaking the truth is for the best and partly that's because people get into trouble for speaking the truth all the time but you can say you can stake your life on those two things and see what happens and that there's an adventure in that and and that appeal to adventure that that's really attractive to you especially the young men but to young people in general and then there's one other element which is part of it has to be the removal of rational objections it's like when I did in my biblical lecture series I said I was going to stay psychological about it except when I had to become metaphysical because of my the limitations of my knowledge and so I was trying to make sense of it's like how can you have a relationship with this book that makes sense so that you're not that you're not crucifying your reason but using it alongside of you and so that it's not mere let's say superstitious foolishness with regards to your axiomatic presuppositions of the form that the rational atheists criticize so well let's say so effectively so I you know I said well I brought reverence to the to Genesis I said this books been around a long time and there's possible there's the possibility that there's something in it that I that I don't understand that's appealed to people across history and let's approach it from that perspective and see what we can make of it and that that seems to have proved extremely popular like sort of unbelievably popular and so so when you mentioned this desire for a deep desire in a sense for a sense for for a sense of being responsible yeah and the truth both of those connect to me as it were something that is given an objective to which we are accountable and reminds me of what your compatriot Charles Taylor once wrote in his best shortest book I'm glad to say the ethics of authenticity he said reflecting on authenticity as being the kind of universal popular value we all recognize he said authenticity only makes sense when there's a wider given horizon that gives it significance so so choice only significance within a context that gives it significance otherwise choices Caprice it's it's whimsy it doesn't matter at all and so I suppose they I mean seeing seeing this through Christian eyes as I do what we have here is a recognition of the need for if you like a given moral order within which we are you know we have freedom and the freedom is what makes us responsible and and makes our decisions and choices really heavy with significance but there is something that is given and we didn't create it and and a large part and right here you see sort of the theologians coming from above Peterson coming from below not the only part a large part of the affirmation of of the beam one God is that there is not just a physical coherence to created reality but also a moral coherence so that one God okay so and they're gonna go on from there that's not the issue here the issue is we have a religious instinct and and then the question is why and and then the question is well what happens when it's not nourished where does it go what does it do well the rationalist idea is well if we get rid of all that superstitious claptrap will just be like straight rationalist materialists and the world will move in a positive direction it's like it no no wrong too simple that isn't it where do we get our values and that's the conversation I'm trying to have with people that that's a big part of it is look the science does not provide values we need values or or nihilism or rains and you want that no so where we're gonna get our values you can you get your values from psychology where do we get our values and if there are values are some values higher than others and if so what are the highest values and what are they opposed to and how do we embody them these aren't conversations for children this is serious stuff and it's underneath all this noise and terror that that we see playing out so destructively so you see what that does to your soul you're on Twitter you get tangled up in these political arguments it just it just hurts you it's not good for you and so I would like to I'm trying to figure out what's going on underneath that and and what we what we need to do about it and that point about sorry just sort of drop it that that points about being on Twitter and sort of getting embroiled in these arguments we've all done it we've all got really angry we've all got really depressed about about certain things I think and you see many many people around you you know I've got sort of friends family members who I'm slightly concerned about because they're getting so radicalized by this stuff they're getting so angry that they can't remove themselves from the issue and I was speaking to my friend before this interview you know what kind of questions should I be asking you and we had this debate and it was it was this when you're on Twitter and you're angry about these issues or even if you're not on Twitter and you're angry and you're angry about wokeism or for example or identity politics what do you do so like we came up with two solutions and I want you to comment on both I said well look the thing that helps me is to switch off I just turn off all my devices I go for a run I go for a walk I go on holiday and don't think about these things and I feel so much happier and I come back refreshed and unfortunately I have to think about these things for my job but if I didn't I probably wouldn't think about them as much as I had to my friend said no it's all it's our duty to fight this stuff it's our duty to try and change the way that society is heading it's our duty to try and get involved in this debate and get involved in this argument so what what is the solution what should we do who's right now I think you're both right you know I mean you have to see how much you can take and not take any more than that and so shutting off and and and protecting yourself against the electronic onslaught let's say which is all new technology right we have no idea what its psychological impact is and especially of something like Twitter because Twitter is a radically new form of communication and we don't know what it is we have no idea like does the fact that you radically increase possibly and so and we don't understand that and by the time we do well time to understand and get adapted to Twitter before no one can keep up and so unplugging that's really necessary and it's very hard for for any of us to figure out well how much can you take I'm up in this northern forget up here late now and I'm really I'm I didn't know if I would ever get up here we bought this place in February and I was so sick I didn't think I'd ever get to see it and I came up here about a month ago when I started feeling better and I haven't left I thought oh looks like I live here who would expected that but it's really nice to be out of the city way better than I thought I needed it way more than I knew and it's part of this connectedness right it's great it's wonderful but man it comes at a price and then so that's the first day at the question and I agree with both of us answers but this is connected to the religious question because one of the things that okay I'm a pastor I'm gonna give pastoral advice one of the things that a robust acted upon committed religious commitment affords is both of these but the answer of escape and distraction that is a tactical answer but what you really need is a worldview answer where all of this politics everything that's happening in the secular is surrounded by what's happening on the bigger stage in the heavenlies with God in heaven etc etc and I think that's actually a better answer because these good now he's gonna say well actually the other answer is you do have to be involved but the question how do you be involved and not let it slip in is you actually need to practice your religion in the words of Jonathan Peugeot you need to go to church and you know all you know hat tip to Andrew Clavin church should not be about politics obviously your politics should be informed by your church that's what it means to be in a democracy and a citizen but church should not be about politics because your church is about that which is eternal that which is higher that which is more that which is forever politics is now religion is always and unless you have that situated and unless you practice that in your life you're going to struggle with it you're always gonna struggle with it but let him finish the answer and with regard to responsibility well your friend is right it's like you have a religious responsibility you have a political responsibility you have a communal responsibility and you need to you need to shoulder those responsibilities for a variety of reasons partly because none of those systems will work without you and you won't work without them and so you you you ignore them at your peril truly you ignore them at your peril partly because you won't be what you could be without shouldering that communal responsibility and then you'll pay for that in your individual life because you'll be shallow and immature and weak and clueless and a puppet and and a sheep and all of that and so and and it's not in simple matter to get that balance right I mean it's no simple but see and that's a good answer too but he's not saying what she should say how do you not have the political slip in and and swell and overwhelm the religious when there is a religious vacuum that is what we are dealing with we are dealing with the religious vacuum because well let's quote Jesus again you sweep that house out you clean that room and seven more demons worse than the first are going to come in and so okay Jordan has his cabin he's gonna do the escape and he's feeling stronger so that he can do an interview like this but you've got to fill the religious space if you don't your politics will continue to expand because and one of the things that I think is a danger for people when they take on that responsibility and they see these issues and they want to solve them for example which may start with trying to solve the problems in your own life is it's difficult to know where to stop and where and how do I word this correctly that was pretty good then what they need to you well I think that what I'm trying to say is people can become radicalized and people can become you go too far down the rabbit hole and you can become entrenched in these issues just sort of mean yeah well that's part of the danger that's part of the danger of the contamination of the profane with the sacred it's exactly that because you see there's an instinct that pulls you into that say conspiratorial and and radical and over committed form of thinking here what you're doing is manifesting religious devotion to to a set of ideas let's say and so how do you not do that you need to have religious devotion in your life you're going to have to have it don't warrant that worship and worship what is worship worship is what you imitate that's what it is to worship something is to imitate it that's what it means most fundamentally well be careful what you worship be careful and you think well I don't have to worship anything it's like oh that's what you think is it well don't be so sure that all those people who lived before us who insisted that you did have to worship something and that you should be very careful about what it was don't be so bloody sure they were stupider than you and so you see you know so many people well lots of people for example are radical about their atheism and somebody wrote me the other day and said oh no was YouTube comment said you know I was one of those radical atheists this is what the guy said and but I was like brutalized by fundamentalist religious people when I was growing up and lots of atheistic people are like that and and I wrote back briefly and said yes you know point taken I understand that the excesses of a certain kind of religious ideation have produced this counter reaction this emotional counter reaction but that's religious fervor so let's say that we're prone to religious fervor because we need to be committed to what is important well then we need to figure out where that instinct should be oriented this is why I'm so interested in the idea of the logos because that is the Western world's attempt to answer that question what is this logos well it's the root word of logic so rationality is embedded in it it's it's a very important part of that it's also that element of consciousness that interacts with the ground of being to produce phenomena to produce experience the world of experience it's a it's a it's a world engendering force it's an ethical demand as well so you see that in in your wrestling with your conscience which is a virtually universal experience like what the hell is that exactly wrestling with your conscience why can't you just tell yourself what to do and you listen these are all the themes we've heard in the second wave he's clearly working on a book and these are these are the themes that are coming through well you're not like that something in you resists well what is that thing that resists and what's it related to that's the Jungian self by the way technically speaking it's it's the totality of what you could be manifesting itself in objection to your narrow-minded rational fervor let's say something like that or it's something like that but so so you you want to be religious about the right things and that's partly again why my emphasis is on is that as on the individual I've struggled in some sense with committing to the spiritual or the political my whole life it's always because I was interested in politics since I was like five like really really young and I always considered a political career and many people have asked me I don't think I have the emotional stability for it frankly speaking I don't think I could tolerate the stress and but in any case every time I've had a choice I pick the psychological it's the what I would like to I would I've devoted my life to what would you say well psychologists work on individuals and that's what I decided to do is and that's the it's safer in some sense to do that as well right it's who doesn't wouldn't it be better for everyone if if there were more better people how could that be worse we're getting to the 2024 election well we're not but in America you know they start like to the 2024 election well we're not but in America you know they start election campaigning very very quickly and very very soon unfortunately and and people were talking about Donald Trump running again would you be concerned about that would you do you think that could cause and not just because of the man himself but also the kind of reaction from his enemies I mean we saw from 2016 to 2021 the media were hugely hyperactive and I think you know we saw a lot of division and we saw a lot of polarization so are you concerned we could see a repeat of that if he runs again another political question it would surprise me if he doesn't run again I think it'll happen I I wouldn't claim to be a particularly astute political seer no I've made many mistakes in political prediction in my life and and it isn't obvious to me what should happen it wouldn't surprise me if Trump ran again and yes that will there will be an exacerbation of these differences because there's an underlying problem and the problem I think is the one that we've been discussing and unless we get that straightened out which is very difficult it's a very hard very very challenging thing to do it because in some sense we have to become more conscious of what was once religious and unconscious we have to start to understand it explicitly and that's unbelievably difficult I mean I learned a lot of what I learned about the psychology of religion by reading Carl Jung and and some of his students Eric Neumann in particular who's extraordinarily brilliant psychologist. Now I know a lot of people will say well but in America it's the religious people who are being political and there's certainly religious people who are being political but overall and again if you look at One Faith No Longer by George Yancey even though the conservative religious people are the ones who always catch the airtime for the most part it's actually the progressives that their politics becomes their religion based on this research we highlight here that progressive Christians emphasize political values relating to social justice issues as they determine who is part of their in group they tend to be less concerned about the theological Conservative Christians however do not put strong emphasis on political agreement in order to determine if you are one of them their major concern is whether you agree with them on core theological points the bottom line we need to illuminate in this book is that progressive and conservative Christians use entirely different factors in determining their social identity and moral values indeed we argue that the ways in which these two groups deal with the questions of meaning are so different that it is time to regard them as distinct religious groups rather than subgroups under a single religious umbrella well there are many ways to look at the divisions within Christianity racial political theological denominational etc we will start with a theological divide to explore other implications of the splits between Christians our aim is to show how theologically progressive and conservative Christians define their social and political priorities and how these definitions differ from each other quite often we see news coverage about conservative Christians but while some news outlets publish stories about progressive Christianity these stories largely do not help one achieve a deeper understanding about the nature of progressive Christianity and where the root differences lie between it and conservative Christians while occasionally we hear about resistance to politically conservative Christians generally our understanding about the nature of progressive Christians is lacking there are all there have also been relatively little there's also been relatively little scholarship that examines the nature of progressive Christianity there has been work outlining the history of progressive Christians as well as primary documents by progressive Christians that in that enunciate their stated beliefs recent attempts to explore progressive religious groups have utilized the case study approach and interviews with congregants of a progressive church this work is valuable but not generalizable Stenger does use a national survey to argue that potential members of liberal Christian groups may be more than indicated by the size of these groups her work provides some insights into why progressive Christians are less effective in their political activism than conservatives in other words you sort of have an irony that the political the conservative Christians are actually more effective in their politics even though for a majority of conservative Christians in terms of how these values work in themselves the politics is not central to their goal in other words the religious the religious strength of the group is strong enough to resist having everything be oriented by the politics in other words the religion is vital enough to keep the politics from encroaching part of what he goes into is in groups and out groups conservative Christians tend to reject Muslims and atheists as part of an out group but they do not necessarily reject political liberals this evidence suggests that progressive Christians tend to use political values to establish their social identity while conservative Christians tend to use theological values to accomplish that task Eric Neumann in particular who's extraordinarily brilliant psychologist very very difficult intellectually I mean there's a lot of psychologists have contempt for Jung they think of him as a mystic and my experience has been I don't I've never ever met someone who understood Jung who criticized him that way every single person I've ever met who had that attitude had absolutely no idea what they were talking about and I think a big part of that is it his books are they're very difficult and making this stuff conscious it's understanding it explicitly I mean even with my maps of my book maps of meaning there's been four variants of that book written by four different people I wrote one Eric Neumann wrote the origins and history of consciousness it's the same book Jung wrote symbols of transformation that's the same book Joseph Campbell wrote the hero with a thousand faces that's the same book and to explain what's in that book in some sense that took me like a hundred hours of lecturing and I never got to the bottom of it it's so we have a daunting the daunting task before us is to understand the source of our values explicitly and then to have an intelligent broad-scale intense public discussion about the ranking of those values what's at what's at the top what's at the bottom and and this is and people are kept people are captivated by that discussion that's partly why they're watching my lectures so we have to sort that out because otherwise it'll just manifest itself in this ideological fractionalization demonization and increased polarization and and increased conspiratorial thinking this is another thing I've really become aware of so many people I know very intelligent people extremely capable people have fallen prey to conspiratorial thinking it's it's it's a real psychic plague and it's it's I believe it's caused by the same issue again it's it's this conceptual collapse of the sacred into the profane and it's a is it the collapse of the sacred into the profane or is it the collapse of the sacred and the profane expands to cover it it's the major challenge facing our civilization as far as I'm concerned it's it's much more crisis than the climate if we solve this other problem we'll solve that problem if we don't solve this other problem we'll just make we'll just make it worse way worse worse than ways we can hardly imagine so so if you don't have time to watch both if you can watch both they're both they're both fairly good but again it's it's clear where Peterson's at the so he wants to help individuals not a religious leader but this rank ordering of values again in some ways modernist okay we're gonna rank order this of these values how well where we're getting these values from so anyway it's it's anyway it's good to see him healthy it's good to see him rested well well I know that there's another video coming there's there more interviews coming it's we'll we'll see what comes down the pike thanks for watching leave a comment