https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lloH32gmfWQ

 I'm not going to do that. Here me about the home you grew up in. It's such a beautiful country. I start general and then I move in. So tell me about the home you grew up in. So I'm English. Living in Tbilisi, English. You didn't sound Georgian. So what I did so I've been following your channel for like maybe a year. I mean not like every video because that would be insane. Oh, I'm insulted. I'm going to end transmission. And I'm like, oh, I can have a chat with him. That's cool. So I clicked every maybe once a day I'd click on your calendar thing and then one day it's like, oh, it's cool. 3 a.m. in the morning. Yeah, yeah. Usually it's in the usually it's maybe 10 o'clock at night. So it's sorry about that. And it's I just I'm really excited. I'm like I was going through for the last few weeks I've been going through my childhood memories and I had great fun doing it. It's been wonderful just like remembering all this stuff so I could answer this question. What was the home you grew up in? I'm like this and this and this. Friday three days ago this kind of bomb dropped on my head. It's like what the hell am I doing talking to some crazy apostate who's like half a world away. I'm going to bear my soul to him. What the hell am I doing? How? I'm nuts. So yeah, I'm nuts. It's 3 a.m. and I really am. I don't know how I can trust but yeah, so I have gone through like lots and lots of childhood memories. Where should we start? Tell me about your parents. Well, a pre memory story that my parents told me and it comes up now and then it's like baptizing myself by accident. But you do jump in the back to history. Don't baptize yourself. Don't tell yourself that's the lesson but so I'm two or three years old and we're in southwest England in the west country. My parents have this cottage there and next door there's a farm and for some reason we're in the farm. I've got a brother who's two years older than me. Another brother who's two years older than him and I'm guessing he's at like kindergarten or something because he wasn't there in the story. and my parents go to the farm and maybe they're happily you know with price of eggs or something and my brother runs off somewhere. My middle brother and of course I follow him and he finds this circular war that he decides to walk on and of course I copy him and the walls containing silage. Do you know what that is? Yeah. Yeah. So, I copy him and of course I fall in. This is my baptism in silage. and uh uh uh my parents version of the story varies but I'm guessing my brother stopped shouting. They come running over and they see my parents just seeing like my lips above the waterline and so they start arguing over who's going to jump in and pull me out. So, that was my baptism in silage. Alright. My first actual memory. Uh again, maybe three years old, something like that. My parents had these two Irish wolfhounds. Uh the only thing you need to know about Irish Wolfhounds. They're very kind, friendly dogs but they're massive. Yeah, they're big dogs. Yeah. And uh at three years old, my head height was exactly the same height as their tail. So, they would swish their tail into my face and I actually got bruises from these dogs' tails, especially during feeding time. And uh at that time, my dad really really was my god. You know, I I worshiped him. He could do anything and so I said to dad, look, dad, can you stop these dogs swinging their tail in my face? And he he looked at me and he said, what can I do? I was devastated of the the injustice in the world and how god couldn't stop this injustice. So, that's my first memory. Wow. Uh this next one might be a very good one for EQL. I've I've heard a lot in my life. It's gonna have to be a biggie. But it's all just fun childhood memories for me. It's it's very light. So, I'm five or six years old. And I used to wake up almost with a gasp and I'm wondering how these two people's opinions are. I'm curious to people's opinions. Um I'm slightly tipsy as well so forgive me. It's 3 AM and I've got some company so cheers. Um I used to wake up with a gasp. I'm alive. I'm alive. I'm alive. Every morning, I'd wake up with this. When when I I've lost it now but when I was a little boy, I I had this. Huh? And the only way I could express it was by singing. So, every morning, I'd wake up and just start singing. Wow. Look out the window and I'd see the fields cuz we're in this little country. It's about a mile off the southern coast of England and I just don't sing and every morning, my mom told me to shut up. What what did you sing? I have no idea. I don't remember. Just my dad's my dad's a musician. Uh what did you do in the village as a boy? Uh not in the way you'd be. Okay, so so between the age of of like zero and three, we were living in this cottage next to this farm in the middle of nowhere. Uh the age of three which is where my memory starts forming. Uh we moved to this other village in the south from the south coast of Devons. So, very still very rural England. Um there's an 11th century church there. Uh seems there's a lot of 11th century churches in England and I think it's cuz William McConkara had this kind of church building thing. He built Ailey Cathedral around that time. Stuff. So, and we used to spend a lot of time in the church. So, that's what I mean by yes but not quite what you mean. Sorry. But when I was eight, they sent me to a church of England school not because my parents were particularly religious but because uh my middle brother was having a bit of a tough time in school. He was going to. So, me and him were both sent to the C of E school. So, I was about eight years old. So, do you wanna hear the memories of an eight year old first going to a church service? I'd love to. So, we this church of England school, we'd walk down to the church. I think it was twice a week but it may have been once a week. And we'd have the church service and the first time I went to the church, I'm like, what are we doing? Whatever. Okay, I'll just follow along. So, I get there and English church is beautiful. And I I I still have this great love of English churches that especially like the village ones and stuff that and and they have the smell and you know, it's all stone and they're just amazing. So, again, we go into this building and we kind of sat down in these really long chairs which I now know are called pews and they've got these like cushions pinned on the chair in front and I'm looking at these cushions thinking what should I put them on the mum or something and then suddenly almost like one movement, all the other children pulled off these cushions and sat down on them and did this. What? Oh, they're praying. I better copy them. Sorry, my glasses are broke so it's going a bit skewy. It does that. I'll be buying a new place soon enough. So, of course I copied them and I moved down and I'm like, What's a prayer? Um and I have no idea so I'm just like I'm just like, you know, peeking out the corner and watching what everyone else is doing and and then they all start standing up so we can stand up as well and put the cushion back and and then this man comes out in this funny cream colored robe and there's like four or five children with him and they do some fun stuff with candles and I have no idea what they were speaking or doing. I can't remember any of that. Um but I'm thinking who are these children that are with this guy? All the children are in robes. He was in a robe. I'm like, that looks cool. What? Uh yeah. So, that was my first church service. Made no sense whatsoever. Um so, yeah. So, you go to that church for how long? You go to that school for how long? The C of E school? Uh between about eight years old and ten eleven. And then you go to a different school after that? So, then I go to what we used to call in England, big school. So, this is like primary school and then we go to secondary school as it was called at the time. I'm sure they've changed the name, isn't it? Um but then this big event happens in my life. Um so, I'm living in this coastal village and I spend a lot of time kind of getting in trouble and running across the fields and going swimming in the sea and just idyllic childhood. And then my parents decide to move to you have this random conversation with Elizabeth. Oldfield. Old Field. Old Field. She talks about this. What's it called? Home counties. So, like these counties around London. Yeah. Yeah. She was in South London. I was in north. Okay. Not South London but south of London. I was north of London. Uh my parents moved there. That's where my grandparents live. And so, I go from this idyllic rural town to the home counties. And she she described it as not particularly pleasant but I don't think she quite did it that justice deserves it. It was so bad. It was I think in the 1960s they did this like graying of the home counties. Everything that was there. Never ending story. Years ago. Years and years ago. I barely remember it. But in the film, there's this kind of nothing that's eating up the world. That's the home counties. There's like there's nothing that's just eating it. So, I go from go from this idealistic rural setting to this gray nothingness. But also I go to so I'm eleven years old so I go to this new school and I've been wearing hand-me-downs from my two brothers for my entire life and there was no problem with that. It was just normal and then so we go to this new school and I'm giving secondhand clothing and they're making fun of me and calling me Jippo which is a kind of derogatory term for gypsy and they're making fun of me because I don't have like Nike or Adidas written on my shoes which was completely novel concept to me and I'm just like what country am I in? What is all this stuff? That was a huge shock. And I it was a turning point. I went the other in the other direction. And not immediately I mean I lost my accent because I had like this West Country accent which is generally considered unentitled you know the English have that accent thing. We've talked about this a bit but West Country accent at the time was you're just stupid. If you have a West Country accent you are stupid and there's a few other accents that have this thing. So I lost my accent like that. Couldn't lose my secondhand clothes until I got to the age of thirteen and I went to a paper round and go caddying and then two paper rounds and caddying and then three paper rounds and working in a supermarket so I got to buy all my own clothes and then people stopped making fun of me but I kind of switched off from the whole school thing and everyone and I didn't go to school so much at this point you know. So yeah. And I, if you're listening to Jonathan Peugeot talk about the centre and the margin because the reason I told myself I moved to Georgia is because I like folk music but when Peugeot started talking about the centre and the margin I was thinking I'm just way more comfortable in the margin. I don't know maybe I need to talk someone about that but I suspect it's true. Well it doesn't sound strange given your story. Yeah. Sorry. No it doesn't sound strange. I mean what you just described. I mean part of the question is it's not just the answer to the question it's the selection of what people find significant in terms of their stories. It's the elements that they weave together and this move to a northern suburb of London and the way you described it was really beautiful. You know something that's eating the world. I mean talk about urban monoculture and then the way you were treated and you lose your accent and now suddenly you have to work in order to get rid of other stigmas and yeah no and then moving to Georgia because you like the fringe. Well Georgia's pretty fringe. No I don't want to. I'm with you there. Nothing against Georgia. Georgia's the centre for Georgians but for the English it's pretty fringe. I can't see why my camera is kind of out of view on the screen. Can you see me? Oh yeah I see you. I see you if I pull you up. Oh okay so do that a bit. Yeah that's better. Otherwise Grimm Grizz will have something to say. Well we can't be having that can we? No no. So okay so then after. Oh my accent's a bit weird as well so one of the things about. I can't tell. I don't speak the language I learned that when I went to England. I don't speak the language it's clear. It's clear watching you English people talk to each other it's like I am not in that system. I don't know what you guys are doing. I am not in that system so. So then so then you know you you you get you get working and you go to university. I couldn't possibly go to university that's where intelligent people go. So what did you do? So I leave school at sixteen which was normal for my generation in England. Everyone leaves school at sixteen unless you stay on because you want to go to university but I can possibly do that because well I didn't even know what university was. It was kind of a mythical place to me. I was in a school. It was a place to me. But we did this thing at school the the career guidance counselor whatever they were called. Okay before that we did this like work week where you like go and join your dad or something and work there for a week and then come back to school. I don't know if people still do that. Career guidance counselor said it's an electronics company and they're looking for people so why don't you go along to that? So I had nothing better to do and well okay so I went to that. Based on that week of working there as a fifteen year old not working but being trained basically they took me on as an apprentice for your apprenticeship. And again I had a four year experience. So I did a four year electronics technician apprenticeship and just kind of forgot to quit. Because I was never into it. But I had this job so I just kept doing it and you know over like three years I kind of figured it out. So that's how I became an engineer basically just by accident. Okay. Okay. Became an engineer by accident not through university. Became basically a practical engineer. Oh so I did the apprenticeship thing and how they did it. They had one year in training center and then three years in the department. So it was a big defense company. And you spend the next two years kind of moving between different departments. And then you kind of settled on a department in your fourth year and kind of stay there. So and they had graduate training programs and a lot of graduate engineers. And you know more seniority stuff. But a lot of the graduate engineers telling me that I should go to university. And I'm thinking why can't I go to university. That's where intelligent people go. What are you talking about. But it kind of it put the seed in my head. And so I was like 22, 24 or something. Let's go with 22 for now. And I'm kind of looking at things. I've got some friends who have actually gone off to university and they've done like music or whatever they study. Mostly arts. And it seemed to me that they basically did nothing for three years. We've got this little certificate saying how wonderful they are. And I had other friends who were unemployed and basically doing nothing. Apart from getting a good suntan and telling up the ladies. And there's me and I'm working and thinking what the hell am I doing. So I thought okay I'll quit my job. I'll go to university. Do nothing for three years and get a piece of paper to tell everyone how clever I am and get a good suntan and carry on working afterwards. So that's what I did. Makes sense. Makes perfect sense. It made sense at the time. Did it work out? I'm not very good at academic stuff. So there's a story there that I can't tell on air. Assuming this will be on air. I can tell it to you if you pause but it's a long story. We only have another half hour so it's your time. I'm willing to pause to hear it. You got me intrigued. Pause for a minute and I'll give you the very cut down version. So yeah my 20s was this kind of slow almost imperceptible spiral downwards. I mean not terribly so. I've always liked drinking and I still drink and it's great fun. I got into cocaine in my late 20s. That's the stupidest drug man has ever invented ever. And here's why. It makes you imagine you're the most interesting person in the room when you're not. So yeah I had a brief flirt with that idiotic drug. The year before I got into cocaine I was in the bathroom and I was like, I'm going to go to the bathroom. And the usefulness it had is it made me realize that my life was going in the wrong direction. And it was a very slow wrong direction but it's like, no. I need to turn the ship around because this isn't good. So I did. Slowly. It's a very slow ship's turn. I'm not very bright. Everything takes time for me. Well there's thinking fast and slow and I don't think you get points for speed only in certain areas. As long as you make progress it's a good thing. A lot of people think they don't go anywhere. I definitely turned the ship around. The first thing I did was like, okay my life is a bit of a mess. Let's get out of debt. That was the first thing. That was the easiest thing. I'm getting paid but my wages are already spent before I get them. So let's fix that one first. That's a problem. Yeah. I'm a single guy so let's fix that one first. And then I came across Gurdjieff's ideas. I don't know how familiar you are. A little bit. How familiar are you? Your turn to talk. Not very familiar. I've heard some summaries of Goethe but the colors and very interesting German romanticism but beyond that I wouldn't consider myself in any way well versed in him. He... Very interesting guy. Very interesting guy. How do I say this? I hear when I hear Jordan Peterson there's a lot he says that's similar to what Goethe says. Very seldom do you hear anybody connect Peterson with Goethe. Sorry, say again? Very seldom do you hear anybody connect Peterson with Goethe. Nobody talks about Goethe. Yeah, not a lot of people do. No, it's like you're not allowed to talk about Goethe. Have you heard of Sadguru? No. He's an Indian guy. He's got a huge following. He calls Sadguru... He calls Goethe the rascal saint. I thought it was curious. There's definitely the rascal element to Goethe. You can't trust what he's saying because he's got this trickster thing going on. He said this but what did he mean? You can't just put my face in Goethe and everything will be fine. It's like everything will be an absolute disaster if you do that. Yeah. You're telling me you're not very smart and then you're telling me that you really took a dive into Goethe. That doesn't sound like not very smart to me. Goethe, not Goethe. I don't know much about Goethe. Who is it then? Goethe. Oh, I don't know that at all. Oh, okay. I can't explain it in 20 minutes or whatever we have left. He's a rascal saint. Huh. I don't know anything about it. Well, how did you find it and why did it grab you? So I was living in London and I had this friend crashing on my couch in Australia and she would often go to this pub near us and I looked into it and just god that looked awful. I'm not going in there. But she had this call from back home in Australia saying her brother had disappeared and she was really worried. So she flew home the next day to kind of help out with whatever the problem was. And she asked me, oh, can you go into this pub that I looked into and thought was horrible and just find this guy Terry and just apologize to him and say she's gone back home to Australia. So I'm like, okay, fine. So I walked into this pub and I asked the barman, oh, gee, you know a guy called Terry? And Terry happened to be sitting next to me. So I explained the situation about this girl and Terry said, oh, thank you. Can I buy you a drink? Yeah. So we ended up chatting like most of the night and he was a really interesting guy. And he said, oh, you've got to buy this book by Ospensky called In Search of the Miraculous. And I'm like, yeah, I will. And then he badgered me again a month later and a couple months later he badgered me again and my office got there. I was going to buy this damn book and read it. And so I did. And it blew my head off. And it's, I'd imagine if I'd have come across Jordan Peterson when I was in my 20s and I realized I was making a bit of a mess of my life, then that would have been like an enormous help. And, you know, I'm 50 now and I've kind of gone through this putting my life together journey, which Jordan's obviously trying to help a lot of young people do. And, you know, I kind of see it as a very similar journey that I was on. But Ospensky and Gojjeff, because Jordan wasn't around then, so it was Ospensky and Gojjeff for me. Ospensky was a pupil of Gojjeff. He was a mathematician who wrote this book, In Search of the Miraculous. So it's an interesting read if you're interested. I'm looking at the Amazon here, so I'm just trying to follow you and get names here. Interesting. You said so many times, I've got so many books on my list to read. It's just not happening. I'm writing a book myself, actually. Oh, you're really? Yeah, but I don't expect you to read it. What's it about? Everything. That's a lot. Everything's a lot. Uh-huh. Oh, In Search of the Miraculous, the most valuable and reliable documentary of G.I. Gojjeff's thought and universal view of the historic influential work is considered by many to be a primer of mystical thought. Okay, so how on earth are we talking here? You got your, I mean, I got to get this conversation moving because you got yourself to Georgia somehow, and then you talked to me, so there's a few more steps in there that we haven't talked about. Yeah, uh, so before I came across Gojjeff, I was very closed off to Christianity. He kind of opened it up for me. Gojjeff isn't a religion, it's just ideas. He's not like, I mean, yes, I think he would hate being called that himself. He died in 1949, so who knows. Um, so it's not a religion, it's not this, it's not that, it's just different ideas, and, you know, me being on the march in different ideas, that worked. But he did open up Christianity to me, which I was closed off to. Interesting. So. So he did a Jordan Peterson to you. Yeah, I mean, it's a very close parallel. You know, I look at the young people who are being, not mesmerized by Peterson, but, you know, interested and encouraged, and I see my journey in this. So, you know, I'm a big fan of Jordan Peterson. Even though I'm probably not learning as much as the young ends. God, am I open enough to say that? Yeah, 50 year old enough to say that. You're definitely on the old side of this little corner if you're 50. But there's plenty, there's plenty your age and older, too. There's still plenty. Yeah, it's okay. That's fine. How did you move to Georgia? You said you moved for folk music. Well, yeah, that's what I thought. That's becoming a pattern with people I know move to Georgia. Say again? That's a pattern of I know two people who moved to Georgia and they both sort of went there for something and found out that what they went there for didn't happen, but they're still there, so that's an interesting pattern. It wasn't just, I mean, the folk music and the church music are kind of intricately connected. They're very similar. They're all three-part harmony and there's this kind of inbuilt trinity in it. And the church music is some more soberly than folk music, but they're kind of the same. That makes perfect sense. But it's not the folk music that grabbed me. It's how they sing it that blew my head off. Huh. I think that's a good point. Because for example, how the men sing it is very manly and how the women sing it is very feminine but also very strong. It's not like weak feminists. I've seen Georgian folk music. I've heard it on YouTube. I haven't seen it personally. Bern plays it when he's trying to raise money to get his library from Alaska to Georgia, which sounds like it failed. Come to my kitchen and hear it live. There's nothing quite like hearing it live. The recordings don't work. But yes, so I was in this Gurdjieff group in London when I was talking to one of the, not leaders, but kind of organizers who had this choir that he would do once a week. I was telling him that I wanted to develop my voice but I didn't know how. He said, oh, this is a Georgian man. I lived in Cambridge, England at the time. He said, this is a Georgian man from Cambridge. Why don't you go to that and see what you think? I heard him singing. I was just like, that's what I want. That's what I want to learn. Whatever the hell that is, that's it. So I got really into Georgian singing. Then I came to Georgia and I just fell in love with the place. So I quickly got on to my wife and how I married her. It was a more crazy story. Because we were running out of time. So I got to know a lot of Georgian singers in Georgia and got very good friends with them. That was my thing. One of them told me about this girl that she thought I would get on well with. I'm just like, not interested. At the same time, a friend of mine in England, we call each other brothers, he was also a Georgian thing. We both kind of not quit. But we don't go along to the group. He told me of this girl that he thought I would like. It happened to be the same girl. So he took me on Facebook and he showed me pictures of her. There's this one picture of her. She's in army uniform. She's holding these massive guns. I'm just like, no. Not interested. As it turns out, she actually hates guns. She was just doing a silly photo thing with some friends who happened to have guns. So next time I'm in Georgia, I'm with this singer and I'm staying with her and she says, she starts talking about this mystic friend of hers. Like a Christian mystic. I'm like, mystic? I don't know what that is, but I'm really interested. So I'm like, yeah, I want to meet him. She says, oh, I can't come with you. So a friend of mine is going to come along and translate the same girl who speaks English. Her mother is an English teacher. So I go and see this mystic. Just comes across as a very, very ordinary guy. Nothing mystic, nothing mysterious. Just normal. And this girl appears, a woman. And how do I say this? We get along well. But this is from my eyes and she is helping translate. And I had this thing, I had to arrange to meet up with her. There's something in me. I have to. So at some point I get her on her own and say, can we go out on our own together somewhere? And she's like, yeah. I'm like, oh, that was easy. You know how it is as men and nerves and talking up to courage. Okay. So we meet up and then we meet up again. Then we meet up again. And then I go home to England and we're texting each other and stuff. And then after about a month I come back to Georgia. And I realized that I was going to grow old and die with her. And so I propose. And she says yes. I went, huh, that was easy. And so now from her eyes, I'm with this mystic, just an ordinary guy as far as I can tell. I mean, he's really well versed in the Bible of Christianity. He knows a lot of stuff. And he's a very, very interesting man. She walks into his house, walks around and sees me and a voice in her head says, that's your husband. Wow. Yeah. And she's like, get out of my head, you stupid voice. What? Stop it. And I'm like, I'm going to go to the bathroom. This is even weirder. Everything I say to her, she already knows it's going to happen. Wow. So when I say to her, oh, can we meet up on our own? She already knew I was going to say that. Wow. She just says yes. And here's me thinking, wow, that was easy. It's like, weirdest thing, but we've married 12 years now and it just seems like a day. Oh, that's wonderful. That's a beautiful story. Beautiful, beautiful children. And it's not just me saying this. Everyone who comes into the house, especially my daughter, they just melt hearts. It's just like crazy beautiful. Wow. That's a wonderful story. I've had such a blessed life. It's ridiculous. That's wonderful. That's absolutely wonderful. So yeah, that's why I'm living in Georgia. So it's not the dream came true. It's what I couldn't even imagine came true. Yeah, yeah. That's wonderful. So how did you find my videos and why do you watch them? So way back when I had this, I forget what the question was, but I had some Bible questions. I've always been Bible curious, shall we call it. And I did a search and this Canadian professor of psychology popped up in the video about a lecture on Genesis. What? That's the weirdest thing I've ever seen. I kind of bookmarked it and I'm like that's so weird. I'm going to watch it. And a couple of months later, I watched it. I cooked some still meat and I'm like this is really good. So I watched the whole thing and then I'm like clicking on this channel and I'm like all these psychological lectures, I'm going to watch them as well. And so then the algo starts popping up, Jonathan Paget. So I start watching him and I'm like this is awesome. And this, I've got these weird marginal opinions, what would be the word, ideas. And John Peterson, you know, there's like this Venn diagram, there's a big overlap, there's all this stuff that John Peterson knows that I don't. That's all really interesting and the overlap. And the same with Jonathan, big overlap, all these ideas that he has, especially this center and margin stuff which blew my head off. That was awesome. And then your channel started popping up on the algo and I'm like what's this? And something very relaxing about listening to you. Yeah. That's how I find it. It's like, I don't know, I just put it down a little bit. John, Paul, you're not making Paul Van der Geer. Can I ask? Yeah. Does your name mean Paul of the Earth? Yeah. I think you're very well named. Well, thank you. I mean that is a big compliment. Thank you. No, that's exactly what it means. It means the Jews in the Netherlands had to think up a name and so they just read the book of Genesis and said this is us. And it's gotten passed down all the way to me. You're well named. Thank you. Bless you. I'm thankful. That's a very wonderful compliment you've given me. Not just the name thing but my videos. You find my videos relaxing. That's good. I'm glad because there's a lot of stress in this world and if I can bring a little bit of peace that's a good thing. I think you do and I think it's not just me. Yeah. Others have said similar things. I'm not church. I said in the comments I'm very religious but I'm not church. I don't think that makes any sense to anyone but it makes plenty of sense to me. Yeah. I don't think it makes any sense to you know Orthodox or all these denominations. I don't know if she's a shit atom. Yeah. But it does sound like you've had a very blessed life. It seems that way. That's a good thing. Is that how I receive it or have I just been lucky? I mean I've definitely been lucky. There are some mysteries. Yeah. There are. But you know even the way you landed in Georgia and the way you landed married and you have children, some people just get blessed with things and the best posture after that is just gratitude. You know. That's a good thing. Definitely have that. Thank you God. Yeah. Enough. Now almost four in the morning for you. I'm sorry about the time thing. It was just kind of the way this thing worked out but here we are. Hope your children can sleep through your voice. Apparently so. I had all these because I was like going through all my memories. I want to share this and I want to share this. Yeah. It's like three in the morning and I'm like. It was just fine. You're just going to get real essential me and one of these preplanned things. That's good. That's good. You're getting too honesty. No, that's good. Very early on I had a talk with a lovely young woman from Australia and it was like in the middle of the night too and it was just, poor soul was just really tired and we never published it because it's just like I can't let that go out there. I was half asleep but this was lovely. You did very, very well. You did very, very well. You have a lovely story and it's well told and I think people, just the way you ended up with the story of your wife and I think people will be encouraged to hear that because there's sort of the nihilism that's in the world right now. A lot of people are, a lot of people don't imagine that there's anyone or anything at the helm and so your story will suggest to people maybe chaos isn't all that there is so it's a good thing. I need to think about what you just said. Well, that's why we have a recorder. I need to think about what I said. Well, I will send you the recording and after you get a good night's sleep you can watch it and if you say delete that thing, I'm not going to say these things to the world but I will... I'm not going to judge that. I'm going to give it to my wife to say delete it. There you go. There you go. She's a better judge than me. Yes. Sounds like she is. I'm actually surprised because I'm, you know Jordan is very good at singing and I've been listening to Weeping. Yeah. So am I. Okay. And I really thought I would leave at some point in this conversation. That's all right. I thought I would sing a little more but I'm trying to be at least a bit quiet. Maybe it will happen again. Maybe I'll get to Georgia. I mean, five years ago I did not expect I would be talking to someone with your story but yet I'm not sure. I don't know. I'm not sure. I don't know if I'm going to be able to do this. Who knows. But I trust him. He's a good God. Yeah. I never had this Christ moment. This come to Jesus thing. I never... Okay. Quick story. Do we have time? We have two minutes. Okay. So I had this rather intense interview. And afterwards I went for a walk and it was in London. It was raining. Not like heavy rain. Just like drizzling. And they have these kind of funny fenced off gardens in this courtyard with houses all around. And I wandered into, not in the garden but into this kind of square. And I wouldn't call it a vision but I suddenly noticed... This is going to sound so stupid. But it was very real for me. It was like love. And it was in every single raindrop. And it was like the rain slowed down. And I could see this 11 raindrops. And then I looked at this fence and I could see the lemon fence. And there was water flowing into the gutter. And I could see water. It was love coming from the water. And there was litter in the gutter. And there was love coming from the litter. And from the houses. And from everything. There was just love is all around. And it lasted a couple of seconds. But it... Because everything slowed down it felt like forever. And... Maybe 20 years ago this was. Again, seems like yesterday. So I've never had the kind of Jesus moment. But to me that was proof of God. So I have this definite... I don't believe in God. I have witnessed... I can't say this. I have witnessed the works of God's hands. And for me there is no doubt. So I don't believe in God. I know God is. It's not belief. Yeah. I get that. That's a beautiful story. Maybe that's the right time to end it. That's a nice way to land a plane. Nice way. So, Mark. I hope I didn't talk too much. No. I talk plenty on YouTube. It's nice to listen. So, God bless you. And thanks for your stories. God bless you too. And I will send you the copy. Okay. I'll show it to my wife and see what she says. All right. Get some sleep. All right. Bye-bye. What time is it? It's 4 o'clock in the afternoon. 12 hours. Exactly. 12 hours exactly. That's what it is with Georgia. Okay. This time of year. All right. Okay. Take care. All right. Bye-bye. Very nice chatting. Cheers. Cheers.