https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=F1jZJtwb9TU

 if you don't record it, whatever we do with it, if you don't record it, you never have it. So I really saw that, so churches have the Bible, and obviously for the last couple of hundred years, or really for even longer than that, you're always trying to figure out, well, how does the Bible relate to the rest of the world? And so people on Sunday will go to church and you'll read from a text that basically imagine sort of a flat earth on pillars with a firmament and a temple, and Jesus ascends, and so you've got this entire cosmos that's framed within a story, but then when people go out of church, we're living on a globe, we're going around the sun, and how do people manage that transition, and how does that transition work in people's lives? And can we take stories in the Bible seriously, like Jesus' ascension, and what does that mean? And I was just talking to someone this morning who was talking about the resurrection and the ascension, and just how do you figure those things out? And I'd read quite a bit of C.S. Lewis on that, and I noticed with Jordan Peterson, his take on the Bible was getting a lot of people interested in the Bible in a whole new way, and I thought that was important. So I started listening to him just like a whole bunch of other people did, rather obsessively, and just heard a lot of new ideas from him about the Bible and the book of Genesis, and thought, this is really interesting, but who can I talk to about it? Because a lot of pastors have day jobs, they're busy with things, and so I'd blogged forever just as a way to write and share with a few people some things, and so I saw these people interested in Jordan Peterson, and I thought, who are they gonna have a chance to talk to? So I made a video, and I expected maybe 100 or 200 people to watch it, and that would be cool, but a lot more people watched it than that. And then people started, you know, Guy shows up in church next week and brings me this, and says, I've never been to church in my life, but here I am, I was like, oh boy, and he still comes to church. That's the stuff. And others just started writing me, asking me questions, and wanting to talk to me, and it's like, well, maybe I'll keep doing this. So I made some commentary videos on Jordan Peterson, and then people wanted to talk to me, and so I just have Skype conversations with people, but then like this, it's like, well, sometimes they would ask me questions about what we talked about before, and it's like, well, if we had recorded it, you could have just gone back and looked at it. So started recording them, and then I get repetitive conversations, and it's like, I wish I could point you to the conversation I had with the other guy. So I thought, well, what if I post some of the conversations with permission on my YouTube channel, and then people start seeing the conversations I'm having, and like, oh, I wanna get on the YouTube channel and talking, and the whole thing just kept going. And so then we got a meetup group going, and then other people are like, oh, we don't have meetups in my own city, so I help people find their own meetups, and start meetups, and so the whole thing is just run amok, and. That's what you want. You want it going out of control. That's what you want. Scale it up. It just gets bigger like a spider getting bigger. That's great. No, good job, like good job. I meant to ask because something, like there's something incredibly deep and interesting that came up out of that, and that was that question of how has it been growing up in a pastoral family, pastoral is probably the wrong word, a pastor family in the globe world. You know, like how's that been going? And maybe the way I'm trying to frame and ask this is, like what type of psychological, emotional response was there? Like did you ever feel your identity was not correct for the world, like you were an outsider? Like do you feel kind of like, because I'm kind of hypothesizing this, that the world has moved on, and they're trying to like leave you behind, and they don't see any value or something like that. There's this sort of like isolating feeling to it at all. A lot of people grew up in places, in churches that sort of dismissed evolution or science. That was not my family. It was more that, well, okay, evolution, yeah, probably. But they didn't really look at details or tried to put it together. They just didn't make a big deal out of it. And so I didn't make a big deal out of it. You know, you grow up and you just sort of grow up in what you grow up in, and it's just normal to you. And so those kinds of issues, I never felt a lot of dissonance with it. Okay, okay, okay. But then when I talked to other people who had had a tremendous amount of dissonance, those on one side that say, well, evolution is just crap, and others that say, no, evolution is real, so the Bible is crap. And it's like, I'm not so sure it's all that zero sum because our ideas about evolution keep changing. People have read the Bible differently for thousands of years. If you read, you know, I've got this whole commentary series, it's just all ancient sermons and comments on the Bible. And if you were reading the same text and they're coming out of it with some interesting different ideas. So at minimum, we ought to be able to talk about this stuff and have a little bit of humility about how strange the world is and how little we know. And that's not a bad place to start, I thought. So I also grew up in a weird bubble because my father was, you know, basically started a church amongst mostly black folks in just outside of New York City and in inner city Patterson. And so, and then because we're Dutch Reformed, we also had a Christian school, which was full of other Dutch Reformed kids. And so I had this weird upbringing. I didn't think it was weird. Didn't everybody grow up like one of the few white kids amongst a bunch of black kids and then to some weird Dutch Reformed school and you just grow up, it's just how you do it. And later on in life, you look back and say, wow, that was unusual. But then again, what is normal in this world? Now there is a good question. Jamie, anything you wanna add by the way? Yeah, yeah, I did have a question to ask you, sir. So you've obviously got a faith in say Christ in the biblical stories because that's like your background. So where does the Jordan Peterson ideas and the more Jungian ideas, if you like slot into you? So is it more of a Jordan Peterson helps strengthen your faith? Is it Jordan Peterson can be used almost like a tool to reframe Christianity for your flock, your congregation, whatever it is, or is it more I'm just interested in the mysteries about the world? So how does that tie in with faith necessarily in terms of like first principles, if you like? Well, I think faith is, I think faith begins basically as a naive story about the world. And when I say naive, I don't mean stupid or dim. I mean, it's just, everybody has to start with something. So, I had never paid any attention to Jung. I had never read any Jung and then Jordan Peterson comes along and part of what he got from Jung that I could tell, which I found really helpful was the fact that, well, so I listened to Peterson, didn't know anything about Jung. So I picked up, I usually like to start with a biography because usually it's helpful to understand people in the context of their stories. So then there's this weird sort of autobiography thing about Jung and this, a lot of parts of the book really gripped me, but one of the things that made a lot of sense to me was him as a young doctor starts working in a psych ward, at the beginning of the 20th century and the other doctors say, yeah, don't talk to the inmates because they're all crazy. And he's like, well, yeah, but that's kind of our job, isn't it? So he didn't listen to his supervisor. He starts listening to the other inmates and because he was a well-educated man and he himself was the son of a reformed pastor, he starts noticing that they lived within these stories and these stories connected up with the religious stories. And he began to notice that by actually engaging and working within these stories, he could actually help these people to one way or another navigate their world better. And that insight combined with another insight that I had a number of years ago, which is that in a materialistic context, we imagine ourselves as bodies, animals that are having certain experience, but these experiences are delusional. And in some ways that's sort of the Sam Harris perspective on the world that we've got these abnormally large brains that cause all kinds of difficulty in seeing the world clearly. And so we have all these fantasies like agency and all of this stuff. What Peterson and Jung really helped me see was that these stories, we are more stories than we are sort of meat sacks walking around. That this meat sack changes and decays and ages and all of that stuff. But the thing that I really identify as me is much more this autobiography. And this thing is not material. And this story is embedded in all of these other stories. And in many ways, that is more me than this body. Now, what are the implications of this for us? And Peterson was dead on right. That's how we live. We live this way. And that's the only sense that suicide makes. Because if Sam Harris's story about us was right, then people living in glorious wealthy homes that have enough money to resolve all of their problems would live just enormously happy lives. But I know plenty of people with lots of money and they have the same difficulties as everyone else. When I was researching a sermon on suicide once, I noted some of the highest suicide rates were in San Jose High School in Silicon Valley. And it's like, these people have the life that everyone else would imagine they want. Why would they kill themselves? And that's because the story that I am nested in the stories around me are in many ways, I act as if those things are more real than just the biological welfare of my body. And I have to look at you. That's absolutely true. Like the clip you shared of us, fundamentally was saying that, and you can think about this in such a basic, obvious way. You get a cut, like you're walking through a bush and a thorn catches you. And what happens is the signal goes up to your brain and it says, something's gone wrong. And all you get is that. And what happens is your brain starts to ask itself, why has something gone wrong? What is happening there? It starts to appeal for a reason. So there's suffering happening and it's appealing for a reason. And therefore, then it looks down and says, it is a thorn. And then you're like, oh, right, it's a thorn, good. There's your story. And what the story implies is a moral, pull the fucking thorn out. It's that simple. And when you just start scaling that being like, the fundamental experience of life is to feel, basically to suffer, as bleak as that sounds, that everything we do, our whole lived experience has been a set of stories to explain why we burst into this scene with no expectation, only woke up when you're around about five and have been getting punched and told what to do ever since. Like you've married yourself, paper mache'd a load of stories over yourself. And I guess you wake up at some point, and we're sort of doing that culturally now where we're starting to criticize the stories. But then we did it so good that we destroyed them all. And now we're sort of going into that place where we're sort of like, maybe we kind of need something back in place of some sort, because when you take them all away, even if you have everything, you have no story, you have no reason for why you suffer. And the suffering just echo chambers gets louder and louder and you can be in a palace and it's just bigger than a house. And so it echoes louder. And then eventually you're like, all right, I'm out of here. This is, I need this to stop. And that's so fascinating because it's almost like, it's almost like the stories are pulling us somewhere to some extent. Maybe I'm making a massive leap there, but it's like whatever story gets grip, whatever story gets grip of us, has, is usually quite shared. And for that reason, it usually has a massive amount of historical power to like pull people in certain places. And maybe that's something we can talk about in a little bit, but- Well, and your observations about pain, so I was just this morning, a woman who lives in the city, saw my YouTube, called me had, and she's got a roof over her head. Nobody's sticking a knife in her, but she's in pain. Why do we even call that pain? It's not like the thorn in, I stepped on a thorn or I stepped on a nail, that's pain. Now, and then you ask questions, well, what is a human being? Well, a human being is this marriage of heaven and earth. If you think about heaven as this world that doesn't decay, the story that doesn't decay, and then my body and everything going on around me. And so it's- And it is really strange because like, we think about the way healers in the past would have worked where someone has a demon. And so like, maybe you could think of like, maybe in the past, someone is in pain. Like we all, we're all in pain. That woman, her pain is weird because nothing's hurting her, but she's sad about the fact that she's alive and there's no point or something like that. Like the way our heads get locked in those places, the fact that she's not as famous as she wishes she were, the fact that she doesn't feel the profound love she felt at one time during her 20s or something like that. And she's kind of suffering. She's like, I don't understand what's happening to me. I don't understand why it's happening to me. And she needs an answer to that. And it's, as I was saying, it gets louder and it gets louder and we're stuck in our bodies and we're looking for a bodily solution to where we're looking for some type of catharsis. But then someone can come in and notice this in someone that there's this anxiety. There's this monster inside of us. Cause if it goes into an echo chamber for long enough, people start to act weird. And it's almost like they're possessed. Like maybe Young was walking in and these people were like possessed. They had some type of narrative to explain what was going on. And a healer like Christ walks in and says, like shoots a story at you. And then that fixes it somehow. Like, no, there could be more to this where they have like emotional power to shoot these stories coming from something divine. But nonetheless, you can see how he would go into a priest and he would do something emotional and narrative where he'd be like confess your sins. And you confess your sins and you get rid of the demon of guilt. And then you stop feeling pain. And it's not like anything's fucking changed. It's just that you've decided, all right, now that he's listened to me, it's okay. Because he's the representative of God. And these things become very, very complicated and interesting when you take them away and watch the zoo animals run around and whine even louder. So it's a strange thing. Well, Jimmy, any thoughts, man? Yeah, go ahead. Yeah, I was gonna, could be thinking a lot recently about which story to tell actually. Because if we say, I agree with you as well. I'm gonna get tea. I'll go and get tea and we'll talk about this. Yeah, go for it, go for it. Because you can take say the biblical stories as stories. There's like a healthcare system, if you like, which keeps everybody healthy. But other cultures have had similar things. And Christianity tends to, and perhaps this is necessary for a society as well outside of a healthcare system, like political stability. You get dogmas and things out of it too. So where's that overlap between the different stories and which one's appropriate at which different time and how to unify them in somebody's head? Because we've had loads of, and myself, we've had loads of boyos who've come along from Jordan Peterson and they've gone, I'm gonna become Christian now. So it's like we turn towards that. But even then it becomes a case of, are these just stories? And it's like, as if there's still something missing underneath it, which is something like the resurrection of Christ to make it so that this is the canonical story. I'm thinking you can make a genetic case perhaps that we've inherited the stories by our collective unconscious. Therefore, they're the canonical stories. But apart from that, it's like, well, which one do we pick? It's like, is Cain enable the healing story or is it Christ literally rose from the dead? I wonder if you had any thoughts on that. Well, I think it's tempting. Once we imagine, or once we realize that, in fact, we are stories and we live nested within stories, then suddenly the thought comes, well, maybe the stories are arbitrary. But I think, again, Jordan Peterson is very helpful in noting that the stories are not arbitrary. So part of what I get from Vervecky, I really think his meaning crisis language and a lot of the background material he's done has been tremendously helpful. This, we've been wrestling with these questions, obviously, for a very long time. At the beginning of the 20th century, a bunch of World War I vets, C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, Owen Barfield, Hugo Dyson. These inklings, they, after the tragedy of the First World War on so many levels, they had to try and put their world together. And what they did was write stories. That's why Tolkien wrote what he wrote and Lewis did too. Now, what Dyson and Tolkien finally impressed upon Lewis is that the Christian story is the myth, because we all need these myths, it's the myth come true. And this is where the resurrection of Jesus, now I've been looking at Peterson for a couple of years, almost three years now. And Peterson's answer about the resurrection, which I probably didn't fully appreciate when he first gave it, the longer I live with it, that's really how you can tell somebody who's probably doing pretty well, is the longer you live with them, the more you see, you grow an appreciation for some of what they've done. So the question that, the thing that Peterson keeps saying about the resurrection is, what if someone actually fully realizes the truth about the world? Because, so once you realize that everything is story, the big temptation then is sort of this gnostic idea, which that now materiality doesn't matter. And no materiality in fact does matter greatly. And so what the resurrection and the Christian claims of the resurrection actually do is sort of put a flag in the middle of history and say, if it is in fact, if this story is so true and so real, and actually the world's true story, then the story does finally govern the history of the world, just like the story in my mind is governing the muscles in my lips and mouth and tongue. And so if Jesus, and I believe he did, but if Jesus really walked out of that tomb, what does that mean? And that's really the thing that took hundreds of years for the church to continue to wrap its mind around. If Jesus walked out of that grave, if the story verse is really that powerful, and if the story verse and matter verse are one, what does that mean? And then how should we live? And that's, I think, at the heart of Christianity's claims. Yep, I made a video on that the other day on the Jimmy Boyo, my personal YouTube channel, trying to go into perhaps the Jungian's psychology of how, like the mechanism of how someone might rise from the dead, really wacky thing. My thoughts on the resurrection aren't clear either. Now, I've been thinking about this. Peterson says, I act as if God exists, but he's never said, I act as if Christ rose from the dead. And to me, that gives a bit of a shift, because God is also like the God of the Old Testament, so you could say Jews as well. And there's, obviously you're more schooled on actual biblical stuff than I am, but if I remember correctly, isn't he in front of Thomas, Christ, after he rose, and he goes, like doubting Thomas, and he's happier those who believe, who haven't seen. So there's an emphasis on believing in me rising from the dead. So I wonder if we were to ask Jordan Peterson, do you act as if Christ rose from the dead, that that might give a bit of a reframe to the question? I don't know. That would be a very interesting question to ask him. So if I get a chance, I'll ask it, because it's a good question. Please do, please do. No, but it's interesting that with Thomas, Jesus says, put his hands there. I mean, and that's the relationship between these two things, that it can't just be story floating around, and it can't just be matter being dumb. And so Jesus says, you don't believe it, touch the wounds. And it's that kind of congruity that we demand, and we should demand. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I completely agree. You said you were gonna say something, Stephen, didn't you, about picking stories and indoctrinating people? Yeah, I was just getting excited since we're talking about this, because now we can get a bit of our Machiavellian marketer on everything we like. So Paul has been pretending to be a really good pastor here, but I know he's just like, how do we take over the world, what's the evil story we need? Like one thing that I think is beautiful about the resurrection is that, related to what I was actually talking about earlier, is that we sit there and we suffer for countless reasons. We've got a sore leg, or we're bored, or we want a girl, or we want someone to be more friendly to us, or we wanna go one step further up the mountain and all that, so we're all pinging out there. And it's very interesting in that, it's neurologically, no matter what you achieve, there'll always be a new pain to seek after. And so your health mentally seems to be more in relationship to how you understand the process, as opposed to how you achieve the goal. It's like, how can I get all the way up the mountain is more about like, how can I enjoy each step of the mountain maximumly? Now that's a fucking interesting thing, because it's also paradoxically requires you to believe that there's a reason to go up the mountain. You need an end, but you also need to meet. This shit, there's a reason why people like, blow their heads talking about this stuff, because it is a bit crazy. And now what's interesting about pain is that probably one of the heaviest problems I've noticed about the human condition is the existential problem, meaning that we are able to comprehend the future in a way that no other animal can. So when animal can feel pain, it can even feel depressed, it can feel sorrow, like elephants have little funerals and all that. But we can think, I'm gonna be broke in 10 years, what do I do about it? Or we can even think, one day, everything that I love and treasure is going to decay into black dead matter and it's gone. And so even if I climb the mountain, eventually death is gonna come in and pull me off it. And even if I climb the mountain, build a kingdom around it and drop a sun in the middle of it, he's gonna die as well. And so there's this war in the world against death, it seems. And that's frightening because that's the core of nihilism. I noticed when I talk to people about this stuff, I ask people about their story. I'm very interested in getting people out of being demoralized. That's just the one thing that's the worst. No matter what you believe, just don't be too bleak. Let's just get out of there, at least. And then you ask them and they're like, well, no matter how much effort I put in, the end is going to be failure. So I should not put in any effort at all. And that is kind of the excuse for irresponsibility and fundamentally a sort of spiritual nihilism. And then that causes the echo chamber of pain because then the sort of thing is like nothing matters. Life is just a kind of cruel joke. And then it's almost like someone's laughing at you and every moment just gets worse and there's no justification and echoes out. And then this is where the scary thing comes in. And I'm not sure where I sit on this, but in order to justify life in the Roman sense, you have to kill. Like it's not a nice place. The gazelle must die and you must eat it if you were to be the lion. And if you don't, the other lion will eat the gazelle and then come kill you and then take all your girls. Like it's just how the game works. And so the biggest, baddest boy-o is what gets the win. And so when you look at history, especially early on, it was just this modeling and gradual amplification of the power of ruthlessness, of winning the game being that type of ideal. And all the gods were modeled around these type of characters. Well, most of them were modeled around these type of characters, the alpha males, if you will. And what's so interesting about Christ is that he came in and he proposed a different mode of being. So you can think about these alpha males as saying, look, I'm playing the game correctly and thus I am winning. And therefore I am a God. I am in the image of the rules. I am what the rules want. I am like perfect fit, like survivor of the fit, I am the perfect fit. And then Christ comes in and he says, I'm the perfect fit. But everybody's like, you're just a little fucking dude in like a little fucking rag cloth and no one likes you. And your family are telling you to get the fuck out of here. And you're running around telling people that you can multiply fish. And like, no, dude, like what's going on? Please, please be quiet. And he's like, well, but I am the son of God. And they're like, you say that again, we're going to fuck you up. And he's like, but like it's true. They're like, all right, fine, get on that cross then. He's like, well, all right, fine, whatever. Like it won't change anything. They're like, stop saying that. And they stick him up. And what's so interesting is he loses his life. And so everybody's sitting around the cross being like, oh, for fuck's sake, he was just lying. Like it was just all bullshit. And they're all kind of, they're back in denialism. They're depressed. They're like, oh, we're just gazelles in the world of lions again. And then he steps out of that tomb and that's confirmation that I played the game and beat the one God all the alpha males couldn't beat. And that was death. And that's a fucking interesting story, man. That's an interesting story. And I don't know, I don't know what to make all this stuff, but I most certainly like that. I think that's a good take because I do, I'm a huge admirer of Rome, but to think that a man could take over Rome without ever lifting a sword is interesting stuff, interesting stuff. Well, and that's where I often ask people, I mean, who look at Genghis Khan and Jesus Christ. So you have one man who left how much, you know, genetic material spread throughout, what, 300 million people or something. I mean, it's an incredible number. People who have genetic material from Genghis Khan and Jesus, who to the best of our knowledge, didn't have a child and he colonizes the world. And what, you know, so I thought about this a number, it's part of the beauty about being a pastor is you get to go back over and over some of these texts and stories and you watch them through people's lives. And, you know, if I were Jesus and I rose from the dead, Pontius Pilate's house would probably be the first place I'd stop, could say, you know, how do you like me now? You know, and Jesus doesn't do that. And it's that- Did he appear in a dream to his wife though? Or maybe mistaken? Well, that was before that. And so she had a dream and says, no, don't touch the guy. Okay, okay. But Jesus doesn't do that. And what's amazing is that not only does, I mean, cause in almost every superhero movie, the hero dies and comes back to life. I mean, that's now just become an archetypal story that superhero movies have to rehearse. But they all still fight in the same manner as the lion and the gazelle. But Jesus doesn't. And that's the crazy thing about Jesus is that he's not only, not only do you have this story where he clearly, according to the story, has enormous power to, if you can stop a storm, you could start a storm. If you can raise the dead, you can make people dead. We know how to make people dead. We've known that for years. We don't know how to make people alive. He can clearly make people alive so he could make people dead. And he doesn't use this power to rescue himself. And the superpower, the crazy, the superpower he seems to have is to surrender his life for the welfare of others. And you think, what kind of superpower is that? That makes no sense. But it keeps winning. Yes, see, that's just crazy. I was just thinking of Superman bursting out in the middle. I'm here to save you. And they're like, how? And he's like, I'm just, I'm gonna take the bullets or something like that. Yeah, yeah. But it is, it's most certainly, it's definitely true. And I think even beyond Jesus, it's actually a bit of a warrior archetype. When a soldier charges out of a trench, he's most certainly playing the lion game. There's a huge part of the soldier that has to say to himself, I am definitely gonna die at some point if I keep fighting these wars. I read the stories about the guys in the trenches and they have to justify it to their heads in order to cope with the terror. Because there's nothing quite like that terror, man, when you're the first person in history to experience a shelling from cannons lined up in an armament and they're throwing mustard gas on top of you. It's a Hieronymus Bosch painting. And you're just bodies and guts flying all over the place and people screaming, rats running at your feet. And you're about to charge into a battle where the last report came that like 85% of the squadron that ran out that gun got killed. And you're going to do that. And you need to say to yourself, like, why? What is this for? And you say, my death is for my people. That's what you say to yourself. And like, it's so hard. It's so grating to see how unaware and dishonored people are towards those people because everything we have came from their sacrifices. And I think Jesus is like the purification of that because there's this sort of understanding that sacrifice, that superpower is the reason we have anything. It's like distilled out of that. And that's the reason why good exists. Without sacrifice and pain, the world would be dead and empty and we'd live in hell. But heaven is built on sacrifice. That's a crazy thought. And it's just taken to its logical conclusion in Jesus Christ. It's like, what about the ultimate self-sacrifice? And to just relate it back to that idea of what I was saying about the pain is that, like, no matter if you conquer every pain, like you look at the rich people now, what they're talking about is how do we get life extension? Once you conquer every pain, you still want something. And you're eventually gonna be like, I've taken over the whole world, I'm a billionaire. And it's like, right, I can't beat death. I can't, how do we beat death? How do we beat death? And he shows you that it's possible through sacrifice. And that gives you this, you're like, what? That's the last thing I wanted to hear because I wanted to hear how I could have my cake and eat it. And he's sort of saying, give up your cake and you will get all the cakes ever for the end of time. And that's such a fucking head fuck because it's like screwing with your idea of immortality and like that ultimate drive to beat death is by accepting it in some sense. It's like that amazing paradox. And there's something profound in that, obviously, like it's a fucking Christ story, but there's something very, very deep about how that deals with pain because I think, like, this is sort of my conclusion is that in order to deal with the nihilism of the world, you actually have to accept your fate. It's not what they always say, amor fati. You have to say, all right, someday I'm gonna die. All right, like, even if I'm gonna be a lion, I'm gonna lose it all. And if I am to experience what, if I'm even to experience whatever few steps I have, I need to be with them. And you can't do that until you accept your faith. And when you do that, it's so fucking weird. Things just don't hurt as much. And you've actually won. The one thing you were trying to do, which is stop suffering because you were afraid, ends when you accept it. And it's like neurophysically, it works that way. It's like, if you can say to someone, it's like, because they're like, why am I in pain? And then it hurts and they need a reason. And you say, to live is to have pain. And if you can get them to emotionally understand that, they can kind of cope with it. And then this is where, I'm serious, this is so strange. If people get a good mindset about pain, a very accepting version of it, the neurophysiology kind of like makes it go away. And you beat pain through something like this. It's so crazy, so crazy. It's like, well, why are you that way? Well, that's what a lot of the neuroses, Jung noticed as well, when you got anxiety and depression. And these days, we like to think that we can get rid of them with just drugs, or it's just like something mentally wrong with you. And perhaps it is, because things are more nuanced. But the idea that Jung had, which I've found in my own life to be so valuable is the anxiety and depression is asking you to sacrifice, which is so weird. It's almost like a demon that possesses you. You know, they've got the, I am legion for we are many scene, like a demon possesses you. And then Christ comes along with this image of self-sacrifice, and he takes these demons and cast them into the sea. So he's that story that pulls the demons out of you. But in doing so, you have to die and be reborn. So the anxiety is telling you, like if you're sitting at home and you're like, I don't wanna go outside, I don't wanna go outside, people hate me and all these other things. You deal with that by going outside. So it's letting your current self die. Same thing with depression. You're meant to listen to your depression, at least if you want to be believed, not a medical doctor, of course, lean into it rather than run away from it and go, what is this trying to tell me? And you have a dialogue with it and it tells you what you need to sacrifice to become better. So Christ, I think you're right, Steph, Christ might be that image. There's also something else with Christ I've noticed, which is there was no resentment on his part at all, none. And there was no resentment in his disciples either. And you could bring up the politics of the time, if you like, but the disciples didn't have any power. But regardless, they didn't go on a crusade to go, you killed our Lord and savior. It's like, well, maybe you should, because you killed our Lord and savior. But they didn't. And eventually they rose to become the most powerful force the world has ever seen. So there could be something innate that self-sacrifice, yes, make the ultimate sacrifice, yes, but don't be resentful about it, because the resentment will come along and mess you up in the end. And perhaps that's how we will reach eternal peace, perhaps. That was the story saying, is we all make the ultimate sacrifice, but we're not resentful to each other either. We accept it wholeheartedly. I don't know, it's a deep story. It's a very deep story. One of the craziest things about Christianity is that it remains viral, even when people keep doing it badly. You look at Constantine, and so Constantine sort of appropriates the story and say, okay, this is gonna be it. And all kinds of problems happen, but it keeps spreading. And one of the examples that I look at is these southern, in the United States, these southern slave owners who buy these Africans off of ships, these African slaves become Christians and become better Christians than their masters. Now, if someone bought you from a slave trader and slapped you in iron and made you do horrendous work in terrible conditions and beat you within an inch of your life if you did anything to cross them, why on earth would you adopt their religion? But these people did. And, I mean, it's just, again, you just can't get your mind around, you just can't get your mind around this story and what this story has done to so much of the planet over and over again, even when people have lived it badly. So it's an incredible thing. Yeah, it does evolve. You're right, when you had the Reformation and then you had this massive split. And the Reformation or the result of the schism caused so many deaths, but it also allowed it to survive forever. I have no idea how many denominations there are, but way too many for them to ever be wiped out. Even more recent ones like Mormonism, right? It's massively on the rise. It's like, that's so different to normal Christianity. You've got a whole new book, apparently. And even like, you can have those African slaves who are probably more of like a peaceful people. They're praying to Christ for comfort. And then you've got the deus vault knights going off to the Holy Land to slay all the other people in the name of Christ. It's like, what is covered across all of these? I don't know, but there's, as Dawkins would say, monetic potential, but obviously there's something deeper than that, absolutely. Well, I wanna know a little bit about you two. I mean, where did you grow up? Why did you start this channel? What's kind of the story behind that? Well, you wanna hear an interesting thing about me is my dad was a carpenter, and that's no joke. Okay. And then, well, I don't know about my conception around my dad, but you know. We don't have to go that far back. Well, obviously I'm Irish. And speaking of slaves, Jimmy, we have a little bit of beef with Jimmy over here for being forced to speak this language. But this is how it goes down. Well, the way I grew up was pretty straight forward, standard. I had good parents, solid parents, and dad was a carpenter. And I got into music when I was a teenager and all that. And I've been always very, very right-brained, but also very, very logical as well. And I'm getting good at mixing the two of them now. And I think that's probably the strength of why I do well on YouTube and whatnot. But the reason why we started YouTube and started all this stuff, it's kinda interesting. I'd always find myself getting in religious debates because I went to Protestant school and I was Catholic. So there was this implication that I just wasn't supposed to respect what I was getting told, because I was like, all right. And I wasn't a real Catholic either because I didn't really believe I was somewhat atheist. But I was never Richard Dawkins atheist. It's weird. It's really interesting looking at my old comments and stuff because you'd see your little littered around the internet and you'd see how I was defending the idea of God, but I sort of didn't believe or something. It was weird. I don't know what I was doing. But then when I went into college, I was part of that kind of movement now, or I was part of that sphere of influence now, where you would take some psychedelics first of all. And maybe that was actually more later, but you would get into people like Alan Watts. And these guys were very, very into Buddhism and whatnot. And so the way that you were understanding the world was like, oh, I don't believe in God. I don't know if I really believe in God the way most people say it. There's this force or something like that. And you'd have that type of energy. And then you'd be talking about stuff like that. And obviously it's almost like Christianity distilled so much that you don't even have any whiskey left, that type of thing. It's like the purified versions of the values. And it's almost ideological because it's missing, it's shall we say stones. It hasn't got the weight to it, the gravitas or something like that. There's something missing. And I was sort of in that place. But then this was around about the same time that I began to get a little bit jaded with my community and all that. And I was reading a bit of Nietzsche at that point. And that was mind opening to say the least. And he kind of spins you, he begins to make you understand that you're living currently within, like as Jordan Peterson talks about, he uses Nietzsche's phrase, that God is dead phase. And he pulls you like, it's almost like you're caught inside this jungle. And he pulls you up into a helicopter and makes you see, look down and be like, holy crap. And you see all these trails that were leading to this moment. And he kind of puts you in history a little bit. And from there I found Jung. And then Jung obviously says in quite a pragmatic sense that all this religious stuff is somewhat united among humanity. There's something very, very unified among it all. And then being a pragmatist, Jung was like, do it bro. Read about my stuff all you want. But if you think this is cool, try dream reading. If it doesn't work, get the hell out of here. And try make artistic stuff and try do stuff, do stuff, do stuff. And I kind of went for that for a long time. I kind of moved away from the drug scene and got really into dreams. That's when things started to get very, very interesting because I noticed that the one confrontation I was getting from most people in regards to dreams is they believe that they're not real. They have no meaning. And that was to me interesting because they are kind of crazy and I don't recommend people get too much into them. They're not as valuable as people project onto them. Well, they are, but they're not gonna save your life, man. You're gonna save your life. But it was almost like I had to challenge that on first principle and say, there's probably something to value in this stuff. And I just spent time with that side of my brain a lot and that side of thinking. And I realized dreams are very close to the imagination, which is different than the kind of logical story told way of understanding stuff. Whereas people will come out and be like jargon, ideas and all this stuff. And that would start to show me, it was almost like a different perspective where I could then go back to all like Christianity and what Nietzsche was saying, even like Greek myth, Norse myth and all this. I could go back to this stuff. And suddenly it just, it's almost like there's a logic within dreams and stories that it's like the mathematics of psychology. And then once you find that, like the one I'm describing now is that, like first principle, mathematical principle of psychology is that everybody suffers and that they need a reason to suffer. They need an escape route. And that's like, that's one plus one right there. And once you start to see that stuff, you're like, holy shit, there's an immense amount of value in this. And then you dig into it more. And then at that point, I had like built up all this stuff. Jordan Peterson shows up and I was like, whoa, someone else is talking about this. What the hell, it's real, holy damn. And then he talks about Jung and I'm like, then he talks about Nietzsche and I'm like, no. And that was pretty much around about, around about the time that I started doing this. That was around about that time. And all during that as well, there was this like artistic struggle, which is off of my channel if anyone's interested, but there's definitely value in that. But that was sort of the construction of my mind where it is now, I guess. Okay, okay. Jimmy, come on, give us something there. Yeah, you got into things a little bit earlier than me, it sounds like. I had a very good upbringing as well, standard parents and whatever. And I was raised Catholic, but not like a proper Catholic. We'd go to mass on the weekends because my mom's mom used to go. And then when she passed like 15 years ago, we were like, okay, we'll go to mass at Christmas. So Christ was always this guy who'd like look over the family. But when it got to about the age of 13, I discovered Richard Dawkins on the internet. And that was the end of the story. That was just like game over. And then I came home one day and was like, dad, I'm an atheist now. He's like, no son, you're not an atheist now. It's bad, you're gonna be an immoral man running around killing people. Which is a jokey way of saying, but I conflicted with my father an awful lot. Just like you're becoming a religious zealot for the scientific cause. And at 13, I was, because I had no idea what the hell I was talking about. You watch a few videos and Dawkins goes, oh, religion is a delusion. I was like, well, amen to that. So yeah. But the result of that was nihilism, actually. And the story I bring up to illustrate this is, I was like walking around Disney worlds, which is where my family likes to go to. It's like our kingdom of God place, our happy place with all our memories. In Florida? In Florida, yeah, Disney world in Florida. We love that place so much. And myself and my fiance have inherited that love. So it's like this continued dream. But I remember walking around when I was like 15, 16, looking at the castle and Mickey Mouse and all the music and going, this isn't real, this is all fake. This is just photons hitting my eye. This is sound waves. What I experienced doesn't matter. It's pointless. I was like bitterly, not like inaction level depressed, but I was sad. And lots of my atheist science friends around the time had the same thing. And one of them, remember he turned to me and was like, James, do you ever close your eyes and imagine death? And I'm like, yeah, like every day. He's like, it's horrible, isn't it? When you just stare at blackness for all eternity. Which is like things a teenager shouldn't necessarily be dealing with. But I fell back into, I guess, the realm of values from, it was originally politics. I started getting involved in the culture war because my family's more conservatively typed, not excessively, but culturally conservative. And everyone around me at university wasn't. So I was like, okay, something's wrong here. I'm gonna try and fix that. And going from politics, I found culture. And from culture, I found values, which was underpinning all of it. And then around this time, Jordan Peterson comes onto the scene. It's like, bomb, that's it. Like, I'm done. It was like a religious transformation where all I needed from Jordan Peterson was an excuse to not be a scientific atheist seller anymore. For all the value that he's given me, the big thing he gave to me was a gatekeeper. And like a key. He's like, you don't have to be miserable and upset anymore. Here you go. And so from then, I've been absolutely hooked on the Western canon, Jungian psychology, Nietzschean philosophy, to the most obsessive degree. And then you can see that on the Ion series, on YouTube, of course. And we'll see where it goes from there, I guess. So how did you two meet each other? Did you find each other on the internet? Or how did that work? Twitter. Twitter. Twitter. I think you found one of my videos first, didn't you? No, no, no, you're on Twitter. And what I did was, I think you said, three books I want to read. And one of them was Ion. And I was like, I've read that book. And you're like, yeah, I've never met anyone else who's read that book. And I was like, you know what? Maybe we should talk. And you're like, yeah, let's talk. And then we sat down and we had that first interview. We were like, so what you think about Dante saying the earth's flat? And we're like, well, it's pretty weird, isn't it? And we're like, let's read Ion. And that's pretty much where it went from. That's how you guys started, reading Ion together. Yeah, pretty much. That's so wild. Yeah, it was pretty, it was kind of a wild start. All right, that very much popped. And it's crazy what we found. Because I've read through that book several times. And as I said, people need stories for what's going on. And the biggest story. This is probably the most interesting conversation that I think people are not having right now. Is that people need a story. I guess there are people doing it, but it could be done better. People need a story for what's happening in history. That's fundamentally what eventually it comes down to. Like, why are we here as a group? Now, the individual stuff is huge and you can't skip to the end. You don't get to play the last moves of chess before you do the opening. But people want to know that. And so we're there reading Ion. I know Young was talking about something happening in Ion, but he sets up a world theory. This is the reason why history has a Logos to it. And you're kind of reading this and you're like, and then through that we're kind of learning a lot about what went down in Russia, for example, and stuff like that. And you're like, whoa, this is getting scarier and scarier and science coming up and the Antichrist and all this. And you're like, damn. And then bouncing that off Nietzsche then as well. Nietzsche with his world theories. That was very profound. Yeah, that changed me a lot, I'd say. It changed me a lot. Grounded me a lot in the Western story, let's put it that way. Wow. Yeah, it seems to be the Western story we've all inherited where 2000 years ago Christ was born and something happened. It kicked off the Ion, but it slowly turned into Faust, which is science versus religion. And it hit me as so powerful because that was the thing that hit me in my own life. And there's Young saying, not only is this our big conflict for the last 500 years to the last 2000 years, but it's also the source of all the pain and suffering we experienced in the 20th century is that irreconcilable opposite problem of science, religion, spiritual material. Like you were saying, Paul, the soul and our stories versus our body. And how do we resolve that? Yeah, it was mind-bending. The reason why I think, like what I got from that that was so interesting is that we don't wanna be Christian. Almost at a destiny level. No, you're exactly right. Cause in order to be Christian, you have to be like, you have to be like God's in control. And no one wants to believe that at all, ever. That's the one first principle that people will not accept. And even people who say it don't wanna accept it because it's so alien to everyone else. And so what that means is that there can't be a story. So what we're doing is we're trying to put a story in its place for, as we said earlier, stories explain pain. And so when you put a story in someone's place, in someone's body, in someone's mind, it explains their pain for them. And then they're very, very unwilling to let go of that story. And so we're in a fucking crazy place. Cause then if enough people get in a group of story and then another story gets another group of people, the stories are gonna, the people are gonna fight each other for the survival of the fittest story as opposed to give up their stories, which is, well, like, I don't know what's happening. Are we getting pushed towards, is this what's gonna happen? We're gonna spiral between an attempt to put this stuff back in place. And then- Well, the people are not in charge of the stories. The stories are in charge of the people. It's true. Yeah. And that's why slaves who take on the religion of their masters win because the story wins. Yeah. And this is, I remember I wrote this as, history is a war between ideas and humans are just the cannon fodder. We're the carriers. Yeah. We're the fodder. We bring it along. We're the bullets, man. That's what we are. Like that's what we're getting, and we're getting crushed and whatnot. And so it makes you wonder where, like where we've come to, because like we've gone to that point where it's like, because it's weird. Because Jordan Peterson would say something like, there is logos. There is order. And I like very intuitively, I know when I play music, there's a logos to it. And if I don't obey it, and that's built into the universe, music sounds shit. And so that's essentially proof of God to me. That seems so obvious. But even though I know that, and even though I think like 80% of people get that, like the world has up and down, it works. That we still can't say that logos is pulling the strings in the way that it wants. We wanna see it as chaos. And that's sort of where we are at the moment. And it's like a big problem, as I said with the amor fati, is that we need to accept our fate. Fate is tied to the idea of destiny. Destiny is tied to the idea of what's gonna happen to you. And that's a big realization, is that you don't control everything that's gonna happen to you. Something's gonna happen to you, and you have to accept it. And it's very hard for us to accept, I guess you could say reality, because we believe that since there's no God, we're the ones who are responsible. And so that means we have to save the world in order to justify history, I guess. Like we have to do the French Revolution or the Marxist utopia or whatever. We always need to justify it because we can't accept that there's no one in control, because we can't accept that there is a controller because we don't believe in God. And it's like we've got quite a conundrum going on here. Quite a conundrum, I'd say. Well, and that's built in, you go all the way back to the beginning of the story in Genesis chapter three, and that's what's at the heart of that story. It's the man and the woman want to write the story, and go ahead and try. Let's see how that goes. It's Cain and Abel. It just keeps repeating itself down there, but you're exactly right. And this is why I think there's always this bias that, so you've got the personal and the impersonal. There's always this bias, I think, we want to demand the impersonal, because if it's impersonal, deep in our heart, we have the ambition to colonize that impersonal. And again, it's heaven and earth. And you walk into a land that's unoccupied, and I will make it my land. Well, how do I make it my land? I begin to shape that land by my will. And so that land will follow my will. And this is the story of humanity, and you're exactly right. We get to the end of it, and we want to say, so C.S. Lewis, basically, with his book, The Great Divorce, which is about heaven and hell, his idea is that finally, what hell is, is when we kept saying to God, my will be done, and God finally says, okay. And that is hell. And we finally get what we asked for, and God finally relents and says, I will leave you alone. I won't bother you anymore. And one might imagine that is, you will have no more pain from me. But as we all know. That's so cool, holy shit. The pain from us is the worst, is the true pain. Absolutely, and that's what's crazy about it. Because that's the real trouble people have, is that if God's real, why does he let evil happen? And there could be an extent where we demanded the right to have evil, to be allowed evil. We were like, we want to be able to experience evil. And he was like, no, you're an idiot. And then we were like, no, we want to do it. We want to be able to have that experience. And he's like, you just shut up. And then eventually you're right, he just gave in. And now we turn around and we blame him for it. We were like, we're able to handle this. And then he hands you over this burning hot coal, and you're like, what the fuck did you give me this for? And that's sort of, yeah, that actually makes sense in some sense. It's like, we bit the apple, and then now suddenly we're kind of like, can we spit the apple out? Is there a catch here? You're like a little baby. Evil is so horrific that you're like, no, I just don't want to have to deal with this motherfucker. And I think like, somewhat personally, it does come down to a very, very emotional, personal level that I think a lot of our issues would be solved in a sort of Jungian term, if people could just be just like radically sincere with themselves and with what they see. It's like a human flaw. I actually don't really believe in the whole meaning crisis or nihilism thing. I just don't think people want to tell the truth. It's not like we can't, or there is none. It's just that, to be honest, is hard and horrific, and it makes you feel ugly, and it's embarrassing, and we don't want to do it. And that's the riddle we find ourselves in. And it's almost like that's so built in that our bigger issue is how do we fix for that obvious flaw and stay on the straight and narrow? I don't know, mate, I don't know. And perhaps that's the source of evil, because if you're in line with truth and the eternal principles, is the source of evil, the thing, the pandemonium, to quote Paradise Lost, we build in its place. But like we were once up with God, and we got so arrogant that we could do things our way, so we cast this out. And it's interesting in the context of Ion as well, I was reading some Francis Bacon the other day, they got like the original scientists. He actually named the scientific method after himself, which he always found really funny. It's called the Baconian method. But he wrote it, his whole philosophy, no, he called it the Baconian method. Could we come up with a bionic method for something? Yeah, well, when we start our own church, which is going to be inevitable at this point, yeah. Well, we need to get the scientists, like what would they believe? They come on, they'd be like dinosaurs, we found a new dinosaur. That's the problem I was gonna bring up. Francis Bacon, he writes all these works, he's like, nature is this thing that we have to conquer. And we conquer it with our will. And that's the whole idea. He's like, oh, we're in a wonderful place, and through conquering nature, we can then build utopia. And utopia was a word that came up around that point. I think Thomas More coined the word utopia in his book. And then Francis Bacon was only like one generation later. So that's what they were aiming for. But then you have like Milton coming along, and it's like, no, that doesn't happen, because you can't do it with your will. Because when you do it with your will, you're kicked out of heaven. And that's just like the nature of things. So it's almost like living life in tune with those eternal principles. And one of them would be, as you were saying Steph, truth, which would be that yong and shadow. There's things you don't wanna confront about yourself. And if you do, and deal with that pain, which is that sacrifice idea, then maybe you won't have that will and that desire to want to latch onto other stories that are destructive, surely to just make up for your own insecurities. This is amazing how much this ties into one part of my personal story where I was struggling to be an artist, and I wanted to be good. And I did a whole long video on this. I wanted to be a talented, brilliant musician. I wanted to sound great. And I had all these people that I thought sounded great. And so I was like, I didn't feel good enough because I wasn't trained classically or anything like that. So I was like, what I'll do is I'll force, I'll train myself into the ground until I become like them. And I would force it and force it. And I was like, I have to be, this is my mountain. This is my justification for why I suffer. Right now I am a decrepit, untalented piece of shit, but I'll struggle up and become talented and then everything will work out. People will like me, everything will become better, and it will be all good, all right? And so I was like forcing my way up and I was like going through and I was hurting. I was making mistakes. I ended up hurting my arm. I got a tension injury because there's so much stress in my body from doing this because I was so tense up about it and ended up causing damage and all this. And I couldn't make good tunes. I couldn't make good music at all. It was all just like junk. And I hated it and I'd listen to it and I'd be like, oh, you're so bad, man, what are you doing? And then I'd listen to it. And then at one point I was fighting through a load of stuff. And I remember I just went through a load of shit, like breakups, like lost money, lost job, had to move house and all this. And then I was eating a crap diet and all this stuff. And it was just too much at once. It was almost like God just said, all right, dog pile him there. Like fuck that idiot up. Like he's just about to give up. We need to break him, right? And so I just got properly bed up. And then I was just like there, heads in hands being like, I have to just give up my dream, give up the will. And that was the one greatest sin of all. In my heart, that felt like evil. And I gave it up. And then I remember like a couple of months later, I just went and made a random tune. And it was like, I was like, that was actually pretty good. Because I was trying to like sing out of my range and all this. And I was trying to be someone else. And before I was trying to like play things I couldn't play in all this. And then I was just like, do something that felt nice for me. And it was just kind of relaxed and harmonized with the logos of the world. And it came out good. And I was like, what the actual fuck? That didn't, I didn't have to try at all. It was easy in some sense. And then I found Pavarotti story, the opera singer. And it was the exact same. He was trying to force the opera, be an opera singer. And then he got a vocal modules, damages voice. And he said, all right, fuck it. I'm gonna give up the singing thing. And he showed up in like church or opera training or some like just random choir group like years later. And just started singing with them because he enjoyed it. And then everybody pointed to him and said, you've got a pretty good voice, man. And he was like, wow, whatever. And then he turned into Pavarotti. It's that type of, like it's that unbelievable paradox. Cause you kind of need that desire to get better and have standards, but you also need some type of profound humility and amorphaty I'd say. And again, like it's hard to get answers. It's more about, can you handle the paradoxes? It's almost like the paradoxes will save you. And then that was a big deal for me. And that maps perfectly onto Milton and Satan. Because when you look at what Satan did, he was arrogant who wanted to create pandemonium because this is Tolkien's take. He was participating in God's choir and he thought he could make his own choir, his own music. And he broke away from it. And instead he needed to, like prodigal son, go back and humbly accept it. And that was the big deal. And that's, I don't know. There's something to this stuff. I don't know, like, has anyone said this before? There's something here. Lewis made a very similar point when he talked about people trying to be original. And he said, basically, he basically is an Oxford Don. So he says, basically, go back and really engage with what everyone else is doing. And in the end you'll discover the only contribution. You won't even, you'll make a contribution without even noticing you're doing it. But it's not, you know, it's very similar to what you just laid out. Yeah, yeah. And like, there's something to that. I haven't articulated it perfectly, but every person I've spoke to about those similar themes have been like, yeah, there's something like that going on with me. You know, and it's still going on with me. Like, I don't think you're ever free from it, really. No. It's a bit of original sin. Like, you always, you always need to hold attention, I guess, when it is. That's almost what it is in some sense. There's this like tension. It's hard to describe. So where do you want your channel to go? Where do you want this crazy thing to bring you guys? There's this archetype called the mountain, and I wouldn't mind getting up to the top of that. That would be pretty good. That's good. Stefan, he discovered the mountain archetype recently. He actually trademarked it. So he's very good at it. Actually, that's what we could call, we could call it bionetics or something like that. And then we could find, yeah, we could do that. And we'll post a word of paper and get people saying, boy, oh, in science. And then that could be our little mischievous way to take over the world with a meme. That would be the meme that gets out there. So in other words, Paul, there's no direction to what we're doing. Two tricksters on the internet wasting everybody's time. I'm right there with you. I don't know what I'm doing either. And there are days when I make a video, and I'm like, what am I doing? This is insane. I shouldn't do this. And then someone will talk to me and say, oh, it's really been helpful. I really appreciate it. I was like, yeah, okay, babe, I'll keep doing it. It sounds like, from my perspective, I guess more seriously, it's almost like a dance that we're doing. I guess I can't speak for Steph, but I'm not entirely sure what the point is, but there's a point and it's a point worth doing. So it's like a dance and it's part of itself development as well, definitely, because it's like, you know, because the material is so psychologically significant. It's like, can I take it? And going through ION, that was actually a huge question, which was, can I take it? Because it really started, especially with the shadow, it really started to reorganize my head. So yeah, it's like, there's a calling. There's, I guess, as the Christians would say, a vocation and personal development at the same time. So it's like, see where it goes. In regards to, yeah, like I don't know about yourself, Jamie, but like it's interesting, the place I'd like to go, like I don't put a lot of weight on these because I've very much learned from that experience I just said, where it's, you kind of play it day by day, you kind of get in the flow, but at the same time, it's good to have a loose stream of what's on top of the mountain. But I sort of see it like, at some point in the future, I'd love to get into films. I'd love to be able to get people to see the dreams I see in my head. That would be awesome. But we'll see what happens. That's a very interesting industry. Same with music, I'd love to see that go somewhere. And I like putting stuff out there, and I have loads of ideas. My problem is time. Like that's, I don't have enough of it where I can put out enough stuff. So it's really just down to, how can I fit enough time, or get all this stuff fit into that thing? But I have a disgusting amount of things on the horizon. That's just, I guess that's it really. It's just like, I've got a lot of stuff that I want to churn out, and that's what it's gonna be. There's like, I'll probably try write a book at some point. I've got a skill acquisition. I like teaching people how to story tell. Like that's a technical thing I've noticed. People come in with jargon from the left brain, and they need to get taught how to use the right brain. And that skill can be like absolutely life changing, because it's a thinking skill. And it's also a fundamental communication skill that is way more powerful than like throwing science terms at people or whatever. And so there's that. And then on top of that, obviously just talking about random stuff as well is a great crack. So I don't know, I'm just gonna keep on the treadmill, I guess, that's pretty much where I'm at. And it's vaguely going towards maybe higher things like that. How could I build bigger, bigger, bigger, better, juicier? That's, I guess, the motto. Without- And beautiful is it, sorry, so you're gonna say something crude then? I was gonna say without ending up in paradise lost, but whatever. There you go, there you go. Yeah, I was gonna ask you, Paul, is your idea basically just to keep building your audience and reach more people? Because that seems to be what you're doing so far is just create clarity, and hopefully that seems to help more and more people. I don't know. The thing that gets me most excited is, and I guess this is the pastor in me, is, you know, so I have this local meetup where people are face to face and helping other groups meet. Because I think there, I'd really like to see, so when we started the meetup, one of the things that a bunch of us noted was that I had always had a longing that a church could be a place where people could come and work on their stuff, whether or not they were heretics or whatever they came from. And because churches were very much not that space. And you go, you watch people and you see life is pain, and people have a lot of pain, and what do you do with the pain? And so often our ambitions to remove the pain are the things that lead to just more pain in ourselves and in others. And so one of the cool things that happened when the meetup started, we're gonna have our second anniversary now, this January, is that people could come in and talk and be heard and be seen. And that was really cool. And so I really want to be able to facilitate more community. So we had a Discord server that started, and some people from the local meetup started the Discord server, and that's gone well. So then I did kind of a big group chat on Zoom on the Discord server. And one of the things that I observed there, one of the women on the Discord is a missionary in West Africa. And having lived in the developing world myself for a number of years, it was my first job, I was a missionary. You notice this real difference between people who, most of the time, people who are poor, living in real tight community, often of suffering, fairly miserable. And then you get people, once they get a certain level of money or status or income or something, they start to then lead these isolated lives. And fewer and fewer people in the home, and more and more time looking at screens instead of talking to real human beings, because screens are these edited versions of life that have clipped out all of the parts that we don't like. So, but there's this real dynamic between getting my way and being by myself. And I think, again, this is very much heaven and hell. And I think people in the developed world need some help into discovering what it's like to have real relationships with real people. That's so, that's a great observation, sir. That is, because that is so true. That is so true. Like, yes, absolutely. Yes, absolutely. Like I think, I think what I was saying about pain and all that, like a massive amount of it is social. Like what will people think of me? What will, it's weird, when I was hurt, like I had an injury at one point, but the worst part of it was me thinking that other people will think I'm weak, because I have this like long-term injury. And that's so crazy, because afterwards, afterwards it hurts. Once I kind of got my mindset right about it, it still hurts, like I still hurt it from time to time, as it was still healing. But it didn't cause me to suffer because it didn't mean that I was a worthless piece of shit, that people had a right to correctly say, oh, you're terrible. And it's crazy, like it's, that's so much wired into you, and it shows you just how sensitive we are to others. And obviously like our limbic system is tied innately to our social systems as well. And so like when people are struggling with that an immense amount. It's very scary though, the idea of that they move from community together to isolated screens, where that you've clipped out the bad parts, and you're like, what? It's like we're editing ourselves into a very, very interesting type of utopia of hedonism or something like that. Yeah. Yeah, definitely. So for me- It's been a, sorry, I just have to briefly say, you two can keep talking, but it's getting late. So I'm gonna have to bounce. But it's been great talking to you both. I really appreciated it, especially Paul, because I'm sick of you stuff, but appreciate you both. I, Paul, as I most certainly like respect both years, and I'd never say something so rude, but I've got to, I've got to go as well. I'm afraid, I hope that's all right. That's absolutely fine. I recorded this and I'll just put it on unlisted, and I'll send it to the two of you, and then we'll see if others might benefit from overhearing on our conversation. Beautiful, thank you very much. Thank you very much for your time. Thank you guys, and we'll talk again after Christmas. Beautiful, hey, have a good Christmas as well. Hope Santa comes, you know. If I don't become him. Yeah, well, that's it. Could be an identity crisis there in the living room or something like that. Who's Santa? All right, I'll talk to you later, sir, and thank you very much for everything. Have a good evening. Thank you, sir, bye bye. Bye bye.