https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_7b2aBTXk1o

 I don't know if we've met, so why don't you start and tell me a little bit about yourself? No, we haven't met except online. Okay. So I'm from Northwest Philadelphia. Okay. My name is Matt Kilbride. Okay. Well congratulations to the Eagles. Oh yeah. I'm glad Freddie is supporting the Eagles. So I was the youngest of five, Irish, Polish, Catholic family. We were very tight-knit in our parish growing up. We all went to the parish school. We were altar boys. My sisters were in the choir. My mom was a teacher at the school. My dad was the basketball coach. So it was a very Catholic upbringing. Oh yeah. Like all my best friends went to the school. But so I was born in 1982. At that time in Philadelphia, there were like neighborhoods in Philadelphia where the neighborhood and the parish were more or less the same thing. Yeah. Where we lived, that was not true. So our parish, it was kind of a vibrant parish. It was tight-knit, but it was small. And it was in a neighborhood. Neighborhood is called Mount Airy, which was famous as the neighborhood in Philadelphia where racial integration kind of just took place without any hiccups. So you know, John McWhorter. Yeah. Yeah. He grew up in my neighborhood. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So he'll talk about it. Him and my oldest brother would have been about the same age. Yeah. So it was a Catholic parish, but in a very diverse kind of egalitarian neighborhood. So a lot of African-Americans in the neighborhood, a lot of Jews lived in that section of Philadelphia. And like me and all my friends' parents, they were very liberal. Some people might object to me using it that way, but there was nothing like Benedict optionish about it. You know, like if, you know, they wanted to live in that sort of place. Yeah. Yeah. So like when you went and played soccer and baseball and it was a very mixed team, right? Our parents were extremely happy about that. So it was a good place to grow up because, you know, on the one hand, you had that tight community, but in a much more diverse setting. Yeah. Yeah. And the thing is, in Philadelphia at that time, that was not normal because you looked at the, all the neighborhoods around us, which were quite segregated. So that was a lucky thing for me. It's so, Philadelphia has a reputation for being anything but its namesake in some ways. The city of brotherly love? Yes. Sports teams that go into, I mean, it's just, I mean, Eagles, Eagles games, it's just known as sort of a hotbed of antagonism. Right. Santa, Santa got pelted by snowballs. Yes. And then I would tell somebody, if you're going to go to an Eagles game as an away team fan, don't wear the jersey. It's just common sense. Don't wear the jersey. Just be smart. But, you know, they mean well. It's tough love. Yeah. But Philadelphia has a bad reputation, but I think it's a fantastic city. There's areas you should definitely avoid, but I think, yeah, Philadelphia, a lot of history. I like Philadelphia. It's amazing. It wasn't the capital of the country. I mean, it was, it was for a while. It was tremendously important city in the colonial period. Right. I think it was too far north at the time, right? Yeah. Yeah. Like DC was at the, they wanted to please the Virginians. Yeah. Yeah. So Philadelphia and New York were out. They had to move down to make the Virginians happy. But I'm sorry, I derailed you. I should keep my mouth shut. Oh, that's okay. I'm very open to derailing. So anyway, that was my childhood. I went to Philadelphia Jesuit High School and then studied English Lit at Penn State. And then I lived in Wisconsin for a couple years after university. And then in 2007, I moved to Korea, which is where I live now. So I met my wife here, went to grad school back in the States and then came back. We got married. We had our now three kids. So two sons and a daughter. My first son. What brought you to Korea? In the first place? Yes. So I was working in Wisconsin at a software company. And for a, you know, a recent graduate, it was a good job, but I was just bored. I, my heart wasn't in it. I was kind of undisciplined at the time. So I wanted to travel. I did my study abroad in Ireland, which always I loved it. But it always felt like it wasn't the real experience. You know, because everybody spoke English. Yeah. It wasn't a challenge. Yeah. I was like, I want to go somewhere different. And Korea, you know, the pay was decent. It was a different society. So I went there to teach English. Oh, okay. So I taught English for two years. And at that point, I would have come back to the States, but I had met my wife. So then I was a, now I'm tied to the place. Yeah. Yeah. So we got married, three kids. My first son, he was born with a cyst attaching his esophagus and his trachea. Oh my. So he had surgery when he's five days old. And he's also born with one lung. Oh my. He has a rare heart condition called scimitar syndrome. Like it's just things aren't connected properly. Yeah. So when he was very young, you know, kids get sick, right? Yeah. Yeah. Runny noses. They always do. For him, it would elevate, right? It would get much worse very quickly. Yeah. He had some ambulance rides, several ambulance rides to the hospital. And then between 18 and 24 months, I started to notice his development was like tapering off. Oh, wow. He was diagnosed with autism and it's fairly, it's fairly severe. So yes, he has a very difficult time with language, kind of behavioral and emotional issues. So yeah, that was, that was definitely life changing. Yes. So, yeah. So my first, my second son and my daughter, they, they're fine. I mean, in that sense. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Having, having an autistic child is a, it's definitely a game changer. We had a severely autistic child in our church when I first got here. And yeah, it, you know, I still know the parents. It's, it's life changing. It really is, especially, I mean, he also, he doesn't really speak. Yeah. It's, it's, it's a tremendous challenge. Yeah. And well, autistic kids, they're all different. Yeah. So they, but when you're the parent of an autistic child, you're hyper aware of other autistic kids. Yep. Cause a lot of times they just, they look normal. You know what I mean? Yep. Yep. You actually have to observe what they're doing. Yep. And then for most people, you would catch on quickly, but if you have an autistic child yourself, it's like, you know, you can recognize it really quickly. Yeah. And there's more of them than I would have thought before we had our son. So yeah, that was a big one. So yeah, three kids, my church life. So after I finished high school, I never thought about going to mass at university. I was happy to go with my parents. I didn't have any negativity about it, but I don't know, it just wasn't on my radar. But my wife, she, when I met her, was a very devout evangelical Christian. Now that means, so she's Korean. That means slightly different things here. There's a lot of overlap between what American evangelical and Korean evangelical, but there are important differences. So like, I don't know, a lot of the political baggage that I would associate with kind of American evangelicalism, it's in Korea is just different. So there's a lot of cultural differences there. I work with a fair number of Korean churches. Yeah. I was curious about that because like, do you have any sense of how much the Korean American community and the Korean community, do you think, are there any important differences that you've been able to pick up on? Well, there's a huge issue in terms of how Koreans Americanize in their time here. So those who came to America as adults, those who came to America at whatever level of development makes a big difference. Those who were born in America, it's what language the church is completely there. It's what language the church is worshiping in. It's a big deal. About a tenth of the Christian Reformed Church is Korean. So a lot of them are immigrants and they work in English or they work in Korean. Their English skills vary. It's a very big deal. Okay. Yeah. All right. Yeah. So anyway, she wanted me to go to church. And she was, so in Korea, the Catholic Protestant divide is much bigger than in America. Interesting. So like, they would say there's Christians and Catholics. Right. Right. Right. So I teach English, University English, and I'll have students, they'll say, oh, I'm a Catholic. He's a Christian. I'm like, no, you're both Christians. I'm just trying to push their buttons a little bit, but you're both Christians. He's a Catholic. You're a Protestant. But that doesn't really click with them. Same in Latin America. There's Catholics and Christians. Although, of course, Latin America, given the whole culture was Catholic, I mean, it's very different for Korea. Yeah. But anyway, my wife, she wasn't going to go to a Catholic church. That was off the table. So we started going to the largest international church in our city, Busan. And it's the international ministry of Busan's biggest mega church. So yeah, it's an interesting, it's technically Presbyterian, but really in culture, it's like an evangelical church. So I went into the evangelical church with very, very hesitantly, and a lot of misgivings about it. And then there were certain things like, you know, the praise, like the hand up. That was the kind of like, oh no, they're doing all that stuff that I saw on TV. But, you know, I got accustomed to it pretty quickly. We made some good friends in the church pretty quickly. There were a lot of other young couples at the time. Then we got a very kind of tight-knit group. So I settled into church life pretty quickly. I was quite happy. And I had especially one friend, he was an English guy, who was very devout, very strong faith. And we were in the same Bible study. And kind of through his influence and his kind of motivation, I got very deep into the Bible for a few years. So I did a lot of studying. And so growing up Catholic, I think when Cal Zeldin was on the channel, he said, I didn't know anything. You know, and I understood what he meant, but I don't think it was quite, for me, it wasn't quite true. Because in the evangelical church, in our Bible study, everything was in reference to the Bible. Whereas when you were growing up Catholic, I mean, you learned all sorts of things from the Bible, but I just wouldn't have been able to tell you like chapter and verse. I could tell you the story, but is that in John or Luke? I don't know. I know the story. Right. So there was much less, what do you want to say, contextualization. So my understanding of the Bible as the Bible in the context of the Bible itself, increased dramatically. I watched a whole lot of NT Wright during those years. I really, I'm a big NT Wright fan. He, in particular helped me kind of view the Bible from start to finish. You know, like it's one large scroll and you unroll it and see, you know, from Genesis one to the end of Revelation, how the whole thing connects. So, I don't know, those were very fruitful couple years in terms of my faith. So that was, that was very good. One weakness of an international church though, is that the congregation is very fluid. Yes. So we had a very tight-knit group, but the majority of them have dispersed. We're going everywhere and you know, like we had a a community group, a Bible study. It was really good. And it went through a few permutations, like you lost a new member, got a new member and it stayed strong. But then COVID came along and it went online and then a bunch of people dropped out. Yeah. And then the two guys that were kind of in charge, because they left Korea now. So then the whole thing kind of fizzled out. Yeah. And it's never really kicked up again. And then the other thing is, so my son's autistic. When he was young, it was okay, but now he's eight years old. Yeah. It's harder and harder to find a place for him in the church. Yeah. Because there's the children's ministry, but he'll disrupt that and the other kids will look at him and they said, well, he's standing up. Why can't I stand up? Yep. Or if he's in the main congregation and he's noisy, because you had a 45 minute sermon, you are just listening for 45 minutes. So I don't know. It's been a struggle. And my wife is taking our daughter, she's only one and a half, but she's taking her to a Korean church because she really likes the program that they have there. So I don't know. That's hard. Crossroads is not the right word. Yeah. No. Kind of a Petering out a bit. So I don't know. At the moment, that's where I am. Yeah. So Jacob was the name of the little boy who is autistic. He's a grown man now. But there were volunteers that used to just, someone would just volunteer for Jacob duty that day and they'd just watch him. We have a decent amount of land here. And so he would be out and playing on the swing. You just need one-on-one childcare so that his parents could go to church. But then of course, as he got older, these things get more difficult and they also have another child. And the challenge then to figure out, okay, how do we help raise these other kids so that my first child's disability doesn't inordinately limit the opportunities that the other children have? So it's a challenge all the way through. And depending on the child's behavior, Jacob was, I mean, he was very disruptive. He didn't have any language skills. So he was tremendously frustrated. And of course, when he was six or seven, that's one thing. But when he's 10 or 12, and then after he hits puberty too, I mean, right now he's about six, four, 250 pounds. Okay. And so he lives full-time in a home that's specifically designed for others in that situation. So it's a big deal. How did you find this channel? I actually thought about this and I could probably draw the line. So I was in a friend of mine, I was a Christian apologist, and he had a Facebook kind of discussion forum that I used to be on. And people always used to talk about Marx and Marxism. It would come up a lot. And I always got the sense that these people didn't actually know what they were talking about. Like these people read Das Kapital. I think they're just throwing this word around. So I went to YouTube, which was kind of new to me at the time, and I watched a lecture series on Marx. It's by a guy named Raymond Guice at Cambridge. It's worthwhile if anybody wants to check it out. So I watched that. And then he did another lecture series on Nietzsche, which was really good. That got me to the BBC program In Our Time. You ever heard of it? That's good too. In Our Time, via the YouTube algorithm, got me to your buddy, Sam Harris. Sam Harris got me to Jonathan Haidt. Jonathan Haidt got me to Jordan Peterson. And then Jordan Peterson got me to you, amongst many other people. And by word of thanks, you got me to Tom Holland. And Tom Holland got me to The Rest is History, which I absolutely love. I love that podcast. I owe you a debt of gratitude for that because I could listen to those all day long. Oh, me too. Me too. I so enjoy that podcast. Yeah. Wow. And so you've found us and you sort of stayed. Well, why? What's of interest here? And what do you like? Well, I think what separates you from other... You weren't like the only guy on YouTube I'm listening to, right? Right. There was Rebel Wisdom. There was early on the Dave Rubin show. The Weinsteins, et cetera, et cetera. Yeah. The whole IDW phase. Yeah. I like Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter a lot. Michael Malice, kind of a love-hate relationship with. But anyway, the difference with you is that there was kind of a sense of community. Like I tried the Discord. The Discord wasn't quite for me. So I was there for a bit. But even in the comments section, you see the same people. You do. Right? You kind of get a sense of who's listening, even though you've never met them. Yep. So there's a kind of relatableness to it. You know what I mean? Yes. Because your status has grown over the years. I've been listening to yours for now. But there's still like, you're one of us kind of feeling. Oh, good. Good. Which you don't have with Sam Harris, for instance. Yeah. Right? John Vervecky, he's an interesting one because he's on his sofa. And he's also got kind of an openness, kind of on our level feel. Not in terms of his sophistication, just like his attitude and how he presents himself. Yeah. So that's definitely appealing. Good. Yeah. Good. Well, and that's my goal. That's in fact, I, we can watch people on YouTube. We can watch people on YouTube. But I think we want to play along. We want to be involved. We want to, it's just much more engaging. Yeah. Well, one frustrating thing though is, because I have three young kids. So it's hard to carve out time in the day to like really engage. Whereas, you know, you can listen while you're washing the dishes, while you're driving. Yep. You can type a comment here and there. Yeah. It's more difficult to carve out an hour to sit down and have a conversation. So I don't know. It's, I'm limited in how much I can actually join this little corner of the internet. And that's true of many, many, that's true of most of my audience. Okay. There are, there are some, and you know, they have their own YouTube channels. There are some who by virtue of, they might be single. They might not be working right now. They can sort of play at a different level or they have a job that's super flexible, but no, most people are like you and that they've got kids, they've got jobs, they've got responsibilities. They can, you know, that's part of the reason Discord, Discord gets overwhelming very quickly and you just can't, it would just take too many hours. So. Yeah. I mean, I'm distracted enough and I felt like I'm distracted by many things. Discord just felt like one more, not because it wasn't good. It just felt like one more distraction. Like I had to check in. Exactly. Like I'm checking in on Twitter and I'm checking in a Discord. I got to check the hockey scores, right? It's like, all right, it's too much distraction. I don't need to keep adding to it. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's true. That's true. Well, well, I can, I can tell, I mean, you're, you're obvious someone who's pretty high in openness. And I mean, you, you went out of the country, you, I mean, you're, you're so, you like, you like variety, you like novelty, you like new things. Yeah, definitely. To, you know, otherwise your life probably wouldn't have, have the shape. So what are you, what are you listening to now or what's, what's interesting to you now? What, what are some of the things that you think sort of bubble to the top in terms of these are things to pay attention to? These are, these are something we should be thinking about or talking about. Um, there's a lot of, one thing that you talk about regularly that catches my interest is um, the whole winsome debate. Yeah. But the thing is you all tend to talk about it in terms of like the Christian, like the church. Yep. Right. So there's the winsome church and then what, what is the opposite adjective? More the antithesis, you know, clear. Let's be, I mean, I let Esther and Tripp did a conversation with Sam a little while ago and I think, I think Esther and Tripp get frustrated with me because they, they want clarity. They, they want Christians to say, this is what it is and to draw a line and. Right. If you don't like it, that's your problem. Right. Um, yeah. I mean, but I also think it's not limited to the church. No. Right. Cause in the culture war as well, you see kind of the, um, the, the winsome approach versus the antithesis approach. Yes. Like Lex Friedman, for instance. Yep. I think is the embodiment of the winsome approach. Yes. Right. He's like all positive all the time. Yep. Um, and then as Kanye on his show, right. And he, you know, trying to gently pull him back from the edge. Yeah. Um, so, but then on the other hand, you know, Lex Friedman's friend with Michael Malice, who's like kind of this famous internet troll. That's kind of the embodiment of antithesis. Yep. Um, but what I find interesting is there's that that's kind of a clear black and white, you know, here and there, but then there's other people that kind of, um, blur the lines. And I think they're the most interesting kind of, so I'm glad Lex Friedman, I like Lex Friedman a lot. I'm glad he's doing what he's doing. Um, antithesis, it's not really my style. I kind of get it. But so for instance, um, he's not with us anymore, but what he's not dead, but David Fuller, rebel wisdom. Yeah. Like, because he, if you look at him, when he's with John Vervecky, um, or Jonathan Peugeot, like, it's very much kind of a winsome, right? Yeah. When some approach when he's talking to Dave Rubin. Well, if you told Dave Rubin that David Fuller is winsome, he wouldn't know what you're talking about. You know, with him, it was like, all right, you got to draw the line. Um, so that might have cost that might have cost David Fuller his relationship with Jordan Peterson, frankly. Okay. Um, but I like that because he's unpredictable. And, you know, issue by issue, individual by individual, you, you can select. So I don't know, do you have any thoughts on like, is it an either or, or how do you balance? I think, I think you're very right in that many of the most antithetical can be selectively winsome in certain places. Usually often because of their relational economy. And even the most winsome, there will be, there will be, uh, sensitive triggering areas that even the most winsome can get deeply antithetical quickly. And I think with some people, you know, some people like me, I'm high in openness. I think that tends to lean me towards winsome because I'm very curious and I kind of want to know. And that, that sort of feels good in me. And I think people, what's that? And if you're attacking somebody, they're not going to want to tell you their story. Yeah, exactly. And I, and I think those who are higher in negative emotion or neuroticism, I think they tend to be more antithetical because the world is a dangerous place and the world is a danger. You live in, you live in South Korea. That's a very, you know, the world is a very dangerous place on the Korean peninsula. South Korea is well, the peninsula may be dangerous. South Korea is incredibly safe. It's one of the things I like about it compared to Philadelphia. Yeah, yeah. No, I believe that. But, but the, so there's definitely a temperamental difference between team winsome and team antithesis, but there's always going to be overlap and David Fuller, a lot of it depends on sort of what your agenda is. I mean, if you, if you have a fairly rigid religious formation and especially if you're higher in neuroticism, you're probably going to defend that formation pretty, pretty, pretty intensely. Right. And that's going to make winsome feel like betrayal, watering down, slippery slope. So it's, so it's very interesting, but no, you're very, you're very right that it goes, it goes far beyond this. I mean, in many ways, part of what, part of what Donald Trump rose to the presidency on was the frustration with many in the Republican party that saw Republicans sort of out there naming a hard line, but when they get into office, they would compromise. Now, okay. Part of the reality though, is if you want to get anything done in the American political system, your, the system is set up in such a way that unless you have just total power, like let's say Democrats have in the state of California, you're going to have to compromise. And if you want to achieve any of your goals. And so it's, it's all of these deeply entrenched sort of temperamental and structural things that lead, I mean, like, you know, the Republicans had needed how many ballots to get the speaker of the house in this time. So you've, you've got some, you've got some people who are very low in agreeableness who are in there and they're going to be anything but winsome. And in some ways it's a very, it can be a very potent relational and negotiating tactic to be a real dogged hard liner. You might get more of what you want, or you might simply get ostracized and marginalized because people have come to the conclusion that there's nothing to be gained talking to you. So it's all of these dynamics that go on. And you see it in the church all the time. There are some churches that are tremendously dark. You see it within the, you see it within the Roman Catholic Church, of course. You've got elements of the Roman Catholic Church that are angry and frustrated and very, you know, tremendously rigid and Catholic. You've got other areas of the Roman Catholic Church that have people like Richard Rohr in it. And, you know, how many other Catholics out there? So. Yeah. But I'm curious. So if you apply it to what John Vervecki is doing, John Vervecki's work, because you said, you know, people are temperamentally predisposed to team winsome or team antithetical. And that makes sense. You know, we all have our personalities. But John, when you look at what he's doing, it's sort of like a training, right? Yes. You're kind of the examined life. You're examining yourself. And if you're examining yourself, then it opens a possibility to, you know, find what needs fixing. Yes. Right. So therefore, and, you know, he's responding to the meaning crisis. He's teaching people in ecology of practices. Yep. Do you think if we then apply that winsome, antithetical or blurred line distinct, or is there some third way? What is John pushing us? What is he training us for in those terms? Do you know what I mean? Yes. Like is he training us for team winsome? Because it doesn't quite seem like that. He's definitely not training us for team antithetical, but it has to apply on some level. John, it's interesting how John in the last couple of years has really sort of focused on neoplatonism. I mean, if you listen to him five years ago and you listen to him now, the word count for neoplatonism has gone like this. And so he's clearly been on his own journey, too, in terms of looking for a worldview that will be sufficiently pluralistic. And yet sufficiently, the difficulty with pluralism is that it can just sort of just become undone. Now suddenly there's everything and anything. And a lot of what, one way to understand the Peterson-Vervecki-Pageot nexus is that they are attempting to find structures beneath all of the diversity of world views that transcend them. And this, again, this has been a major part of the project since the wars of the Reformation. I mean, in many ways, the Enlightenment was an attempt to, let's get beyond the sort of entrenched positions of the Catholics and the Protestants and then the many positions of the Protestants, and get into a more, you know, a more, you know, a more, you know, many positions of the Protestants and get into a bigger system. And so John is very much trying to do that. And he's trying to both use ancient wisdom and contemporary science. And he, you know, his temperament is interesting because he's mostly winsome. But, you know, if you watch him carefully enough, you'll notice he does have some hard edges and some hard lines. They come out in Awakening from the Meaning Crisis now and then, you know, some things that he's passionate about. And everyone, you cannot have a structure without having your own dogmas. I mean, dogma is inevitable. Otherwise, you don't have identity. So he's, it's very interesting, like in the, let's see, what conversation was it? I think it was the last conversation I had with, was it the last conversation I had with him about the intro to his After Socrates, where we sort of wandered into a political realm. And he gave a pretty hard, you know, he gave, he's definitely got some very clear political and he's got some very clear positions out there. He doesn't talk about them much. So there's certainly winsome in antithesis, and there's also process versus dogma, let's say. Okay. And he's very heavy process. Okay. Whereas some people are very heavy dogma. Right. Procedural versus propositional. Exactly. Right. Okay. Okay. Because, yeah, so I'm interested in that. What, one of my favorite videos that you've ever done is your sermon on Jesus entering Jerusalem. Oh, okay. You know, when he's passing Jericho. Yeah, yeah. And what's the guy's name in the tree? Zacchaeus. Zacchaeus. Yeah. I mean, again, I think that story, you can apply that winsome antithetical filter to it. And Jesus, like, I don't want to compare David Fuller to Jesus, but Jesus, like David Fuller, you know, he blurs the lines. And because me, why I think this is all interesting is because, you know, because you like to participate in all this stuff. And I struggle with how to behave yourself in the most optimal way. Right. Because team winsome seems like, well, you want to be a nice guy. But, you know, especially on Twitter, people get snarky. And you end up expressing yourself in a way that, you know, 10 minutes later, you regret and you wouldn't have done in person. So I don't know. That's one of the reason I think it's interesting is because I think it also, at the end of the day, has to apply to our own behavior in the conversation, in the culture, or in whatever you want to talk about and how that guides us. So I don't know. It takes a fair amount of rigor to maintain a winsome posture. But if it's fake, I think it's not valuable. Well, the question is, what do you mean by fake? Because sometimes authenticity means that which erupts unreflexively, which is also sort of the same as, it can be the same as immature because one does want to cultivate a certain posture. But the process of cultivation, depending on one's definition of authenticity, leads people to say, well, if you had to cultivate it, it's not authentic. So that word authenticity really is difficult in our context because there are actually some real subtle contenders for its definition right now. Right. And there's also the problem of perception. Because, so for instance, I know people who don't like Tim Keller. They think he's kind of plastic. He's a little wishy washy. I don't think that. I quite like Tim Keller. But when they see him, they see a lack of authenticity, a sort of practiced media-friendly, made-for-consumption niceness. Whereas they want that guy that's going to give you the gospel and whether you like it or not, here it is. Right. Turner burn, baby. Is it authenticity? Can we really say, I think he's authentic. They say he's not. Is it just opinion? Well, when I'm on Twitter, and I dealt with this this morning because some tweets go further than others. And when I'm on Twitter, I will, I try to have a rule, no back and forth beyond two tweets. And sometimes no back and forth at all. Because now would, when I see something that, let's say someone responds to something that I did and I get triggered or reactive, is it authentic for me to just kick back? Is that authentic? Or is it more authentic for me to say, now, VanderKlay, you know where this goes. You've done this enough. You might feel like responding to this person right now in the way that sort of grabbed your consciousness might be satisfying and or productive. And I think that's a good thing. And I think that's a good thing. And I think be satisfying and or productive. But you know that three or four or five back and forth into this, it's neither, it's likely neither going to be satisfying nor productive. And at the end of that interchange, you're going to want to close the lid on your computer and put it away because, ah, I hate Twitter. And so, so what is authentic in that situation? Yeah, that's a good point. Like, because there is that idea of authenticity as your instinct, what is instinctual is authentic. But like you mentioned Donald Trump, you know, and that's kind of a lot of his appeal. So get up on stage. He has no script really. And he's just saying what comes out of his mouth. That's instinctual. That's authentic. Whereas, you know, people like, you know, who aren't as fond of him would say the man has no filter. Right. Or no wisdom. Right. There's nothing authentic about that. So, yeah. So we have this very, we don't, we like to use the word authentic and authentic is one of these. So buzzwords are holy words. And so authentic is one of these holy words in our culture. But when I watch people use that word, so authentic as instinct or authentic as authoritative, you know, which, which is it? And people are tremendously unclear on that. And they'll tend to flip back and forth. Usually authentic is that which they agree with. And it's like, okay, well, now we've got another word that's nearly spoiled. Right. Yeah. Now that I think about it, it's not a particularly useful word. No, it really isn't. It's so contentious that it doesn't really achieve much. Yeah. Yeah. It's like he's, he's being really authentic. Yeah. Donald Trump is being really authentic. And if you understand it as instinctive, maybe, but I'm not always sure that that's the case too, because he, he's been inordinately, unusually successful in many realms as a salesperson, as a marketer, as a popularizer. And sometimes when I watch him, I think this guy's a real expert at some of these things that he's doing. He makes it look completely, let's see, what's, what's a better word? He makes it, he makes it look easy. He makes it look spontaneous. Makes it look spontaneous. Yeah. And, and that, and, and that, and that gives people a sense of, I mean, so Peterson lately has been talking about the fact that he's been talking about psychopaths. And he talks about the fact that psychopaths usually look confident and young women mistake confidence for competence. And that's a, and he said, you know, older women through much sorrow on their own often figure that out eventually, but there's a lot of that in our culture where people mistake confidence for competence. And there's a lot going on. Right. And I think a lot of that, like a lot of words that we use, they have like a double valence. So like to say that someone's brave or to say that someone's foolhardy. Right. Well, they're the same thing, just depending on whether they win. Right. Or if you say somebody's like confident versus they have braggadocio, right? It's a confident good, braggadocio bad, but really it's up to the eye of the perceiver. Right. And so for, for team, for team winsome, I think people, you know, like Tim Keller is trying to play a, he's trying to play an evangelistic game with usually a very intelligent, subtle community. And he is trying to move them along certain lines. And whereas let's say someone who is quite a bit more antithetical that just wants to look, John MacArthur. Okay. So Tim Keller, John MacArthur, you know who John MacArthur is? Yeah, I know. Okay. So John MacArthur would be someone who's, you know, we're not going to, we're not going to have a conversation about masks. Don't wear any masks into church. We're not going to close anything down. And if state of California tries to stop us, we're going to take him to court. So, and, and in some ways, you know, John MacArthur won. So good on him. But if you look at that sample, in this case, he won, you can find many other ways and many other people that have lost in other ways by being dogmatic about something. You know, at the beginning of the automobile, the automotive era, someone might've said electric vehicles are the future. They might've said that in 1912. And well, by 1930, it was very clear that gasoline vehicles were the future by 2023. It looks more like electric vehicles are the future. So, you know, right. There's a lot that goes into this question. And, you know, was, was Augustin winsome or antithetical? Well, it kind of depends on, you know, he's brought in a lot of neoplatonism, kind of depends on exactly how you're looking at them. So even those categories can sometimes be slippery. Yeah. Sounds good. Yeah. It's just, yeah, it's just something I, I think about in terms of my own behavior and what other people do. So that's why I wanted to talk about that with you. Well, I think about it a lot too, because I, as open as I am and as winsome as I am, I, I don't want to shut the door on the antithetical. Right. Because over time, certain stubborn, low and agreeableness antithetical communities and positions pay off. They really do. Others just lose and are gone. Yeah. At least in certain frameworks. For example, the, the people that when television came out decided no TV. Okay. You know, there's some really good things about that. Their kids read a lot of books. Yeah. There are some other things that weren't good about that because maybe their kids having zero experience with certain kinds of media, some people got overwhelmed by it. The world is just so large and complex that wisdom is trying, is the whole point of figuring out what, what you need to be dogmatic about and what you can be flexible with and when it's, it's tremendously difficult. Right. And does it improve with age? Would you say you're, would you say you're much wiser now as you're raising you were 20 years ago, for instance, my data set has grown. Okay. And that's helpful. Yeah. But also my, as you age, your, your relative amount of potential diminishes. I mean, I have, you know, my father died at 77. I'm 59. So, you know, my father, my grandfather died at 90. So am I going to die at 77 or at 90? What does that mean for where I should spend my time in this decade, how I should spend the next 10 years of my life? So I think I have grown in wisdom, but my ability to engage this world continues to change as a function of my age. I mean, even, even in this world, because I am bald and have a big white beard, even if I cut my beard off, I'm still gonna, you know, my hair turned gray a decade ago. It's, it's, I, I'm cast, I, I regularly talk to people who look younger than I am, but are older than I am. And does that help me or hurt me? Well, it helps me in some ways and it hurts me in other ways. I mean, the world is just so immensely complex and wisdom is in the moment having to make the best decision that you can and then learning from both your successes and your failures. So the bigger the data set, supposedly the better you'll do, but still no guarantee. Right. Okay. Anyway, well, this has been fun. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I enjoyed it. It was good to meet you. Well, face to face. I've got many hours listening to you. So I'm. Yeah. And I've seen your comments and I recognized your name and now it's fun because now when I see your name again, my view of you is, you know, it's still just an hour of conversation, but it's much higher resolution than just sort of the, what I tally up in terms of the low resolution impression of the comments and such. So. Right. Okay. I will send this to you and you can decide whether or not this is something that you'd be okay with me sharing because part of it is, I mean, part of the reason that the community, that there is a sense of community on my channel and that community grows is because, I mean, these conversations sort of up the resolution with people. And now suddenly when people see a comment, oh, that's right. He talked to Paul. If they remember it, I mean, it actually stacks up very slowly and never as much as you might imagine, but. Yeah. All right. That is part of the intentionality. Yeah. All right. Well, thank you very much. I enjoyed it. Well, this has been delightful and God's blessings to you with your, with your son. Oh, thank you. It's a, yeah, it's a, it's a big calling. It's a big calling, but, but in my exp in my experience, even those hard things can produce good fruits of wisdom. So I pray that for you. Right. All right. Thank you. I appreciate it. All right. Take care. Have a good one. God bless. Yep. Bye-bye.