https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pHXC4ryM9GY

 Hi, this is Paul and while I was on my weekend thing, I played, this is Justin Wells, some of you know who he is by now. I played his conversation with Grim Grizz, which I thought was absolutely outstanding. I think we got a chance to know Justin a little bit better. We heard about his idea for a little maybe 10 minute on-ramp intro for this little corner. So Justin and I had planned this little talk this morning to sort of give an update and ask for more material, but things have evolved. So Justin, why don't you let people know where things are at right now? Okay. So, yeah, so as you know, it started with John Van Dong saying to me, you know, why don't you make a video based on the Chino Conference, the Quest for a Spiritual Home conference with the other material that I've gathered over this past year that would be kind of an introduction to what estuary is. And I think that that's going to be easy. Now, so I dove into editing it and I wound up with over the weekend, I looked at my timeline and I had 45 minutes of very watchable footage that I had cut together. And I thought to myself, is this really, is this, you know, so I talked to Chad yesterday and I showed Chad some scenes and I, you know, so I'm starting to think, you know what, I think that this could be a bigger project. Now again, I still don't know where it would land, but I think that there's enough material here to make a feature length documentary. I think that it would be sustainable for someone that's not maybe familiar with this little corner of the Internet and the high level conversations and the insider language to be able to watch this for for, you know, 80 minutes or 90 minutes, hour and a half. I think it's possible. So so I think that I'd like to just kind of keep going and see where it lands. And again, we were talking just before we started recording, not sure about what where documentary film is going these days in terms of where people will would like to watch something like this, whether it would be on YouTube or some other platform. But but everything that I've gotten from the community, the confession booth audio that I did at the Chino conference, which was which was very, very gracious of people to go in anonymously, tell their stories to me just via audio in the confession booth. And then people that have been sending me messages on Twitter saying, I didn't get a chance to tell my story, but I still want to. And so I've given them the opportunity to send in audio or video to me, which is still open. I'm still open to if you have a story about this little corner of the Internet estuary, your journey in to and out of and through the meaning crisis. I certainly would love to hear that. But I thought maybe I'd show just a little sample here of kind of how I'm kind of thinking about it. And and those of you that have been in this in this community longer than me, I'd love to hear from you in terms of if you think this is if you think this is working, if you think this is worthwhile, those of you that I talked to in Germany back in September, you know, now you're you're probably wondering, I would gather that footage. What happened now? I'm finally putting it all together. And so it's all I'll just show you a little maybe three, four minutes. Does that sound good? That sounds great. OK. Sharing screen. OK, so. Imagine this is about halfway through. I've already introduced the meaning crisis. I've already introduced a few key concepts from, say, John Verbecky. And this is going to be basically your your introduction into the film. So this is about we'll watch about five minutes of it. OK. Let go back just a touch. This argument before we the pervasive worldview, the scientific worldview is a worldview in which we do not belong, in which we do. Our existence as cognitive, personal, moral agents doesn't belong. Right around before my dad died, I ate psychedelic mushrooms and it kind of changed everything. In that moment, I was with a bunch of friends and it was just a very interesting time. But there were like several lessons that were immediately engraved into my mind that I didn't really understand the fullness of until later. But the first thing that struck me was I actually hate myself. I don't want to live. And I saw that clearly. And I in this state asked, well, that's why. That's silly. Like you're alive. So why should you wish to be dead? You know, and so I was able to reconsider all of these things and I immediately knew that, OK, so you should probably stop smoking weed all the time. And yeah, stop drinking. And all these things like, oh, just start here. You know, and but it was also beyond those very practical things. It's like the group was about 10 people. And immediately it split into two between these hyper rational materialist types that were arguing for how science is going to prove everything and science is the only answer and blah, blah, blah. But then there was this other group of people of which I felt very much like in tune with that was saying. The ineffable is the supreme period, and that is the source. And it was so funny to hear them talk about their measuring instruments and their numbers. And we're laughing and laughing. It fills us with such joy because it's silliness, you know? And so that moment kind of ripped up the husk of who I was and allowed some new growth. So Reverend Paul VanderKlay is a Dutch reform pastor who served as a missionary in the Dominican Republic for several years before taking the call as a pastor in Sacramento, California. Reverend VanderKlay is known for his deep engagement with culture. Okay, and then I would go into your backstory and how you started a YouTube channel and how it came about that you are sort of hearing these confessions from all of these different randos, all these different people. And what a kind of crazy thing that that is. Yeah, over YouTube. It's a very crazy thing. Yeah, that's that's powerful. And and before you played some clips from the confessional booth from the conference to and, you know, I've been really curious because I have a sense of what's in there because I've heard a lot of it on my channel, the randos conversations. But even just with the next, I'd say about half to two thirds of the conversations that I do are posted and the others aren't. And people can say things with the camera off without a name that they can't necessarily say with their name or at least their face on video. And of course, that's I mean, pastors know this because it's it's part of what part of what our work is. But there's so much truth out there that I started posting these randos conversations partly because I knew when people would tell me these stories, they were not alone. But they all felt alone because there were seldom spaces where they could tell this story and have someone else say, oh, me too. Oh, that's true of me, too. And to begin to make connections with each other, which which for me has been what Estuary and this little corner and this whole project has been about. So, yeah, that's I'm I'm so excited about this project. I just partly because for so many people to. So so I here's this relatively small YouTube channel and I post a conversation with someone that nobody else, hardly anybody else on the Internet knows. And why would anybody watch that conversation? And when it comes to my video analytics, I know if I put a video up about Jordan Peterson or John Verbeke or Jonathan Peugeot or some famous person, lots of people watch it. And then I put a Randall's conversation and, you know, a few hundred people watch it. But those who have watched that together, that sort of becomes a holy space and a holy moment. And and then suddenly all of those randos sort of start getting that into a community and a group of people. And and for me, that's, you know, that's really what this project is about. So that and as Grimm Grizz says, you know, people will be even more than virtually not alone. And that that's what the conference was about. So now I'm I'm super excited about this, Justin. I'm super excited about this. Yeah. So go ahead. Oh, no, I was just going to say, yeah, what I'm interested in is the phenomenon. What you might say, what's the phenomenon that I want to document? It's actually those numbers right at the bottom of your little YouTube, those people watching, you know, is there a common story or a common pattern? You know, maybe the background of the meaning crisis, individual feelings of of, let's say, not belonging, trying to process this moment in time in human history that we find ourselves in. You know, I think it's a very profound, you know, moment and this hopefully the reason why I want to do it is to contribute my rumination. To to to provide an opportunity for us collectively to ruminate on these patterns. So what? So collect them all together, you know, collect the stories together. And I think there is a common sort of, you know, thread of of this. I don't know what you call it, spiritual journey or intellectual journey or emotional journey that this whole generation maybe or generation or two is going through. I agree. I agree. So so obviously, you know, it's it's a it's a little bit of drama. The difficulty of getting a slot on my channel, a rando slot to tell people stories, that's a constant thing. I always get way more requests than I have time myself to sit for. But how can and so what's been gratifying about this is, you know, the other channels have taken a lot of time to do this. And what's gratifying about this is, you know, the other channels have taken this up, you know, grim grizz has and part of for me, my goal in this has always been to sort of not build a monolithic empire that Paul VanderKlay or estuary ink, but rather much more of a network. And I think that's the reason why I get distributed because when it's distributed, then more and more people can share. So if people want to participate in this and they maybe haven't gotten a rando slot with me or weren't able to go to the conference, how can they how can they participate? Yeah, just just go to go to find me on Twitter. You're one of the ones who got me back on Twitter. I don't know if that's a good thing, but here we are. I'll put my Twitter handle below and just shoot me a message. And I have a few people now who are doing this. They're saying, you know, they're going to I mean, all I want you to do is find a quiet place, a quiet room and record your story. Try to keep it one to five minutes at the most. And if it's something that you want to be anonymous, just specify and and or if you if you don't mind your name or face being in it, you could record a video. But I kind of I kind of like this idea of. This is not we're not focusing on the face of the person we're not focusing on, but this is a pattern of of collective, you know, processing mental mental processing that that that a whole bunch of people are going through. And I'm looking for that common thread. So the way I'm structuring it just so and you guys can give me your let me know if you think this is work. So those of you that have been in this community longer than I have listening to Paul longer than I have in this little corner of the Internet longer than I have. I'm sort of going from general to specific. The general background of the meaning crisis. That's the background. That's the setting that we're in. The feeling the emotional sense of not belonging and some not belonging to a community, not belonging to a metaphysical story, not belonging to this or that. That's the sense. So that and then. What to do? What are you doing now? You know, estuary is something that people are doing now. Together, not alone is something that people are doing now. Campfires, you know, camping in Germany in land out Germany in the rain, you know, whatever it might be making music or whatever it is that you're doing sort of as you to to maybe to address the the the meaning crisis and the crisis and the not belonging. But those four things. So as it relates to those four things, that's kind of what I'm thinking. All right. And I will I will I will talk to John and Jonathan too, because there are corners to the corner and you don't have to necessarily watch my videos to participate in this. There are a lot of people who watch primarily John Verveke stuff. There are a lot of people who participate predominantly in the symbolic world. And so this fringe has fringes too. So I would say if you listen to how Justin just sort of laid it out, you know, find Justin again. I'll put his his his Twitter handle below and message him. And yeah, and participate. I'm I'm blown away that Justin wants more materials because over the last five years I've done all my conversation playlist is over 500. Now some of those are with, you know, John Verveke and Jonathan Peugeot and so on and so forth. But the vast majority of them are with randos who just telling their story. I mean, there's just an immense amount of material out there. So I'm amazed that you can sift it and pull it together. And I Justin showed me another little clip before we started recording, which mostly from sort of the confessional booth at the conference. And it was was really moving and really powerful. So I'm I'm very excited about this. So yeah, and we'll just see where it goes. I I have no idea where this thing will land wind up. But I figure why not? Why not just keep going? Why not just push forward? Absolutely. Well, that's kind of how my thing started. It was like, well, people are watching. Why not just keep doing it? What could happen? So here we are. All right. So any other any other things that people need to know? Otherwise, we'll keep this fairly short. At least relatively on my. No, no, no. I'm just I just want to say thank you for everybody who has talked to me so far. And and again, I'm not I I'm I want to listen to to to your guys experience. I'm not I'm not trying to impose a story on this or anything or necessarily, you know, decide where this thing is going to. I really want the feedback from the community and I see it as a gift to the community or perhaps a gift that the community can help give to the rest of the world. You know, so so that's how I'm approaching it. And what's for especially for the audio podcast? What is your Twitter name or however? What's what's your Twitter address? It's at one J Wells. I mean, OK, at one O and E, J, W, E, L, L, S. Yes. Wait, let me at one J. Well, W, E, L, L, S. Yeah. OK. That one J Wells. OK. I will put that below and it'll be in the notes of the podcast, the audio podcast about if you look at my about a third of my listeners are pretty much audio podcasts mostly. Oh, I see. I want to be sensitive to those who are just listening. And yeah, so and and those of you out there in the audio podcast land to you can just take your smartphone and almost Samsung's apples. They all have these little voice recorders get into a quiet space that'll make a good recording and then you can fairly easily. Or if you want to make a YouTube video, you know, if you have a Gmail address, you can make a YouTube video as long as the audio is good and then just send him the link. And that way he can check it out. So good. Thank you, Justin. Thanks, Paul. All right.