https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uFszq2LkxEY

 Hi, this is Paul. This is a video I've been waiting for a while to get to. It touches on a bunch of the issues that I touched on in the previous video. Gris made the comment, I did the hand things and I didn't say opponent processing. So winsome versus antithetical, sort of opponent processing in the culture. This is a big deal right now in evangelical churches. Evangelicalism is sort of splitting apart over this winsome versus not winsome. Sort of ground zero for this was a conference up in Battleground, Washington that happened earlier this year. Aaron Wren, I met Aaron in Chicago in the little estuary cluster thing that we had in Chicago. I had with Bethel McGrew before I went to Synod this summer. And Aaron's work is something that I've been watching for a long time. He started with a newsletter called The Masculinist, which turned a whole bunch of women that I know off right away. But it was quite popular. And part of what's interesting about Aaron Wren is that in the, so in terms of evangelical church culture, a major, you had sort of the moral majority, and that was in the 1980s. That was followed up by the seeker movement in the 1980s and 1990s. And the seeker movement was followed by the emergent movement. And the emergent movement was sort of a split between, that's really where the beginnings of sort of the progressive evangelicals and the young restless and reformed started to diverge. You had reformed theology suddenly getting very popular in a lot of Southern Baptist places. And during this time, Tim Keller in New York City began to really draw the nation's attention. And he on one hand was a minister. The last video I did in this series was about Tim Keller. Tim Keller was a minister in the Presbyterian Church, the PCA, the Presbyterian Church of America, which was a split off of the PCUSA, which is the old mainline denomination. And Tim Keller went to New York City. I should pay more, I should probably do more background with Tim Keller because a lot of people don't know his background and don't understand where Tim Keller comes from because actually these stories get very old. Tim Keller got his undergraduate, he first went to seminary at Gordon Conwell. He went to Bushnell in Pennsylvania, went to Gordon Conwell. That's where he met his wife, his wife Kelly. Kelly's at it. Shoot. And then he went to Westminster, Philadelphia. And part of what was happening at Westminster, Philadelphia during the seventies was during the seventies and eighties, especially during the seventies, was sort of this urban renewal in conservative reformed communities. And in many ways, my father was sort of adjacent to that movement. And in fact, there was one summer where my father was the speaker at a conservative Presbyterian camp. I was too young, it was mostly for teenagers, I was too young. But because we were the family of the speaker, we stayed in this house. And I remember that trip quite well. But what I didn't appreciate was that there was this whole urban ministry movement that was going on within the neo-evangelical community and Westminster, Philadelphia was sort of ground zero for that. The Christian Forum Church was quite involved with that, Spirit and Truth Fellowship in Philadelphia. And so this is very much part of my roots. And Tim Keller comes out of that movement. Roger Greenway, who is the father of a friend and classmate of mine, Scott Greenway, who's got ministers in West Michigan, is in the CRC. Roger Greenway, Scott Greenway is another third generation, I believe his son's going into the ministry. So I guess they're adding a fourth. But so there's a lot of ties to this. And so of course, Tim Keller takes some of the ideas of the seeker movement, doesn't like a lot of the kitsch and some of the entertainment of it and sort of adds kind of a classical neo-Puritan movement. Of course, Tim Keller is right there with the foundation of the Gospel Coalition. Tim Keller then plans Redeemer Presbyterian in New York City, leaves Westminster Seminary. And that's when in the 90s and early aughts, Tim Keller became very popular in the Christian Reformed circles. And he was kind of a bridge figure. A lot of Christian Reformed progressives were leery of him because he was against women elders and women ministers, although he had women deacons. And when I visited Redeemer Press in 2006, a lot of the ministry, the heads of ministry departments were women. So Tim Keller sort of straddled that line a little bit. He was clearly formally complementarian, as was his wife. They have a book, his wife has a very interesting book on it, in fact. And, but they were sort of the hot church in the aughts. And Tim Keller, Tim Keller would go on major media. He would sort of be the kind of, you can find the Tim Keller talk at Google. Tim Keller captured the imagination of a lot of people because here was someone who was a Christian conservative who seemed to also have some traction in the culture. And so Tim Keller really became sort of the winsome prototype for this kind of ministry. Now, another guy who spoke at this conference, James Wood, who is now teaching at Redeemer University, which is a university in Ontario, Canada that was founded by Christian Reformed people as an alternative to Calvin University, not necessarily because of politics, Christian Reformed politics at Calvin, but as much because it just cost a lot more for Canadians because of the exchange to go to college in Michigan. They couldn't work. I knew some seminarians, some Canadian seminarians who were quite impoverished by trying to live in Michigan and go to school in Michigan, especially those who had gone later in life. Anyway, so towards the end of sort of the heyday of Redeemer, Tim Keller retired a number of years ago. Aaron Wren wrote The Masculinist and sort of came in on that sweep because part of what was going on with James Davidson Hunter, Tim Keller was there was this renewal of interest as to whether or not evangelicals could do ministry in urban settings and sort of like what Willow Creek Church in northern Chicago did. Now again, another Christian Reformed tie, Bill Hybels grew up in the Christian Reformed Church. Willow Creek became the kind of church that would start a church planting movement and help plant churches all over the world. Redeemer Presbyterian did that too, but their focus was on cities. Part of what happened with Redeemer was I got to know Fred Harrell, Scott Sherman, Mike Hayes. They had sort of a Redeemer plant in San Francisco and when they came and planted their church in San Francisco, sort of like Redeemer in New York, it grew fast as, and it was a strange thing because he was a Complementarian, conservative Reformed Church in the heart of one of America's most liberal cities and the church flourished. The church then moved from the PCA to the Reformed Church of America so they could, some of you are going to, I'm predicting it in the comments, it's going to come, so they could ordain women, but they swore up and down when they joined the Reformed Church in America that they weren't going to budge on same-sex marriage. So then they came to the Reformed Church of America. Pretty soon there were sort of a special urban ministry classes in the Reformed Church of America and then a few years after that they sort of gave a statement on same-sex sexuality that, well, that was a big fight in the Reformed Church of America and they lost a lot of the people that were going to their church and it was, it was, there was a lot of drama in that. All that to say is that Wren comes in towards the end of, let's say, the Tim Keller Urban Ministry Movement and Wren right away was talking in some ways a lot of the same language as Tim Keller, James Davidson Hunter, about renewal of the city and especially about the cultural relationship between elites and the culture of the nation. Now the United States is a massive nation with a lot of cultural conflict and many subcultures, so it's very difficult to talk about these things. At our last estuary meeting one of the topics that came up was, can you really say things are getting better or things are getting worse, they're sort of moving in the right direction? Political pollsters love to do this sort of thing. Aaron Wren wrote a piece and then wrote another piece and one got posted at First Things, which is a former, which is an interesting website and its story is also interesting in terms of the conservative Christian space in the United States on the positive, neutral, and negative world and so he's really been a central figure in this and one of the things I really like about Wren is that he is more self-conscious about the transition of American Protestant Waspi elites and how that transition has gone. I remember when I got the book, Jesus and John Wayne, to me I was, I'm very well accustomed to the tight relationship between American conservative politics and American conservative evangelicalism. That's old news. You know, we saw that with Karl Rove, we saw that with George W. Bush, we saw that with the moral majority. You can see the roots of that in George Marsden's writing about American fundamentalism and what happened through the 20th century. All of that is old news. To me, the far more interesting story is the story that Wren, Aaron Wren, in many ways almost uniquely keeps an eye on, which is what happened to the American Protestant elite that basically used to run this country and if there's a, I think, I think for a professional historian to really write that story well, that to me is really the central story and Wren isn't a professional historian but he works on that and he talks about that more than anybody else and to me that's the ball to keep your eye on and Wren does it and Wren does it better than almost anyone and so when suddenly I saw this video pop up in Twitter and from James Wood that he had spoken at this conference and then I went and saw the conference videos and I thought these videos more than a lot of things are really sort of at the nexus of what's happening in the culture so I want to give this some time so here we go. ... negative world, it's up to me to tell you what it is and so that's what my first talk is basically going to be today and we used to talk about the culture war or this conflict between the church and secular society. Well today it seems like there's a culture war. Now before I let them get too far this is a lot of in-house talk so these are conservative, politically conservative, small orthodox, big R reformed, this is a gathering for these people and this is obviously not in a major church. This is a small church I think in a fairly small, I didn't look up, Grizz says he's been to battleground Washington, I never have, I'm sure Nate Heil can add some light here but so this is a lot of in-house talk and but I think this has implications that definitely deal with many of the tensions that are in this little corner of the internet for us and so when you listen, yeah let's let them go some more. But the culture war is actually inside of the evangelical church itself. We're seeing a lot of conflict, a lot of acrimony, and a lot of realignment so we'll have this group of evangelicals over here point their fingers at this group over here and say look at them they voted for Trump, how dare they, how horrible is that? And then you have this group of evangelicals over here pointing their finger over here and say they're going woke, they're abandoning traditional teachings on sexuality, whatever it may be and there's all this conflict and if you're on Twitter then you see it every day. We also see the people like David French who you would have classified as a really a hardcore culture war type is actually spends most of his time now criticizing conservative evangelicals. Russell Moore who actually ran a major entity or agency in the Southern Baptist Convention left to join the staff of a church that baptizes babies. Somebody needs to find out what's going on there. And Owen Strand who is a Southern Baptist Seminary professor, he left a very nice established seminary to go be the provost of a startup seminary. So people are moving around, alliances are changing, and there's conflict and what's causing this, what's going on, and what is happening is that there has been a fundamental shift in society into what I call the negative world. I love it that you can hear babies cry during this presentation. That's a sign of a healthy place. That is putting tremendous new pressure and different forms of pressure on the evangelical church which is producing deformation of existing strategies, sort of conflict and realignment similar to what we see happening in conservative politics. Now this is an old story and this is why I often recommend that people read George Marsden on the history of American fundamentalism and especially the war between the modernists and the fundamentalists. Another video I want to do on Tom Holland's Jesus. In many ways we have to work through the issues raised in the modernist fundamentalist war and we have to do that in terms of understanding the Bible and all of the stuff that's going on in the Jordan Peterson biblical seminar stuff, the stuff we're doing with cognitive science, all of this for a minister, this is why I'm interested in this stuff, all this impinges on the fallout from the fundamentalist modernist war that happened and split denominations, split families. So Westminster Philadelphia grew out of old Princeton theological seminary and in much of the modernist fundamentalist wars in the church wars in the early 20th century the conservatives and fundamentalists lost and so they had to go out and found new institutions. What's happening now is basically similar to that and there's a major divisions that are going on in evangelical churches. So if you roll the clock back to the 1950s this was probably the high watermark of Christianity in America, about half of all adults attended church every Sunday in the 1950s, more than that were members, we were adding in God we trust to our money, we were adding under God to the Pledge of Allegiance, we had a sort of Protestant establishment in America at that time, there was even prayer in the public schools and while it may not have been an especially devout era perhaps, there was a sort of soft institutionalization of a sort of generic Protestantism that was in the process of absorbing Catholics and Jews into that as well. A couple of things now it's nice when they pull the camera back to get a sense of who's there. Now notice this is a very young audience and anybody that's been around in the church space or even in this little corner space this is a very young audience. I mean a lot of these guys if they had been new atheists at some point and you know come through the Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot pipeline might be ortho bros but these are sort of next generation probably young restless and reformed, that's who this is. The history that he's talking about is important because at the beginning of the 20th century even in mainline waspy American church there's plenty of exclusivity. African Americans had their own institution, Jews were not welcome, Catholics were not welcome. Part of what happens in the second world war in the Roosevelt administration, Franklin Roosevelt for the first time puts Catholics and Jews in places in elite positions in the government, in the cabinet and so this then causes in the 1950s and the 1960s a lot of debate about there's a famous book written Protestant Catholic Jew. These were sort of the the three main white elements of the culture of course African Americans that then is going to become increasingly an issue through the civil rights movement but again the black church sociologically is very different from the white church in America because of the historic roots. So what Wren is mostly talking about is politics in white churches. Now that's also going to continue to change because of Pentecostals. There's no church movement as racially integrated in America as Pentecostalism. Pentecostal churches are in the old style rainbow coalition as Jesse Jackson might say and Hispanics, African Americans, whites, the Pentecostal movement has really done racial integration better than almost any other movement. So these are some of the issues. And so Christianity was held in esteem and honor in the country but starting in the 1960s and you know again when he says Christianity it's important to remember that's mainline Christianity. This is part of my complaint with the whole Christian nationalist language because go to Duke University there's a cathedral at the center. Go to Wellesley College, very liberal college in Massachusetts. There's a church building at the center. Every Christmas they hold a multi-faith celebration of you know choirs, you know very beautiful, very lovely music if you like that kind of music. So any mainline university you go to when I talk to James Wellman, you know the church building surrounding institutions and academies, go to major colleges and you will find church buildings at the center. And again if you want to understand this read George Marsden's work on the secularization of universities in America. I've talked about that in videos. So church and state were right like this. But remember it was America was mostly Protestants during the 40s and 50s. Catholic and Jews were let in. That's when you begin to get this Judeo-Christian as sort of a phrase sort of allowing the Catholic and Jews into the power structure in America. You probably date it to the Kennedy assassination. I don't think the Kennedy assassination per se had anything to do with it. But somewhere around that date things started to go the wrong direction for Christianity. Christianity went- Okay now another person to member to mention in this history and again I've touched this on videos in the past is Robert Bella. During the Kennedy administration Robert Bella writes about civil religion and coins that phrase and talks about the fact that in American society you also sort of have this other pretty Christian sort of religionish nationalism. Anybody know what day Abe Lincoln was assassinated on? Good Friday. Abe Lincoln is in many ways the Jesus of American civil religion and let's say George Washington is the Moses. Let us out of the promised land of British monarchical imperialism and if you read any history in America you'll bump into these things a lot. Into a period of decline in America starting around 1964, one that continues all the way forward to the present day. In this period of decline from 64 to the present I divide into three different eras or worlds that I call the positive, the neutral, and the negative worlds. These names refer to how society as a whole views Christianity. We're used to talking about how the church views culture. So it's a very famous book by H. Richard Niebuhr called Christ in Culture. It's all the different ways that different Christian people have attempted over the years to reconcile Christ and culture. This is a little bit the opposite. Mm-hmm. Christ in Culture was basically everyone at Calvin College when I went to Calvin College had to read Christ in Culture. That was a big deal for our little subculture and Calvin College was very much the wing of the Christian Reformed Church in the post, in the Cold War years was we were Kiperian transformationalist. Now even sort of this Kiperian theme has sort of split in the United States now. This is how the culture views Christianity. So in the positive world, which lasted from 1964 to 1994, Christianity is in decline, church attendance is declining, the metaphysical and moral claims of Christianity- I don't know if I need to have it started. Positive world was pretty much everything in America and it intensified into the 50s and 60s. But again, you can't read George Marsden's history of American church history or Mark Knoll's history of American church history and not appreciate just how deeply Protestant America was. Protestantism was in many respects sort of the state church of America, but because it didn't have a state church, evangelicalism sort of became half of it, the neo-evangelicalism, but again that's after the Second World War. It was the main line church that was the established, that was the establishment churches in America. You're being called into question. Nevertheless, Christianity is still basically viewed positively. To be known as a good church-going man, people want to vote for you. It helps you get a job, that sort of thing. And Christian moral norms are still the basic moral norms of society. Around 1994, we hit a tipping point in which Christianity was no longer viewed positively, but it wasn't really yet viewed negatively either. It was sort of seen as a sort of socially neutral attribute, hence this is the neutral world. Now you can also see in that period the rise of new atheism and this sort of really got heated up then with 9-11 and the sort of the recession of Christianity. I've talked about this a lot when I first started making videos and first started making commentary videos about Jordan Peterson. Part of what happened with Darwin is that first the Bible was just assumed as a source of truth and when I get into the questions about Tom Holland and Jesus and modernist readings of the Bible, the Bible was a source of truth. What happens in the modernist fundamentalist fight is that fundamentalists say the Bible is a source for history and morals and the modernists say the Bible is a source for morals only. And what happens then is you get this fight over a modernist conceptualization of history and again that's another video that I want to get into. What begins to happen in the 1990s is that the Bible went from again with the fundamentalists this is our source for history and morals. The main line said this is our source for morals and then in the 1990s you started to have the question of is the Bible an adequate source for our moral life? And that was again part of the women's movement. The Bible was seen as somewhat recessive with respect to the roles of women and then obviously the LGBTQ movement. The Bible was seen as regressive with respect to same sex sexuality. So increasingly in the 90s and then in the aughts the Bible increasingly people were suspicious that those old morals that we derive from the Bible not so good. That lasted from around 1994 to 2014. And then in neutral world Christianity is essentially one lifestyle choice among many in a sort of pluralistic multicultural society. And in this era Christian moral norms held a sort of residual force. But around 2014 we hit a second tipping point. Now again this is pretty broad ranging but again back with my thesis with Tom Holland the Bible still sort of lays the moral foundation but it's sort of bifurcated. Ross Douthat just wrote a really good piece in the New York Times about this. It's sort of it's continuing to fracture. So sort of the moral agreements that there were in the United States that's continuing to fracture. And entered what I call the negative world where for the first time in the 400 year history of America society as a whole elite culture now views Christianity negatively. Being known as a devout Bible believing Christian does not help you get a job in Silicon Valley today. Quite the opposite in fact. Additionally Christian morality is expressly repudiated by society and is even viewed as a threat to the new emerging moral order. Now in Canada it's also the case that there are places Canada's far more secular than the United States. And on the university it's very secular. You might not have no professors at the university who are Christians. Christianity might not you know ABC as Rupert Sheldrake said anything but Christian. And so the Canadian story is different because Canadian history is different from American history. I like to illustrate the difference between these worlds using three different presidential sex scandals. In the positive world you can go back to 1987 Colorado Senator Gary Hart was a leading contender for the Democratic nomination for president the next year. The Miami Herald reported that a young woman had stayed overnight in his townhouse in Washington D.C. and he was forced to drop out of the race. Just the appearance of potentially having had an affair disqualified him from running. Fast forward to the neutral world 1998 the Drudge Report breaks the news that Bill Clinton has been having an affair with White House intern Monica Lewinsky. This caused a massive scandal. Bill Clinton was badly damaged by it. It probably cost Al Gore the election in 2000. Now part of this was also Americans were increasingly electing governors from the south. They're trying to bridge that that moral gap. But of course that that has continued to that has continued to change as well. And yet the Democrats rallied around him and he survived and people said look his his personal behavior however deplorable is not relevant to his public performance in office. So it damaged him but he survived it. In the negative world fast forward to October 2016 NBC News has been sitting on this Access Hollywood tape of Trump making all these statements about women and they're just ready to drop their October surprise. They can't wait to take Trump down with this tape. They release it and it turns out to be a 48-hour blip of a scandal and he goes on to win the election a couple weeks later. So in the negative world these sex scandals basically don't matter at all. And I think there's a sort of irony maybe a delicious irony in a sense that the very people who tore down and rejected the Christian moral system are the ones who made it possible for someone like Donald Trump to become president. If we weren't in the negative world Donald Trump would never have been considered a serious candidate for president due to his personal behaviors. But in this negative world it didn't matter anymore. And of course the other irony is that the people who voted for Trump are the people who would have previously been most strident that character and leaders matter. So I think it's kind of interesting that the profound consequences this negative world has had for our society. Now I really love the point he made there because you might miss it but the point he made is that it's not just let's say the cultural heirs of the main line that are changing as the world changes. It's also the conservative, the fundamentalists. They too have been changing. I mean again Gary Hart so back when Gary Hart was no longer considered a viable candidate he was no longer considered a viable candidate because what he did violated mainline sensitivities even though and I mean even though of course presidential mistresses and sex scandals had gone on forever but of course the press didn't talk about FDR's lover, didn't talk about John F. Kennedy's dalliances in the White House. They didn't talk about that. The culture has been changing and so Gary Hart, bang, no longer suitable candidate. Bill Clinton, you know many of the people who yelled their heads off over the Monica Lewinsky scandal lined up for Trump and Ren's point is that this isn't just one side changing and you know pointing out hypocrisy. This is the whole culture moving. Now why did I pick these dates and again picking dates for transitions in history is always somewhat impressionistic. I picked 2014 as the neutral to negative transition because this was one year before the Supreme Court's Obergefell decision that essentially institutionalized Christianity's new status in society. 2014 is also when people including democratic pundits like Matthew Iglesias started talking about what they called the great awoke. Now again in all fairness to some who listened to this video Aaron Wren has his own filters about what Christianity should be and that's implicit in what he just said about institutionalized Christianity's position in society. Again I'm waiting for a historian to really write a good book about basically if you have Christian nationalism on the one side you have Christian imperialism on the other side and those Christian imperialists are heirs of the mainline churches. Including democratic pundits like Matthew Iglesias started talking about what they called the great awoken. The use of phrases like white supremacy or structural racism just exploded in the major media. Also 2013 is when New York University professor Jonathan Haidt a lot of people follow Jonathan Haidt he started saying man I notice something's up with my students. Crazy things are happening on campus. So clearly something happened during Obama's second term that represented a major social rupture in the country. Now the transition from positive to neutral is a little less precise. I think you could make an argument for 1989 which is when the Berlin Wall fell and the Soviet Union collapsed because that end of the Cold War really was critical to ending the positive world because Christianity was a key part of essentially the moral arsenal that America used in its battle against the Soviet Union which was this sort of atheist godless communist state that repressed religion like the Catholic Church in Poland and that's why back in the 50s we were adding in God we trust through our money adding under God to the Pledge of Allegiance we're putting these symbols of Christianity into the center of American culture as part of the Cold War and so once the Cold War ended that sort of got rid of a bulwark that sort of Christianity had. And it's helpful to remember then with 9-11 the fear was that again neutrally the new atheist movement had a lot to do with this so neutrally religious fundamentalism then went from being too prudish to hyper to dangerous because of course the Islamists who attacked 9-11 Osama bin Laden they were then seen as Islamic fundamentalists and of course that is sort of seen in many people's minds as parallel to religious to Christian fundamentalists and you know off the new atheists went. You know I picked 1994 for a few reasons though one is it's the year Rudy Giuliani became mayor of New York and the cities came back. Think about the implications of the urban renaissance the urgent resurgence certainly. And as I remembered with as I mentioned with Tim Keller this was a lot of that movement and Wren when he started his newsletter those were the kinds of issues that he was writing about in his newsletter and in many ways the masculinist that newsletter sort of was for some conservative young restless and reformed evangelical Christians was sort of a pre-Jordan Peterson thing. It's affected Portland, Seattle, places like that in the 70s. There was a famous billboard in Seattle where the last one leaving Seattle turned out the lights. People thought cities were going down the tubes. The rebirth of the and you can see some of this of course in Mark Driscoll and the rise of Mars Hill that was all part of the emergent movement have talked about that in the past. The cities really had a profound influence both in the culture and especially in the church as I'll talk about in a bit. 94 was also the year the Republican revolution when Newt Gingrich and the House of Republicans took over the House of Representatives the contract with America. That was a watershed moment. It really represented the peak of probably early 90s populism and probably also the peak of the religious right influence within the Republican Party. So I picked 94 but again if you want to pick a slightly different date be my guest. Now how did evangelicals respond to this changing landscape of the three worlds in the period since say 1964? Well now it's really helpful to remember that during the 1980s with the more majority they're already evangelicals already had sort of a take back the country. That's been sort of standard fare for fundamentalist evangelical and neo-evangelicals really again if you read Mars and that goes all the way back to the fundamentalist modernist fights that were happening in the early 20th century. And so already with the rise of Darwinism with many of these developments in the late 19th early 20th century a theme begins to develop in certain groups that they want to take back or go back or get back. Well they responded with three characteristic ministry strategies that are culture war, seeker sensitivity, and cultural engagement. So the culture war strategy or what we might think of as the religious right emerged in the 1970s and of course continues with us today. It's probably the best known of these. Now it's helpful to remember that that name didn't come about until really the new urbanization in the 1990s with James Davidson Hunter. He was the one that coined the culture war term and again the term has become so ubiquitous it's people forget who coined it. And I think Ren is right, Tom Holland mentioned this. The rest is history. Early on had a culture war episode where they talked about where I think Holland was right that when you talk about a culture war it's an internal war and this has always been a war that has sort of been within Christianity even the contemporary expressions that we've seen during the pandemic. Movements and I think the very name of the leading organization we associate with the culture war moral majority speaks to the positive world. You could only call something the moral majority in an era when it was at least plausible to make that claim. Now it might. Now I think now again Ren isn't really a historian and neither am I but moral majority it's important to remember the connection between that and Nixon because of course if I remember correctly Nixon talked about the silent majority and it's sort of been a trope in a lot of these movements that the assumption is that we're the majority of the country however we is conceptualized and we are losing our grasp and so moral majority basically was the assumption of again this is not very a not a very reformed or Augustinian anthropology that most people are good people this is this is very American this is very Jeffersonian actually and so that's that's where some of these this cultural language and some specifically Christian especially reformed language sort of butts heads even though you'll see people not point this out in some of the internal conversations not have been true even then but much like Richard Nixon's silent majority it was at least a plausible claim and so the the religious right again emerged in the 1970s out of this movement that was called the new right at the time and you might be saying well I'm reading a lot about the new right right now and which I just always like to tell people there's nothing older than the new right there's always a new right coming along this is probably the most famous one it was a big 70s and 80s insurgency and what they basically did was they saw that the you know the the sexual revolution was happening roe versus wade prayer kicked out of school they said things are going the wrong way godlessness is on the rise and we're going to fight back so we're going to mobilize politically in order to take back the country from the left and you know up until the 1970s and even into the early 1980s evangelicals had predominantly been democrats the first evangelical president was jimmy carter and newsweek magazine named 1976 the year of the evangelical because that was the year that he won as late as 1983 the sociologist james davison hunter found that a plurality of evangelicals remained democrats but this is this is a really key point that he's making here because again people now here in the 2020s might not recognize this but but erin wren is is exactly right jimmy carter was so you could really begin to see sort of the the turn from the main line to the evangelical happening in the 60s and 70s people were leaving main line churches and going to evangelical churches and that mass movement took about 20 years some whole churches would would sort of get out but they saw a lot of the issues that arose in the 70s they're very similar to the issues that are in churches now in terms of women in leadership same-sex sexuality all of these things were issues in the 70s and people began then leaving people began then leaving mainline churches and joining evangelical churches there are also a number of real big movements that happen in evangelicalism there's a there's a filmmaker he's he's a friend of uh he's a friend of of bern power who made a lot of movies in this era a lot of people became christians in the late 70s early 80s one of the most famous is chuck colson and if you really want to get a sense of that era read born again chuck colson's memoir and i've used this clip not really a clip but i've referred to this often where chuck colson of course he was richard nixon's hatchet man and he was the one that was going to go to jail and he did go to jail he started prison fellowship but just at that point too he had been kind of a surly guy and he comes home and he basically tells his wife that he's become a christian and she's sort of like well i thought we were episcopalian and so you see this huge movement towards evangelicalism time magazine had born again on the cover because that's how jimmy carter introduced himself to the nation he was a born-again christian and a lot of americans thought well what is that well born again was sort of the way that evangelicals saw themselves as differentiating from the now in decline mainline wasp christian movements under the leadership of people like jerry fallwell pat robertson this group of people realigned into the republican party in the mid 80s and became and i would argue remains the largest and most important voting bloc in the republican party and again the culture warriors uh as their name implies they took a a highly combative and oppositional stance versus this emerging culture they were looking for a fight okay and what he's talking about here this is sort of the rise of not really the rise but this is sort of the instantiation of the antithetical side of the argument that to take the country back we need to gain political power we need to once we gain political power then we can basically promote the kinds of policies that we want right and it's also notable that the people we associate with the culture war movement are people who are sort of located far away from the major citadels of culture uh in america they tended to be from backwaters a lot of them and they reached their followers mostly through their own platforms like direct mail or paid for uhf tv shows uh like the 700 club and now it's really key again to notice that let's say trump's protestant lineage norman vincent peale was sort of the main line joel osteen of his day when trump runs for president suddenly he pivots to really embrace the evangelical evangelical community because he knows that if he woos the evangelical community they'll be deeply loyal to him and and in in the election of 2016 marco rubio and ted cruz were sort of the favorites of the evangelicals but when trump won they all sort of lined up behind him against illery clinton you know this gave them a sort of marketing driven televangelist style that we all know although later in the 80s as these groups became political politically active groups like the christian coalition drew in big donor money but originally it was sort of donations from the flock and so the major culture war figures people you may have heard of jerry fallwell of moral majority who is where lynchburg virginia not a big city in kind of western virginia pat robertson of the christian broadcasting network in virginia beach again not a major cultural center james dobson of focus on the family i'm not sure exactly where he originally started but focus on the families in colorado springs today the fact that there are a lot of christian orgs in colorado springs like again another kind of smaller city which at that time colorado was not really all that much in terms of growth uh so that kind of gives you a sense of who was there a second now now it's it's real it's also really helpful for those of you who aren't aware of the theological and ecclesiastical differences between these communities is someone like doug wilson today theologically ecclesiastically is really sort of fringe but he comes because he's a he's sort of a someone can correct me if i'm wrong but i believe he's so he's a he's a reformed post millennial with ties to some of this reconstruction movement which is sort of a fringe movement in the reformed in the reformed cluster of churches but he he sort of takes front and center on youtube via social media fall well pat robertson pat robertson was pentecostal fall well was kind of old style southern baptist but what happens in evangelicalism is that you sort of get this the the the distinctions the theological distinctions blur and again a great book to read about this is molly worthens um oh shoot apostles of reason where she really walks through the history of neo-evangelicalism and how these groups well they they can sort of find ways to build coalitions around certain key theological items but then also some key political items and that's what gives the group a lot of political power strategy of the positive world was seeker sensitivity which again was also pioneered in the 1970s by people like bill hybels of willow creek church in suburban chicago or rick warren of saddleback church down at orange county and again um you know basically these are people what happened with them was they saw that church attendance was in decline and they said how are we going to get people to start going to church how are we going to reach people for christ now it's helpful to note that fall well southern robertson southern i believe um but but but it's it's helpful to note that the seeker movement with bill hybels that's chicago rick warren that's the west and neither of these guys although rick warren is southern baptist neither of these guys really want to fall into the political alignment so so their values are going to be generally conservative but they're not going to be out there as political actors and that's really a key differentiation between the moral majority fall well focus on the family these ministries very much took up political um valence but the seeker movement did not the seeker movement wanted to be more non-aligned and so in many ways the moral majority focus on the family pat robertson these these people were team antithesis seeker movement really team proto winsome and the whole ethos behind the seeker movement where you you took all the symbolism out of church you were on sort of a campus that looked like a junior college campus you had jazz music in church all of these things bill hybels bill hybels phrase was a safe place to hear a dangerous message and so in that way there definitely is continuity i think rent is nicely drawing the continuities but really with the seeker movement you get the beginning of team winsome and so as the story goes bill hybels went door to door in suburban chicago knocking on doors and first question you'd ask is do you go to church and if the answer is yes interview's over if the answer is no he's like well why do you go to church why don't you go to church then people will give all the list of reasons they why they didn't go to church he says i'm going to design a church these people want to go to so he kind of shed many of the denominational distinctives traditions etc he adopted this sort of informality in liturgy and dress from the jesus movement which was a christian christian so this is really the liturgical roots of team winsome especially at the counterculture contemporary christian music was brought in and you know there was also a sort of a therapeutic style of preaching what it meant that is there's a lot of self-help you know today you might hear a sermon on here's how you manage your social media or something like that the christian psychologist henry cloud who some of you may know because he wrote or co-wrote many christian books he's actually been a regular speaker or at least one point was a regular speaker at willow creek they're getting very approachable very non-threatening not combative and it's also helpful to note that whereas in some ways what also what will creek also did i made a number of trips to willow creek in the late 90s and they would have every year they'd have a leadership conference and they would bring in leaders of of industry and business to give to give tips and at this point i still have some of them at this point local church pastors were were supposed to be reading business leadership books because running a church was like running a business and so this very much came into the church and business leaders were you know they would be on on board so and in a lot of ways the seeker movement inherited some of the cultural alignment that the main that the main line churches had and and many of the people that went to seeker churches were individuals that would have gone to main line churches a generation before so you can begin to check to watch the continuity but now again team winsome has their roots in the seeker movement this group is again still with us today and you can think of this as basically the non-denominational suburban mega church that we kind of mostly know and but but their influence was far beyond just mega churches because what happened in church communities was that very quickly your mom and pop churches were now bleeding members to the mega churches and so what smaller churches and medium-sized churches like christian reform churches here in northern california very quickly other protestant churches low church non-liturgical churches began adopting contemporary music within the churches in the 90s and aughts you had the worship wars in the churches drums came into the sanctuary guitars came into the sanctuary because churches all over the place were basically adapting to market pressures and if they didn't want to lose especially young families young families were the hot commodity in this if they didn't want to lose young families they had to adopt contemporary liturgy which was contemporary music this is also the same so now the jesus movement you had this also this the rise of christian contemporary music all of that began in that movement as well and so even though the seeker movements seeker churches large suburban large suburban non-denominational churches were a big part of this this deeply impacted churches across the board I think there's a couple notable things about this that talk about the positive world first is just the term seeker sensitive i don't know when that term was invented i didn't invent it but people talk about seeker sensitivity just the very name assumes it was to my mind willa creek now it's it's helpful to note too that the seeker movement grows out of the church growth movement which grows out of fuller seminary in southern california grows out of the reform church of the reform church of america church robert schuler the christian cathedral which is now a roman catholic church so there's there's a ton there's there's so much written about all this there's a ton of information about this but this is this is the historical the historical roots of this fight a lot of people are seeking right so it's still positive in the sense that people are looking and we just needed to give them some place to find you know also the idea of just going and asking people why they don't go to church and get expecting a coherent answer from it you know today if you knock on somebody's door and ask them why they don't go to church they probably look at you like you're from mars or something like why would a church who goes to church it's just not so so if you listen to tim keller's analysis of this because now remember in some ways tim keller's church in new york city is seeker church applied to the urban context whereas the seeker church was suburban the urban tim keller's church was urban and and keller when you listen to keller's talks in the early aughts he basically noted that in the positive world all churches had to do is sort of activate dormant christians and a lot of those dormant christians were boomers or builders but now i think this is again where ren's thesis is correct the culture is going to keep moving on and the culture is going to continue to shape people beyond the kinds of shaping that had happened during against the heyday of church attendance in american culture which was during the cold war part of the mental landscape whereas back then it was essentially people kind of knew well yeah you should possibly go to church so those were two strategies the positive world as we entered the neutral world a third strategy came to the fore which is cultural engagement cultural engagement and this is a term that again the practitioners of this would happily embrace they would say yes we practice cultural engagement and i think there's a couple ways that we can think about the cultural engagement movement one is that it's a sort of seeker sensitivity for the cities so again the cities were coming back all these young millennial and generation x college grads and businesses they're pouring into the cities there's a new urban sensibility a new urban culture and just as guys like hybils and rick warren cracked the code on suburbia in the 1970s this was about cracking the code on the urban environment okay so they they uh they were not um so that's one of the things they were doing and again they adopted a variety of different styles you know some of them are much more formal and traditional liturgical others are more hip cool contemporary arts forward but they found and so one of the interesting things one of the one of the last times i went to willow creek in north chicago they had sort of cracked the code on the boomers but they were trying to work on the xers and it didn't work they tried to apply what they had done with the boomers to the xers and it didn't work but now tim keller if you read center church which is kind of his main missional how to do an urban church guide they were also doing what the seeker church churches were doing they were planting churches in world-class cities they were noting this this now gets into globalization they were noting that their similarities in world-class churches world-class cities all around the world so if you can plant a church in new york you can plant a church in london you can plant a church in berlin you can plant a church in paris and that they were noting that there's commonalities now it would be slightly tuned usually via music um churches very quickly figured out that music was key and that you just basically borrow this from let's say the radio station and what type of music are your people listening to normally find a christian compatible as um version of that music and use that on styles that worked in the cities and again they adopted this therapeutic language to be able to reach them you can think of this as a secret sensitivity for the city another way to think of it is as the opposite of the culture war it's like the culture war people wanted to fight against the culture these people are like let's not fight let's sit down and talk let's try to get along with the culture and again these people were starting to develop as it was becoming clear the culture war strategy was a loser wasn't going to work and they're in places that are not friendly to the culture war and it's like why should we just fruitlessly fight with people why don't we take advantage of this new pluralistic landscape and just sit down and talk with people and now i love this lecture this is a terrific lecture and if you're you're unaware of this whole thing this lecture is a terrific introduction into it it's helpful to remember that these suburban mega churches are one of the places that these places are growing is the old south and so these churches are exploding in atlanta in memphis and and because there's competition with the older churches all of the churches are sort of picking up on these cues and these strategies that the secret churches are and this old take back america ethos that was in sort of the the places in america that didn't have political power as opposed to the places in america that had elite positions of power new york chicago los angeles san francisco seattle team winsome really grew up in those places where they knew they had already in some ways now tim keller writes a response to james wood and arren ren and tim keller makes the argument we were already living in a negative world and as with many things like this it's a super complex he has a point but ren also has a point and so there's once you as you focus in the resolution higher and higher and higher you get to see that yeah team winsome sort of figured out that the old style revivalist anti-culture go back to the christ and culture book christ against culture this will not work in new york city because new york city is the generator of national culture it's the generator of world culture same as los angeles same as san francisco same as seattle same as chicago these things are not going to work so if you can't beat them join them and so team winsome decides you know bill hybels we're going to create a safe place for a safe space for a dangerous message because if we you know the fundamentalist ethos was antithesis this was let's bring you in and slowly but surely we're going to see if one way or another you can come around to our thinking now if you so before i was interested in jordan peterson i was very interested in tim keller and so just as jordan peterson was a harder study because of course my roots were much closer to tim keller but one of the things tim keller's main strategy sermon wise was to agree in principle with what those seekers already wanted and show how the gospel and jesus actually gets you there better that was tim kattas tim keller's strategy that's very different from sort of the old style um antithetical approach that that those in non-centers of cultural generation and elite power were using take back america is a strategy of people who feel they have lost it new york los angeles san francisco seattle chicago they already have it there's no taking back they already have it and the question is well let's see if we can subvert so in many ways that's sort of the the comparison between full frontal assault and subversion and and you know even in if you listen to say john vervecky when he talks about stealing the culture that's much more of a winsome strategy than an antithetical strategy if we articulate the truths of christianity in a compelling way in language that they're prepared to understand right in ways that affirm the things that you know we can affirm in that culture that's the secret sensitivity aspect then maybe we can get a hearing for christianity and it did work for parts of it so again as i said they came in they rather than being negative it's also helpful to note that if you looked at someone like bill hybels safe space to hear a dangerous message bill hybels was an undeconstructed christian evangelical in that when it all boiled down to it it was the roman road it was the four spiritual laws and i think that that facilitates ren's idea of it was a positive space because all of these tools that were developed in the mid 20th century evangelism explosion were again ren noted that the seekers knocked on their door and said why is it you don't go to church a generation before d james kennedy in florida their people knocked on the door and said if you were to die tonight what would you tell jesus what would you tell god in order for him to let you into your is into his heaven that was evangelism explosion that was a generation before and you can tell it's a little bit more antithetical but the presumption again is that the person that you knock on the door has some sense some christ hauntedness that uh hell might be an issue and so maybe but maybe you'll get a hearing towards this culture they're like look there's a lot we like about the city we love the arts we like the life of the mind you know we like being urban we we care about profession and vocation and things of that nature and the other thing that they did that was the opposite of the the culture war is that they were typically studiously apolitical they're like we don't do politics again evangelical sort of stereotyped is very conservative these cities are much more progressive they're like we don't do politics although this sort of now remember what he said earlier that a generation before evangelicals would have been more likely to vote democratic than republican and it's in the 80s with ronald reagan that you saw this big shift it was also of course the same time that people were leaving the mainline churches and when they left from mainline to evangelical eventually they would also leave from democratic to republican it broke down a bit in 2016 with the trump nomination when a number of these people you know really denounced him they really sort of became essentially the never trumpers not all of them um but some of them and there was though i would say a political manifestation of the cultural engagement model which you can see in a character like george w bush you know the fact that the left called him bush hitler and all this stuff that they hated him we shouldn't let that obscure the extent to which he really was very different from the culture war evangelicals what did he tout his catchphrase was compassionate conservatism he wanted to have a kinder gentler conservatism he made a point of saying explicitly he said basically it's almost like a literal quote i'm not going to kick gays we're not going to be anti-gay he supported civil unions he didn't support gay marriage but he supported civil unions for gays less than a week after 9 11 he made the first ever presidential visit to a mosque in order to reassure muslims that hey you're a valued part of america we don't blame you for what happened so this is very very very different than what you might have expected it's helpful to also remember that where do many muslims in america live michigan what is michigan battleground state these politicians are not dumb i'm a culture war type person and uh but today i would say like the the kind of the platonic form of this cultural engagement leadership in politics is somebody like nebraska senator ben sass i think he really represents this but again the pastors and the you know the self-consciously evangelical people they tended to be um very very uh studiously apolitical they didn't talk about politics up until trump and again uh as i indicated this is basically much more urban strategy uh the people we associate this were much more urban so you can think of who are these people tim keller of redeemer presbyterian church is probably the most biggest and most influential name here new york city hillsong church i would put in this category very different more the hip cool category but they did it now it's helpful to remember hillsong is out of australia australia and canada are interesting because they're they've got more european dna and influence than the united states does and so they're tim keller this again i think is some agreement with tim keller's push back against aaron renn tim keller canadian evangelicals australian evangelicals in some ways are already living in a negative world or a neutral world and so increasingly they're adopting cultural engagement strategies instead of antithetical strategies the veritas forum if you're familiar with the veritas forum literally started in the early 90s goes to college campuses and like invites a christian person to sit down with a secular person and talk i mean he doesn't get any more cultural engagement than that contemporary artist makoto fujimura if you know him a writer andy krauss these are people i would put in this cultural engagement bucket so these three different movements the culture war the secret sensitivity and cultural engagement they represented three strategies for dealing with sort of changing times but i don't want to overly make you think like you know i'm a consultant i came from a management consulting background as as pastor wiley said but i want you to think that a bunch of mbas cook these strategies up in the lab okay this wasn't just a purely strategic model there were also sort of other demographic geographic cultural dispositional theological differences between these groups that sort of drove a lot of what happened from a geographic perspective you could potentially say culture war was rural evangelicalism secret sensibility that sensitivity was suburban evangelicalism and cultural engagement was urban evangelicalism right so in many ways you already had positive neutral and negative worlds practicing and you just see the continue the intensification of it so college campuses urban areas negative world continues to intensify neutral world in suburbia continues to sort of switch go from neutral to negative even rural areas getting increasingly neutral that's sort of if you kind of imagine it as a tie that's probably a good way to think about it also the culture warriors tended to have a sort of fundamentalist sensibility about them and some of them actually came from fundamentalist backgrounds the secret sensitives and the cultural engagers had a more evangelical sensibility about them so fundamentalism really prioritized doctrinal purity and it was frequently separatist and hostile towards the culture or people that they felt would would water down doctrine evangelicalism or sometimes neo-evangelicalism started in the 1940s when people like billy graham and like that said let's try to take the basic fundamentalist theology but let's target the mainstream let's try to reach the mainstream of society and it was much more i would say missional rather than doctrinal in focus and so this division of what i could again sensibilities or sort of dispositions or ways of engaging with the world between sort of confessional or doctrinal purity on the one hand and revivalism or missional focus on the other that's been a pervasive divide throughout american religious history i think there were also other differences between these groups you know the the culture warriors were mostly middle class or lower middle class the leaders of the cultural war movement were college educated but most of the followers were not whereas the secret sensitives and cultural engagers were much more solidly middle class or even upper middle class much better educated for example if you go to church in manhattan evangelical church in manhattan virtually the entire congregation is college-degree that's not the case in a lot of places the other thing is that the culture warriors attracted a lot of pentacostals there were a lot of charismatics in that movement pat robertson i think was very influential in this and there were some disagreements and some tensions perhaps between the pentacostals and non-pentacostals in that movement but there was a big heavy pentacostal emphasis whereas in the secret sensitive and the cultural engagement world they've tended to be much less pentacostal and the people who do sort of affirm the continuation of the spiritual gifts tend to be very low key about it the culture warriors were also very heavily shaped by the cold war they weren't just culture warriors they were cold warriors and again we see this in something like jerry fallwell's liberty university the very name sort of associates his theological project and his political project with america's fight against again godless communism he didn't know there's a theological layer to this too many of those many of those groups would be functionally very much over on the the free will side of things the armenian side of things originally call it liberty university it was originally something else and it was renamed to that this was also an era i think it was lynchburg not not not the nicest name if you want to become the largest christian university in the nation it emerged in this era in which there was tremendous end times fervor you know the soviet union was supposed to be gog and may gog and it's we're going to have an imminent rapture or tribulation or all the above and there was sort of end times fever there was books like the late great planet earth in the 70s selling millions of copies and and so that was really big the cultural engagers by contrast they developed in a post cold war world so they didn't really have any of this cold war legacy about them and they had not an end times perspective but an end of history perspective if you remember francis fukuyama's book an article about that which incidentally came out in the early 90s right as a sort of a neutral world was getting going and so again these strategies you know cultural war secret sensitive cultural engagement they weren't they they were just purely strategies they were also different groups of people but i do think that the the particularities of their strategies and the way that they developed were linked directly to the eras in which they came about now we have three worlds in three strategies but you know two of the strategies are in the positive world and one's in the negative world in the neutral world but what's in the negative world and the answer is there has not yet been an evangelical strategy to deal with the negative world the one strategy that's been proposed for the negative world is rod drears benedict option if any of you read his book the benedict option that came out now drear is eastern orthodox formerly catholic and he may have underestimated the he admits he doesn't know anything about evangelicalism he'll tell you that straight up and he may have underestimated how you know it might make some people throw up to have something named after like catholic monks and things like that but nevertheless evangelicals basically rejected the benedict option and it wasn't really because there was too much catholic imagery in it it was really i think denial people didn't want to admit that we're in this negative world i think christianity today magazine commissioned four people to write about the benedict option and all four of them didn't like it for various reasons and i think that's changing that's changing i put together this three worlds framework and published originally a version of it 2017 it was well received then and then i sort of updated it and it was published in first things magazine earlier this year and got a huge response but i was amazed that there are still people essentially denying that the negative world exists for example tim keller and david french implicitly did that when they sort of raised the objection hey tim keller said this hey when i went to new york it was a hostile world i was in the negative world when i went to new york i was never in a neutral world david french did the same thing where he sort of like i know all these people who've been persecuted my entire adult life so i call it this is the argument that it's the same old negative world that it ever was and so there's nothing new implicitly there's nothing new about today where i think clearly we are in unprecedented times see i i think french and keller have a point but i also think aaron is right that you know you might need more layers of gradation here because i i do think i do think on the the basic grounds ren is right you can just see what's going on and and uh you know you know when the when the skirmish line in the culture war is transgender athletes and girls sports you know something is really really really different in the country and so there has been the state of denial but again i think it's changing and again we see this in the fact that evangelicals really have not developed their own strategy for the negative world and i don't think there's going to be just one or just two i think we're sort of in an exploration mode trying to figure things out but that's the really the to do but as we've gone into the negative world in these three models of now it's interesting when he says evangelicals haven't developed a strategy because team antithesis is a strategy and in many ways i think many continue to i think many continue to imagine well if we can win elections and and elect our people i don't think that's that's not really a strategy for church growth now i think some of the strategies emerging and and i think the jordan peterson phenomena and what we see happening on the religious side of this little corner is definitely a result of the negative world and yeah been exposed to the pressures of the negative world it has had big consequences for evangelicalism it has caused a sort of adaptation or even deformation of some of these strategies and of these groups the cultural engagers clearly have the most at risk from the transition to the negative world for one thing the shift from a positive world to a neutral world represented a sort of downward slide in status for christianity but the cultural engagement strategy was much higher status than the culture war strategy right people like tim keller were treated as legitimate by secular society in a way that jerry fallwell or pat robertson never were so you know he can write for the new yorker he can write for the atlantic nicholas christophe does nice sit downs with him and you know mark galley on his way out the door christianity today wrote a piece that really ticked off a lot of the cultural engagers but you know galley had a point and i think ren has a point here too new york times actually last weekend in the wall street journal weekend edition there's a very nice profile in the review section with tim keller he gets very friendly press in a way that these other guys you know wouldn't have so these guys these people have a cultural status to lose that the culture warriors never had and that doesn't mean they're all unwilling to lose it but they actually do have something to lose and by the way they're also higher status than the secret sensitives because urban is higher status than suburban basically and so right tim keller would go on tv in a way that rick warren and bill hybels never did tim keller was seen as educated or bane i i'll have to check i highly doubt rick warren ever did a talk at google although again remember 2008 rick warren preys at obama's inaugural and then he would not pray he would not be allowed to pray in 2012 at obama's the second inaugural and the second inaugural had the the drama around giglio because then again and i think this this is exactly ren's point and this is exactly why he's right by 2012 giglio rick warren not would not be welcome on the stage of the democratic party inaugural because of their stance on same-sex marriage even though not many years before hillary clinton barack obama and before that george hw bush were all in the remember civil unions what are the example i like to give of the risk this posed by the negative cultural engagement was when tim keller went to princeton seminary in 2017 so princeton seminary is actually a mainline seminary it's in the pc usa it's probably their flagship seminary but it's not super liberal i would say it's kind of moderate by pc usa standards a number of evangelical pastors have attended there now remember what i said earlier about westminster philadelphia where tim keller was a professor tim keller was a professor at westminster philadelphia westminster philadelphia was started when the modernist fundamentalist fight happened at princeton and the fundamentalists lost and so they went out and founded westminster theological seminary philadelphia which became um which became a seminary for the orthodox presbyterian church or the opc so when tim keller was invited when he won what was it the kiper prize again abraham kiper again this is all very close to the christian inform church when tim keller was awarded that prize this in some ways was in some ways analogous to peterson at cambridge remember when peterson was invited to cambridge then disinvited keller was invited to princeton and then disinvited you can see you can see the times change and i think again i think arren ren is fundamentally right there was a negative there was some negativity that someone like david french and tim color had to face but the overall cultural shift arren ren is right and they were going to give him their annual abraham kiper award and let him you know give a talk there well some of the students objected they say he does and there was a significant financial prize in it as well doesn't believe in ordaining women so he's a bigot he's this he's that and so they rescinded the award they didn't give it to him although they did let him give talk and i'm like if tim keller is too much i believe i did a commentary on that talk the talk is worth finding it's sort of a bootleg recording but it's it's worth finding for a moderate mainline seminary the award they didn't give it to him although they did let him give talk and i'm like if tim keller is too much for a moderate mainline seminary nobody else stands a chance right of giving a hearing because he's the best at being able to navigate situations like this again cultural engagers are also much more likely to live in sort of upscale urban environments which are very very secular progressive they work in more higher paying prestigious professions for mainstream employers they love the social milieu of the upper middle class you know the historic architecture the you know pour over coffees the farm to table restaurants the luxury gyms all of that stuff i love that stuff too nothing wrong with that but you know these are these are the environments in which the pressures are the negative world are most intense this is where you're much more likely to get canceled you're much more likely to get canceled if you work from goldman sachs in new york than if you work in a muffler shop in rural indiana where i'm from you know you're just not gonna you're gonna be exposed to different pressure and so um uh you know i think that um this this pressure that they are under is often under appreciated by sort of red state christians who to them it may be still the positive world to some extent where they live and i think what's happened with the cultural engagers is a lot of them have sort of given up on the engagement and they've sort of become synchronizers with the culture and for so for example they're becoming ever more vocal ever more strident ever more militant about if issues like immigration or race refugees and racism i say are the two biggest issues they're very loud on those issues and virtually everything that they say today is a secular talking point maybe with a little evangelical gloss but there doesn't seem to be much genuinely christian input on the circumstances you know they always sort of downplayed the flashpoint social issues like abortion or sexuality they never really talked a lot about it they tried to avoid talking about it but today they've actually even softened their stances on it further so what you'll see is on abortion you'll hear a lot of people talk about being holistically pro-life so you know welfare for single mothers i don't know if this is just today i think this is this has been for a long time is a pro-life issue care for the refugees a pro-life issue and so they don't say that abortion is good necessarily but they like to talk about other things as being pro-life similarly on sexuality you're much less likely to hear a sermon on traditional christian moral teaching and much more likely to hear a lament about how the church has been unwelcoming to sexual minorities in the past and they will use terms like sexual minorities that come from uh secular society and so this group is sort of becoming much more now i don't think homosexuality came from the church that's also from sexual society that's also from secular society so his point that um the winsome crowd tends to um hug left and punch right is i think it's a fair i think it's a fair critique and a fair i think it's a fair critique but um a lot of both everyone does sort of the let's let's call it the um verbal recalibration depending on where they want to go and who they want to go with we're in sync with secular progressive culture i would say that's not all of them tim keller to his credit has not done this he stayed i think he stayed remarkably consistent uh on many things in fact you can actually argue that keller for those you've known has actually gotten stronger on the conservative side on some issues when he was a pastor you could go google like tim keller abortion people would ask him about abortion he'd sort of do a tap dance you know now if you look at his tweet and again his um people always have people who people have suspicious minds are you know always well tim keller is really a liberal at heart no tim keller was actually more conservative at heart and so when he retired he got more conservative because he was modulating what he was saying for his audience for missional purposes weeds he will straight up say you know that but that modulation for missional purposes again illustrates the missional strategy is it cultural engagement or winsome or is it anti or is it the antithesis is it antithetical because being antithetical is also a missional strategy and it's it's a very valid missional strategy um again we could we could point to so if you look like at people like beckett cook it was and relationship and rosaria butterfield these are two people that super switched in other words they were all in uh living gay lifestyles had a conversion experience and they came 180 degrees and so a lot of time team winsome will complain that team antithesis doesn't have a point it's just wrong team antithesis there are many who there are many stories that in some ways validate team antithesis but there are stories on both sides and so in that sense both sides are strategies but they also sort of reflect different um they also reflect different temperaments frankly some people just temperamentally are much more winsome cultural engagement other people temperamentally are super and antithesis and so you tend to go back and forth the church you know abortion is bad i mean he'll qualify you know and say things like yes we need to care for for moms and things like that but he'll straight up say abortion is bad i think on some of these things he's actually more direct than he was in the past but a lot of these guys are becoming very culturally synchronized and i think for their part the culture warriors they've sort of uh evolved towards trumpist populism so they're trumpist in a couple senses one they support trump and candidly some of them support trump to an unhealthy cult of personality degree and they also support his sort of policies around you know immigration trade or even post-liberal politics for people who kind of find out about that stuff they're also populist because they attack the elites sort of in the name of the people and i think and this is where ren is such an interesting guy because he is from rural indiana not a place for the elites but he spent time as an urban planner i think it was an urban planner he was in new york city he was in redeemer for a little while so he's been in those places too and so arron ren is not a populist at all and most of his videos are about he's really looking for a strategy because he believes that at some point christianity is going to need to recapture something of what it had back in the mainline waspy days when it had a gemini in american culture now i should probably have him on the channel i spoke with him at that conference in chicago so he in that way doesn't sort of fit in with the populists either and and part of why this gets so interesting is is many of the figures by virtue of their theological and ecclesiastical stances don't fit into the populists now this is where he just recently did a video where he basically made the point that roman catholics are doing better has he recently had on one of a on one of those little live streams again hardly anybody's watching these things but has he had a live stream where he was talking about in many ways things parallel to the state of israel where it's not christian but it's in the state of israel you've got this real question as to whether it's going to be sort of secular jews or observant jews who run the show and the observants are winning and so then suddenly you get what what often happens when you get conversations like this is is the word theocracy comes into play now part of how the american tradition is different is because by virtue of the fact that there was there initially again were state churches in some of the state but there's never a a national state church for the federal government america has always resisted theocracy as such but now when we have roman catholics the catholics have a tradition of see the catholics aren't really full-blown theocracy let's say in the way that perhaps and i don't know enough but perhaps orthodoxy has more of that because there's a long tradition of coziness you know and this is a theological tradition so all of these figuring out the relationships between politics and religion and the relationship between church and state you have the separation of church and state that's brought to the early united states in the bill of rights by thomas jefferson and many churches and many christian leaders in the united states are there this of course is in contrast to the islamic world and that's where i've got to listen to vervecky's conversation with his with his friend from iran now it's it's really helpful to remember that um well i'll hold that i'll hold that card for now but these these questions right now we're dealing with the kinds of major questions that a lot of the questions from the protestant reformation around the table but questions that were sort of didn't need to be dealt with in the protestant reformation where you had things like the piece of augsburg where whatever prince is in charge of whatever little um part of the holy roman empire can decide what the religion of his country is you know if you have the king of france i mean basically after the protestant reformation you still had in many cases all the way up till now a a formal relationship between church and state that was broken in america in america even though it was formally broken there was always sort of an implicit cultural connection between the majority protestant religiosity and the state and that was very much the positive world to be a church if you wanted to really rise in politics you should be a church gore many atheists have long noted that we've never had a president of the united states as an outspoken atheist but increasingly what we're seeing is that atheist is in effect sort of a religious posture and so these are all issues that we're dealing with now and that's part of the reason why the winsome war is so vital at this moment they have also experienced some deformation about that stuff they're also populist because they attack the elites sort of in the name of the people and i think they have also experienced some deformation as they have essentially jettisoned some of their traditional touchstones the thing i really have in mind here is this idea that good character is a precondition to holding public office or some type of key position in society you may remember this was the issue with the bill clinton impeachment they were like bill clinton simply lacks the moral character to be president period well now these people all voted for trump you know and he's had all these affairs and he's done all these things and it's like wow we can't let hillary win can we and so i think they're they're sort of a reality and of course we just saw the the herschel walker business i mean that the this last election in america had a variety of people for whom um they just seemed somewhat unsuited for office al politique approach now that this group has sort of a sort of adopted and so these sort of shifts in adaptations and deformations have produced sort of realignment and conflict for a few reasons and one of them is that the other than the kind of a few institutions that are like hardcore culture war or a hardcore cultural engager most churches like these suburban mega churches they contain a mix of people with a mix of dispositions and these people are sort of being polarized by a couple of forces one of them is trump the other is wokeness and you can add a third to that i guess which is coven what to do about coven but i think the coven one was less about creating the divisions and sort of exacerbating the divisions but there are some people especially a lot of these sort of people from affluent suburbs who were sort of chamber of commerce republican types they just couldn't go for trump they thought he was just low class boorish character trump was just a bridge too far and again one of the the real good things about ren is that erin ren is also class sensitive in this and and so class comes into his analysis and you know for reasons of either they they still do believe culture matters and leaders or they just didn't like low class behavior they just they just totally went insane about trump and then there are another group of people who you know again when the great awakening hit the world it also hit the church and a lot of churches have just become obsessed every sermon is about some element of racism you know i you practically hear in some of these things i walked into a church the other day the other month and it was like i practically sat through a native american land acknowledgement at the beginning of the sermon i'm like what's going on here and so a lot of people are very alarmed by that and they're leaving churches and so if you're somebody that's the trump issue so again if you i talked about the history of the fundamentalist modernist fight the beginning of the 20th century again marston writes about that then you had in the 60s and 70s you had another mass exodus of the mainline churches into evangelical churches which sort of set up the evangelical hegemony in the 80s and 90s and the political movement and now the question is what happens now will there be will there be more people moving around based on woke see i i think that the the part of what's difficult about this is that churches are by structure conservative and so some of the wokeish stuff will stay around longer in the church than it will in the culture ironically because that's that's sort of how churches are made and what they're made to do so it's it's hard to know how this stuff shapes out but part of part of what's different is that church so many more people were going to church and the cultural was so much more positive in the 60s and 70s when you had that big migration out of mainline into evangelical than it is now and many churches are one generation away from non-viability and church because of the seeker movement and because of so so part of the church growth movement was management by objective you attract a certain kind of person by um hang on a second and then the woke issue are really dividing people causing a lot of divisions causing a lot of realignments and then you throw covet on there and it's really fuel uh on the fire and again it's been it's increasingly acrimonious increasingly the culture wars within the church there's a lot of realignment happening it's happening in the republican party as well as the church and the party as well but it's also happening in the church and so i think this is left evangelicalism in flux and it's kind of future is kind of up in the air kind of endowed and i think a lot of this comes from the fact that we have not yet taken the measure of the negative world and said now that we're here what do we do how do we live as individuals how do we live as the church how we be on mission how do we adapt to a world where the institutions of society do not look favorably on christianity that's a very difficult problem that i don't think anybody has figured out but fortunately for us that's the topic of this conference and i'm very happy to hear joe rigney and james wood tell us the solutions after i tell us the problem so thank you very much and again i think erin ren is right on his analysis the church doesn't know how the evangelical church particularly because in america evangelicals are of course heir of the split of the fundamentalist modernist movement and so all of this take back you don't hear roman catholics say take back america you don't hear orthodox say take back america because they never had it evangelicals are at least heirs of the protestant hegemony that had america but again it's hegemony over america was different the situation in england where you have a state church and in the other realms of the queen those will be different situation in latin america very different and in the french france and the french colony is very different but evangelicals are in uncharted territories and even see see again someone might look at this and say oh erin ren is team antithesis not exactly he's not a populist and if you listen to enough of his stuff he is asking the question how can christianity once again become have the positions of power it once had now this sort of meets the tom holland thesis and i would argue that the secular elites have within them the legacy of christianity but they also are in uncharted territories and you see that with i think a lot of people imagine that the woke would inherit the earth and i think it's increasingly clear that they will not that wokeism which almost anyone could spot right from the start was just plain too incoherent to actually have a regime that lasts so i gotta gotta keep an eye i've got my security camera at the house here and the porch pilots um the porch pirate stole a package from me a couple weeks ago so i'm uh oh that's my neighbor who just came home i think so when a car slows down in front of the house i already ran home and put a package in so um because my wife is she's working all week and christmas eve is saturday and christmas is sunday and kids coming over and all that so getting ready for the holiday anyway so the woke clearly won't inherit the earth and in many ways nobody knows what the way looking forward is you know the the old the whole end of history is you know was there's a good argument that that they basically misread the text um there's another delivery truck i think they should i should tell you all the delivery things it's not what you're here for so when you look at this little corner of the internet or as as he calls it um a brave space not a self-spit not a safe space i i think what ren does here is is really important because even though this sounds like sort of in church stuff christianity has been so dominant that usually you can sort of track the really big stuff by seeing what's going on in church if you remember when i started this i talked about at the estuary meeting someone asked you know how do we say if things are getting better or things are getting worse well always that evaluation requires something of a yardstick to measure it by and one of the functions that religions have are as they have a much longer term yardstick to measure things by and that's that's one of the functions of religion without a very long tradition where you can at least try to gain some perspective on current changes it's very difficult to make any sort of evaluation so i think generally speaking ren erin ren is right here with his evaluation that with respect to christianity christianity as a brand is by no means what it was where does this all go will evangelicalism be able to sort of get its feet under it again now when i say that people if you if you say look at numbers evangelical churches are not doing as badly as let's say orthodox or catholic churches and some of you say well what do you mean lots of lots of young people are coming into orthodox churches yeah but they're losing their immigrants faster than let's say the jordan peterson jonathan peugeot j dire wave can fill it up you've got some new little church plants that are orthodox but again that little movement into orthodoxy of former atheists and american nominal christians or even evangelicals that's tiny compared to the sorts of losses that are happening because of because of the way the drift the drift that the culture is going evangelicalism there are many places that are far less negative than let's say downtown manhattan or los angeles and there are many places where things are still working for the church of churches that are growing the church is massive and the context is complex like that making making generalizations difficult but so this is the first and if you really want to hear a speech listen to ren's second i wanted to set the table with this because i figured even though some of you might be aware of his three worlds of evangelism his speech i think was an excellent articulation of it but his next speech is really something and that one i really want to walk through so all right that's it i think this will probably be a longer video again and you know some of you said what what happened to the two hour videos well um i haven't i haven't checked this one yet to see where it is but it's a 41 minute talk and usually it's two or three to one in terms of a commentary so as always let me know what you think leave a message