https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aSzib5MMha4

 Hello, this is Aaron Wren and thank you for joining. There have been some very interesting developments in a Christian denomination called the Christian Reformed Church. I say interesting because these are not the kind of developments we normally see in denominations and you'll find out what I mean by that. And today I have an expert here to talk to us about it and that's Paul VanderKlay. Perhaps I should say the Reverend Paul VanderKlay as he is a pastor in the Christian Reformed Church denomination in I believe Sacramento, California. And he's also a prolific YouTuber and there's tremendous content on a wide range of subjects on his channel. He's very thoughtful on the CRC but also Jordan Peterson, you name it, he's talked about it. And so there's a link to his YouTube channel in the show notes for this. You can check it out. So Paul, thank you for joining. It's my pleasure to be here, Aaron. Most of my audience is probably unfamiliar with the CRC, the Christian Reformed Church. So just very briefly, what is the CRC? The Christian Reformed Church is as its roots as a Dutch Calvinist immigrant denomination that split off from the Reformed Church in America, which is the oldest Protestant denomination in North America. Came over with the Dutch in the colonial days. The Christian Reformed Church had its roots in a couple of split off groups in the Netherlands. And then when they came to America, they found the Reformed Church of America a little too American. And so they wanted to maintain Dutch language. They were against Masonic. They were against secret societies like the Masons. They very much wanted to preserve their Dutch ways. So they really grew in immigration before the First World War and have always sort of been next to the Reformed Church of America, but been more self-consciously reformed and a little bit more tied to their Dutch roots than, let's say, the Reformed Church of America, which had been here quite a bit longer. How many people are approximately are in the denomination? I think current numbers are a little less than a quarter million, about a thousand churches in the United States and Canada. Okay. So it's a little smaller than, say, the Presbyterian Church in America, which is in the 300,000s, but similar size there. And where is this church geographically concentrated? They've concentrated mostly in areas that Dutch immigrants settled in. And then after the Second World War kind of spread out to other major American cities and metropolitan areas. Western Michigan is sort of the base. You have other subsets in Northwest Iowa and then some dying colonies in some of the other areas like northern New Jersey, where I grew up. So what percentage of the people who are in the CRC today come from predominantly Dutch ancestry? That's a real hard question. My guess would be somewhere around 80%, 80 to 85% would have Dutch last names. Yeah, I sort of think of it as almost like a quasi mainline denomination and somewhat similar to the Lutherans and being a little bit of a quasi-ethnic denomination. And also one that has a lot of institutions from K-12 education, colleges, seminaries, all wrapped up in the denomination. Is that a fair way to think about it? If there's a Lutheran denomination that we're similar to, it would probably be mostly the Missouri Senate Lutherans. So the Christian Form Church has looked mainline from the outside, mostly because people recognize, especially Calvin College, Calvin University. That's usually what people see. But basically what's been happening in the Christian Form Church since the end of the Second World War is that it's been assimilating into the broader American ecclesiastical framework. And so in the Christian Form Church, there's been this division between those who tend to look to the mainline as, oh, that's who we'd like to be, and those who look to the evangelicals as that's who they'd like to be. And so over the last 70 years, it's been in that process of assimilating much more towards other North American churches. And just to make sure people don't get lost when we start throwing around lingo having to do with the CRC, I want to briefly talk about the governance structure. So let me tell you what I think it is, and then you can correct me on that. It basically has a Presbyterian form of governance. So it's very similar to the Presbyterian Church in that you have local churches that are governed by a board of elders made up of lay elders and the pastors called a council, I believe, it'd be the equivalent of a session in a Presbyterian Church. There's a higher level structure, typically geographic of churches called classes, which would be similar to a Presbytery in a Presbyterian Church or think of it as a diocese. And the key here to Presbyterian governance, meaning it's essentially ruled by committee, you wouldn't think of it that way. But it's instead of a bishop, you have a committee. And then essentially above the classes, you have the synod, which is essentially an annual meeting in which all the classes come together to make denomination wide policy. Is that basically correct? That's that's that's close enough. The in the there are three assemblies that govern the church. So actually, elders and the pastors would be the consistory. But in most churches, it's the council, they include the deacons, and then the classes. And there is usually a little governing committee in the Christian Reformed Church. The classes and the synod actually only have instantiation during their meetings, they have little subcommittees, but they're always accountable to the annual or, you know, quarterly meeting. Presumably, it's somewhat bureaucratic. I mean, Presbyterian Church is the most bureaucratic form of church governance that I know. Yeah. Although my father part of what's kept the Christian Reformed Church from a lot of that is is because of its ethnic roots. Many people in the Christian Reformed Church are blood related. And so up until really quite recently, it was a very high trust denomination. And so when my father, for example, after retired, there was a local Presbyterian Church that wanted him to do basically do interim pastoring for them. He was shocked at the amount of bureaucracy that was in that Presbyterian group as compared to what he had lived with in the Christian Reformed Church. So it has been a fairly high trust, which has kept the bureaucracy to a minimum. Okay, so with that kind of the basics out of the way, my impression of the CRC is that it was a denomination that was trending liberal. And this is basically for two reasons. One is that the CRC approved women's ordination. So I'm not sure exactly when that happened. It was a product of a lot of debate. And then after that, a group of more conservative churches split off to form a denomination called the URC. And splits like that leave the remaining denomination more liberal, almost by definition. For those of you who know Kevin DeYoung, who's very well known in evangelical circles, he used to be in the CRC. He was a minister in the CRC. He was a minister in the RCA. Yes. And second is that the flagship denominational college, Calvin University, has been trending very left with no apparent pushback that I've seen. And then two, three years ago, a church in Grand Rapids or East Grand Rapids called Neelan Avenue Christian Reformed Church installed a deacon who was in a lesbian relationship. And this is very typical of left-wing vanguard moves. So by that, I mean leftist groups often take unilateral action, sometimes in contravention of the rules or the law, in order to establish facts on the ground and then essentially dare people to stop them. So for example, that's what Gavin Newsom did when he was mayor of San Francisco. He started unilaterally issuing marriage licenses for gay couples. And that ultimately led to the Obergefell decision that legalized gay marriage nationwide. So this is often a very highly effective tactic. And one reason is because organizations, denominations, etc., often are divided into sort of three camps, the kind of the liberal, moderate, and conservative. And the moderates typically don't have the stomach for the kind of bare-knuckle conflict it has to roll back these vanguard actions. So that often does work. But that does not seem to have been the case here. So maybe you could fill us in on what happened with this Neelan Avenue CRC situation and how it is played out in terms of the denomination. So as you, in the mid-90s, the Christian Reformed Church allowed what they called a local option for women's ordination. And what that meant was that local councils could allow women to be ordained as deacon or elder. They could at some point call a woman minister. Those people wouldn't be seated at classes the next level up until classes agreed. And once a majority of classes sat women deacons and elders, then synod would seat them. And that happened, I believe, in 2004. So before the Second World War, the Christian Reformed Church, like many other ethnic denominations in North America, was a fairly insular, fairly conservative denomination whose main job was to try to preserve its cultural and doctrinal distinctiveness that it took over from the Netherlands, in fact, from the Netherlands when it left, not as the Netherlands continued to evolve. After the Second World War, as with many denominations, across the denomination, young men had to go to war. They were rubbing shoulders with other soldiers. The Christian Reformed Church didn't seem like God's chosen people the way it had been before the Second World War. And you had this, in many ways, it sort of follows the neo-evangelical developments that you saw in Billy Graham, in the broader evangelical culture. And when the counterculture hits, it sort of tacks along with Billy Graham and many other broadly neo-evangelicals in sort of a slow accommodation to the changes in American life. And in the 1970s, there was obviously a big push across the board for women's ordination. And also in the 1970s, a move towards, you know, gay liberation, let's say, a re-evaluating of the church's traditional position with respect to same sex marriage. So the women in church office wars began in the CRC in the 1970s and ended in the 1990s. Basically, in the 1990s, the church, in many ways, in exhaustion, found that it could not use its traditional way of dealing with this, which was have a group of elite theologians from the denomination study the issue, come to a definitive answer based on the word of God, and deliver it to the denomination for the denomination to follow. Basically, what they had had was a number of study reports that said, this matter of women's ordination is difficult. We don't really know if we should prohibit them completely. And so out of exhaustion, the denomination basically says, we'll let local churches and local classes decide. And once the majority decides that it's permissible or okay, they'll go. We'll do it. Obviously, there was a group of around 60,000 members who left out of protest of this, but also Genesis issues. Again, in terms of the broader trajectory, this is part of the assimilation into the broader American church experience. These issues were out there in broader evangelicalism. Evangelicals were dividing around them. You still see the Southern Baptists fighting about women's ordination. And so the Christian informed church had maybe 20, 25% mainline-ish and maybe 80% moderate and conservatives. And the moderates could basically in time go along with women's ordination. Important to keep in mind with this is the fact that the Christian informed church reaches its numeric height, 350,000 members in the mid-90s. A lot of it sort of driven up by the baby boom. After the second world war, there was a significant, I always say to people, churches leak left and break right. While everybody sees the break right over women in office from the URC, what has been invisible all along in the denomination has been the left leaking. In other words, the deconstruction that we've seen going on broadly in society where young people don't see the relevance of church, don't see the necessity of church, maybe abandon some traditional beliefs, maybe sort of believe there's a God, but God loves us and church attendance isn't that important as long as I do good things and my heart's in the right place. And maybe I believe in Jesus in my heart privately or something like that. Those groups tend to leak left. And so while there was a break right in the 90s, there's been a continual leak left in the Christian reform church as well. And the churches that fought the women in church office wars often were urban Christian reform churches that had been planted after the second world war in places like New York metropolitan area, San Francisco Bay, Southern California. These churches fought that fight. What happened between the 1990s and the 2020s has been a place I grew up in New Jersey in the 1960s and 70s had more than a dozen thriving Christian reform churches. Now there are three or four significant ones with people with a lot of Dutch last names and a lot of smaller ethnic church plants that have joined the denomination. Similar thing, San Francisco, when I got here 25 years ago, number of thriving churches in the Bay area. Many of those people either have left the faith, left the denomination, gone mainline or sold their homes in the Bay area, retired in Grand Rapids. Similar things in Southern California. What's been happening is that where the Christian reform church basically decided we're not going to fight over women in office anymore, basically the denomination said if you're complementarian you're good, if you're egalitarian you're good and we're not going to fight it anymore. Over this time there have been a number of study committees that dealt with the issue. In 1973 a major report basically said people often don't choose their sexual orientation, what they have to decide to do with it is what they will be held accountable for. Therefore if you find yourself with a same-sex orientation you can be a member of the church, there's no problem, as long as you don't act on it. And that's been the position of the Christian reform church since 1973. Since then there have been a number of attempts to try to get the church to update that position. At each attempt the church has been turned down. What we've seen happening over the last 10 years though is that the church has actually been growing more conservative and part of this is because of, so also after the civil rights movement like the church I grew up in, my father's church that he planted in Patterson, New Jersey, mostly African-American church, the church I pastor here, majority African-American church, most of the leadership is African-American, these were basically racial reconciliation churches that in the 60s and 70s said the church needs to bear witness to racial reconciliation and churches did that. That tended to be the progressive wing of the church. That progressive wing tended to have dominance in the establishment and so CRC progressives tended to be at Calvin College, Calvin University in denominational offices and then ever since the civil rights movement there's been a steady beat of we need to be a more diverse church. Now this was both in terms of theologically we believe that you know that God's all human beings are God's creatures regardless of race, we denounce racism. Also because there's no more Dutch immigrants and because the Dutchmen in America have been very successful and they've had smaller children and those who have been successful in terms of academics and higher degrees have tended to leak left, the Christian Reformed Church said we need to grow among Asians, Hispanics and African-Americans in order to stay viable as a denomination. Reformed Church of America did the exact same thing and so over the last 30 years the Christian Reformed Church has been trying to grow amid other ethnic groups. Now to many that looked like a progressive move because racial reconciliation sounds like a progressive move. Many of the people who came into the denomination from Hispanic backgrounds, Asian backgrounds, about 10% of the Christian Reformed Church is now Korean immigrants. Those folks generally speaking are conservative with respect to issues around human sexuality. So the progressives who have held the establishment have sort of been losing body weight behind the scenes and losing churches. The moderates have sort of held their own but the conservatives have been growing and they've been growing partly due to as bringing in perhaps some people who have left mainline churches. That's sort of been the overall evangelical move for the last number of years. But also ethnic minorities, Koreans came and saw oh another distinctively Reformed, self-consciously from denomination, conservative denomination, we're in. And the Christian Reformed Church used a lot of its financial resources to try to attract these groups, you know give scholarships, help with finances, the way denominations usually try to grow outside themselves and were to a degree successful. So then suddenly when as after Obergefell and all of the changes with respect to same-sex marriage, many in the establishment and the progressive side of the denomination said this is just like women in office but the church was not like the church was in the 1980s and 1990s. It's less Dutch and then also the progressives increasingly look whereas before they were saying things like we're all part of the body of Christ but now these establishment progressives are saying our children and grandchildren aren't going to church and there's no way they're going to go to church unless we basically follow with the predominant prevailing cultural trends of saying you know total inclusion. And that sort of ratcheted up the tension but I've been watching the language over a number of these issues over the last 15 years and it's been fairly obvious that the church has been getting more conservative and conservatives have been having more power in synods and classes around the denomination and what really happened in 2022 when and even in 2016 when they established a committee to study this again because the progressives kept saying we need to restudy homosexuality and in 2016 senate said yes but everyone on the committee is going to be in agreement with our position. We're going to exclude people who are not in agreement. Progressives had a fit but they didn't have the votes. Then after the pandemic the report finally came to senate 2022 and again the conservatives the moderates sided with the conservatives and the progressives are now in a real fix because they have been the establishment. The denomination has always sort of followed them and looked up to them and now they're realizing there may be 20 to 30 percent of the denomination and they're not going to have the votes and they're probably never going to have the votes. So basically what happened was they did a report. The denomination did a report and this report affirmed the traditional position on human sexuality and then essentially my understanding is they wrote it into the confessional documents essentially saying our confession when it says this this and this it means this sort of an interpretation sort of written into the governing docs if you will. That's the progressive interpretation of what happened in 2022. I think a truer interpretation is that this is what the documents always said. Okay okay. It's sort of like an opinion, a judicial opinion on the you know here's what it here's what the law actually means. Yeah this is what the position of the church has been and this is why the church has believed this and so if you want to change the mind of the church you're going to have to justify it but again as you said before a lot of people assumed well we can sort of change the church because the moderates won't have the stomach to actually discipline and enforce this and this is in fact why the Reformed Church of America has been splitting up over the last couple of years because partly because of their structure they couldn't enforce it and moderates and conservatives couldn't discipline those churches that were stepping out from denominational guidelines. Now before we get onto this Neeland Avenue situation again I want to highlight something and and talk a little bit more about this idea that the church the CRC has been growing more conservative as it's become more ethnically diverse and as it's sort of the younger generation is more conservative than the older generation so you essentially have old baby boomer progressive establishment denominational position type people who are apparently very heavily concentrated in East Grand Rapids they're much farther to the left than the next generation the younger generations and then these ethnic groups that strikes me as completely the opposite of the Presbyterian Church in America where the younger people and maybe I don't know exactly what their positions would be on sexuality they're certainly much more liberal on gender issues I would say and culturally in many ways they're definitely to the left of kind of the old more conservative southern traditional people in the denomination there's there's a view I and I see I I think that the under 35 crowd in the PCA is far to the left of the baby boomers in the PCA and you're saying that it's it's the opposite here that the the older generation is more liberal than the younger generations in a sense yeah but now if we imagine that is within families you get the wrong picture the part of my argument is that a lot of the children and the grandchildren of the establishment boomers are no longer in the christian reform church and this is almost like the mainline bleed a little bit here for the more progressive types they were mainline ish and they've suffered the same diminution as a result of demographic atrophy as the you know PCUSA has and so and what's been happening is that others have been coming in and filling those positions it's also to the fact that and I saw this in the 80s when I was in seminary I remember it didn't serve in the 80s there was this lament that the brightest and best of the denomination are no longer going into the ministry which didn't really feel good if you were in seminary I guess we're not the brightest and the best but that was the lament then and but you could see where let's say in in my so my grandfather and my father were both christian reform ministers I think in my father's generation still he from seminary in 1960 the idea was that if you'd have a really sharp young man in your community we would really have that person go into the ministry because that was elite status in our community and what happens as the 20th century continues to progress is that well increasingly people aren't going to say our denominational college they want to go to the ivy league and anyone can go to calvin college but our young man got into harvard and so yeah you had in the 20th century boomers tended to assimilate into mainstream culture but the denomination sort of held itself together by attracting those who weren't necessarily in mainstream culture do you think that there's something different about the way that the crc did multi-racial outreach that attracted a more conservative base and you'd know again a lot about this again you you grew up in multi-racial ministry in paterson new jersey you now essentially pastor an inner city church in sacramento i believe it's very multi-racial again if i look at the recent debates in the southern baptist convention over women's ordination or you know can you you know have a baptist church that has a female pastor there is just a group of black pastors who wrote a open letter critiquing this move to become more strict on that so they represent i think it's fair to say a liberalizing faction they may not be liberal on sexuality issues but they're more liberal on other issues but in your denomination it seems to be the opposite did you do something differently in terms of multi-racial outreach than others did i don't know that we did i know that because of one stream of thought you can sort of connect women's ordination with let's say same sex marriage but i think the issues are quite different there have been women in leadership in the salvation army and pentecostal churches you've had female orders and in you know orthodox and and roman catholic traditions a lot of people whereas when it comes to same sex marriage there's nothing like that in the church history so i don't think the issues are necessarily as tied as a lot of people assume they are i think with some lines of rationality they are tied in terms of an overall liberationist rationale but in terms of what really motivates them i think they're different i think part of the reason logical tools that you use to analyze the analyze the situations are quite similar as well i mean if you that they are they are in some groups yes certainly from an evangelical perspective if you adopt a biblical interpretation principle that leads to women's ordination the same techniques can be used for essentially any anything yeah yeah there certainly is a yeah i i i agree with that again in a more mainline they have an entirely different theological approach and i don't know how the crc approaches those things because you have traditional confessions it's not about just well we're going to go consult scripture but you also have these you know long-standing traditions and confessional documents going back hundreds of years right so that's a layer of interpretation but with respect to let's say would make the christian form difference from let's say the baptists many african-american churches are baptist you don't find with respect to let's say some african-american catholic groups and they're fair the african-american population in the catholic church is not insubstantial but the majority of black churches in america tend to practice tend to practice believer baptism ethnic minorities that look at the christian reform church obviously we're something different from let's say a large black church and this was true in my father's congregation in new jersey it's true in terms of my congregation in sacramento any african-american in my church has a whole range of black baptist churches that they can pick from that are far larger far more monocultural usually what they grew up in what it tended to attract other ethnic minorities to the christian reform churches tended to be heideberg catechism the some of the the practices so i was a missionary in the dominican republic and one of the things that always impressed the haitians about us was that this presbyterian form of government they used to say in the dominican republic no i have face and let f automata which meant we don't have bosses in the christian reform churches basically you'd have these bishop structures and we had much more of a um you know much much more of a presbyterian form of government and that impressed them so i think a lot of what now the koreans many koreans had a presbyterian background and so they fit fairly well in the christian form church but many african-american and hispanics who would come into the christian reform church wanted a denomination that actually had the confessional formulas that we had and so for that reason um they you know they weren't sort of black baptists who said oh we can be southern baptist or we can be african methodus episcopal or we can be you know whatever well that's good what about neiland avenue so what happened with that church so it's helpful to know that i don't remember how many years ago almost an a similar thing happened in toronto where a church in toronto said to its classes we would like to ordain a um an openly practicing gay elder and that hit the news in the denomination there were overtures that were sent to senate senate basically told the classes in toronto this is out of step with us you as a classist should admonish your local church not to do it and the church back down because the church had had all of this talk about this classes grand rapids east in 2016 as a classist wrote a document that basically was a justification for the church um allowing same-sex marriage in the church and classes put that up on their website saying this is our study committee we disagree with the position of the christian church with respect to this nothing happened then this um this deacon in the in the congregation she had served uh three terms before apparently but now she had married uh she was a lesbian married another woman and this was during the pandemic that this happened as well and it had been called off two years in a row because of the pandemic and then there was a sense of what's happening here um it's one thing to have a conversation about this matter it's a different thing to act on it and also what you had was you had a classist that was in favor or at least not willing to discipline or admonish the local church now the christian forum church has been watching the reform church of america deal with this for 25 years the polity of the reform church of america is a little bit different from the christian reform church their senate doesn't have as much power and the classes has more power in the reform church of america and there are a number of classes on the east coast of the united states that had been ordaining openly gay and lesbian clergy for a number of years and the denomination similar to the christian reform church had been growing by attracting ethnic minorities by attracting other evangelicals and so their church too had been growing more conservative but the majority of their denomination didn't have the ability to discipline those classes and get them to stop and so what happened in the reform church of america when finally the the conservatives and the new people had come into the denomination got sick of it someone else started a a breakaway denomination and so the conservatives left for the breakaway denomination leaving sort of a a rump denomination that's the reform church of america the christian reform church has been watching this and knew on one hand our polity is a little different senate has more power basically if senate decides to do something it can really do it and so senate 2022 did it and then senate 2023 said a lot of people said well the next senate maybe will undo maybe senate 2022 was an anomaly senate 2023 happened and it was not anomaly the denomination has changed and these this will not be permitted and so those who want to go in that way those who feel very strongly about having an affirming stand and conviction it's really uncertain if they're going to have a future in this denomination because at some point they will be kicked out so the senate told this neil and avenue church that they have to back down on their approach senate told classes grand rapids east they need to deal with senate with neil and because there's there's a structure to it so basically senate is loathed to sort of jump over the classes so they lean on the classes but classes grand appas east has held their line and a number of the other churches in the classes have now come out with affirming statements and so basically it looks like the majority of that classes is not going to back down and formally that i think they just assume that we'll just wait it out the culture is going to change just like women in office eventually everyone will go along with us what they've seen in the denomination is that it's not changing they're becoming increasingly a minority in the denomination yeah so what happens if you know we are i saw the statements from last year after last year's senate and he'll inhabit is like we're not changing and then if this class us grand rapids east says well we're just not going to do it like what can you actually do is there like are there actually any mechanisms because again it's very typical of vanguard action on the left you do something you just refuse to back down and say okay force me and then it's like oh you know what do you do how do you do that and it becomes like endless legal things which a lot of people don't have stomach for uh to be quite honest i think the conservatives conservatives seem to be much more interested in procedures following procedures uh maybe this just because of this uh biblical literalist kind of thing they tend to be very interested in the book and the order never occurs to them that like other people just like man we're not going to do that yeah we we've seen that in like the united methodist church where you have bishops who basically openly defy the position of the church and then discipline against people who do comply with the position of the church that's not christian reform church culture okay and so part of what happened in these two synods is that synods have said in order to participate in the denomination to be an office bearer you need to subscribe you need to sign the covenant of office bears that say you subscribe to the three forms of unity the heidberg catechism belgian confession canons of dork and you should do so wholeheartedly and in good conscience and what synod said is basically there's no room for holding a an affirming position while subscribing to these documents and so even though there wasn't there was a motion on the floor to basically have classes grand rapids east lose their seats in senate 2024 that motion failed partly because a the president of senate kind of stepped down from the chair he's a moderate with a lot of um with a lot of authority and persuasion in the denomination said they're they appealed at this senate they've only now learned of their appeal it's a little draconian to kick them out six months from now give them another year and so that's weighed enough moderates to give them another year but if um i don't think they can count on that happening in 2024 so if nothing happens if classes grand rapids east doesn't do something or leave what will everyone expects to happen in senate 2024 is they will lose their seats in um they will lose their seats at senate and what's happening between now and the next senate is there's going to be more work done on the question of what does subscription look like how much can we differ and what if you do differ from the teachings of the church what then is the process um but there will be the christian reform church isn't going to be a denomination that just sort of looks the other way on this that's the culture of the church so how do you think this is going to play out with these progressive churches and maybe the grand rapids classes they end up leaving the denomination or what ends up happening how do you think that will play out obviously we can't fully predict the future here we're not going to hold you accountable for fully predicting the future but a few clergy and churches have left to the left for some of them because the reform church of america is very close to us in a lot of different ways some churches are thinking about well maybe we should join the reform church of america part of what's also in christian form church culture is a love of institutions and the institutions of the denomination have been the establishment's baby you know they this is what they care about they love calvin college they love calvin university they love world renew they love all of these institutions i i would i would like to see these churches start a new senate basically um and then you know probably leave start a new senate and and then see what kinds of agreements that they can broker with the current christian reform church in terms of ways that we can work together with institutions and other things i think we're also going to see and this has been coming for a long time we're also going to see some uh a a rea a reassessment of the stance between the or the church's organism and these institutions evangelical churches usually have there's these all these sort of institutions up there that other churches relate to the christian form church some of our institutions have sort of been doing that like world renew which is sort of a relief and development organization so i think we're going to see the continued evolution of those things which again is along the lines of what we've seen in evangelical spaces overall in the country how do you think this is going to affect calvin university because calvin university is a denominationally owned and controlled college has definitely been very progressive on these issues and i believe actually issued a ruling that their faculty don't have to subscribe to the confession on this matter because they do have you know some gay affirming faculty because they do have you know some gay affirming faculty i haven't seen any evidence that anybody in the calvin world is interested in pushing it in a more conservative direction but how do you see it playing out because the crc is so family oriented these things are going to take a little time because you're not dealing with a name you read in a magazine you're dealing with a second cousin and so there's going to be a pace to this and that's also a bit of dutch culture dutch culture tends to have a certain degree of tolerance as well i think long term though i think calvin has for the last 15 years tried to walk a line they've continued to be technically aligned with the position of the christian reform church in many ways if you look at someone like preston sprinkle that's pretty much where calvin has lined up um we're gonna we're gonna give as much latitude as we can in this while holding this line while not while not agreeing that same-sex marriage well not affirming same-sex marriage and in fact just last year there was a sociology professor who performed a same-sex wedding and their contract was not renewed and they are now suing the university so the university has been trying to hold that line i think actually in the future the the college is going to try and hold some tension with this and not simply break away from the denomination and follow the culture the reason being that once calvin that there's another there's there are other colleges closely tied to the denomination but not owned by it one is dork college in iowa dork colleges dork college has been thriving as a conservative alternative i mean a college like hillsdale is thriving as a conservative alternative if calvin if there's no nothing distinctive between calvin and grand valley university or the ivy league schools calvin is going to lose its reason for being i think it's going to see that even though it can no longer count on sort of the christian reform lock-in that will bring students to it i think it's going to have to try to continue to be a confessing moderate evangelical college when i went to calvin college probably 75 percent of the student body was from christian reform churches today it's less than half and so calvin over the last 20 years has been trying to exist by attracting evangelical students that it's basically moderate evangelical students but that's increasingly that middle space is tougher and tougher to hold no i agree i mean it's just like the the politics have become polarized we've become much more of a bimodal distribution in many domains of society where sort of the middle ground is is hard to hold it's not a very pleasant place to be in a lot of ways because you're getting hit from both sides you're not really getting anything for it yeah that'll be interesting my friend nate fisher who went to calvin and then also went to harvard law school his point of view was basically yeah if calvin doesn't hold to its distinctives as this reform university why go there why pay to go to an overpriced mediocre liberal arts school like everything else when there's no distinctive it's not a mediocre it's an excellent it's an excellent education i will say that i'm a i'm a calvin fan i'm a calvin alumni yeah it's an excellent education at least it was for me yeah okay yeah well it's probably not going to go it's not going to be like ranked up there with like williams college and some of the other in terms of if your competition is other christian colleges then you'd say yeah you're you're really feeling good if your competition is the ivy league uh calvin is not going to hold as much appeal versus the more elite secular institutions calvin is going to attract christian students that who that is who their market is you can look at u.s news and world report rankings for calvin it's it usually ranks very very high in the midwest uh so a couple other questions uh just to be just to be complete do you think that the idea of women's ordination is going to get pushed back on at some point you know if the conservatives win if this thing goes in a more conservative direction and some liberals start leaving is there more of a push on women's ordination i think there will be more of a push on one but i don't really see it rolled back anytime soon the conservatives know that right now they're winning because the moderates are with them and if they really try and hold a hard line on this they're going to lose moderates and so i think the current position of the christian informed church which is the local option with respect to this i think that's probably going to hold isn't it the case that there aren't very many churches with female officers um there are i had the numbers wrong and someone corrected me recently um the number of churches that have women senior pastors in the christian informed church is i don't know 10 to 12 it's very small um number of churches with women elders maybe 30 40 women deacons maybe 60 but there are there are a number of christian informed churches that don't have any women serving in office a lot of churches again it's really important to remember that this is in you have to understand all of these issues not sort of just in the theological abstract but in a context of continued aging and decline of the denomination if a church runs out of men who can serve in office you're going to be you're going to be motivated to let more and more women into office just to fill your officers yeah i mean when you look at the main lines it looks to me like when you start once you allow women pastors it sort of becomes morally a more of a characteristically female occupation they become like more and more and more higher percentage of women over time and kind of like happens in a lot of things that men start exiting essentially the profession uh that hasn't happened necessarily in the crc so it really hasn't and and part of what's run part of what's happened here too is that when the progressives came and said we need a local option on same-sex marriage the christian from church hasn't found the local option to be a very satisfying thing either on one hand a number of women say we feel like second-class citizens and some of the complementarians say we feel like second-class citizens so you say all of the um all of the denominational offices in bureaucracy is staffed with non-complementarians basically yeah or at least at the highest levels yeah yeah and i'm curious about the role of essentially um activist networks within the crc uh there's a couple that were out there there was one of a sort of a pro-lgbt group called all one body and then there's what i gather was a more traditionalist group called abide we've seen a lot of controversies about those in against like the the pca had the national partnership partnership and there are these different factions who are becoming organized within these denominations to try to push it in particular directions did these have any real effect in the crc or uh were they major players i'm curious about the role there i don't think all one body had a lot of impact beyond class s groin rapids east where it met they tended to be if you look at their videos usually aging boomers and a few young people i think abide um had a much bigger impact not necessarily in terms of reaching out to moderates but i think many conservatives in the denomination felt that there was there was absolutely they had no voice in the establishment or the administration and abide sort of gave them a an establishment to look to for leadership and something around which to organize so abide like a shadow government yeah yeah i think in some ways for the conservatives but i don't i don't i don't really think abide really um impacted moderates a lot i think moderates again for the most part have been satisfied with the position that the denomination has had since the 70s on this matter they look at the main line and say this isn't a strategy for church growth and um they and so they voted with the conservatives in the last two sentences very strongly and then i want to ask you about affinity classes uh in the reform church in america they've created affinity classes once called the city classes which is basically a non-geographic an affinity classes i would define as a non-geographic classes of sort of birds of a feather who flock together so city classes is this group of hip cool very progressive churches that have kind of formed their own club the anglican church in north america has affinity dioceses as a result of the amalgamation that produced it in the first place i've heard some suggestion that that's going to be a trend in some of these other denominations they will just resolve disputes by allowing people to sort themselves into their own sort of self-governing communities is that something that you think would ever be in play for the crc i don't think so there classes men coda has become sort of a de facto affinity classes what's men coda men coda minnesota and and north dakota south dakota okay um and and basically in the christian form church a local church can switch classes with the approval of synod if they have a rationale because of women in office some churches found it very objectionable to be in a classes where there were women office bearers and so synod basically said we would rather have you go to men coda than leave the denomination and so classes men coda has become sort of a de facto affinity classes but this when the reform church of america was doing this again the christian form church was just always looking at the rca and back and forth and the christian form church was like this sort of breaks up the geographic nature of classes now again they allowed it with respect to two korean classes but again those are korean language so the church has resisted it in terms of a theological distinctiveness even though they've allowed it with respect to women in church office they have also allowed it with respect to say language groups it sounds like there's been quite a decline in the membership of the crc since its peak in the 90s we're 30 years on from that and it looks like about a one-third decline you've got the boomer generation dying out we just have different demographics in the country so that's obviously driving some of it we've had the rise of the nuns but it also does sound like the crc has had some success in attracting new non-dutch people of various ethnic backgrounds do you think the crc will continue to decline or will ultimately bottom out and start growing again thanks to these other factors i'm interested just in that overall health from the population perspective i think it i think there will be a bottom i think we're going to see continual decline as the older generation grows and i think we're going to see the loss of of some churches i think in some ways the denomination is going to be more like it was before the second world war coming up into the future not in that it's sort of dutch homogeneous but probably more doctrinally homogeneous that i think is the bigger trend um if it can start if it can start growing again that's i i think the church i mean i think in some ways some of its growth has been taking pages from let's say pca growth because the pca has sort of learned to grow you know the tim keller movement and some of these things i don't know you know i don't know if the pca is going to continue to be able to experience some of that kind of growth that's on the 90s and aughts i don't know if some of that is receding so it's it's hard to tell um i i think for a lot of these denominations they're going to have to find a reason for being they're going to need an identity and it's going to have to be something that's distinctive enough to give it to give it character so that someone out there and say in the menu or marketplace of denominations would say oh that's what i'm looking for one of the interesting groups in the denomination that has been growing has sort of been what i would call neo sacramental you know a little bit more like the anglicans but again um the that's certainly been the trend for you know a while now in general like across the evangelical world yeah more kind of like pro liturgy right so back when we when i came to sacramento in the 90s we were planting churches with seeker methodology all those churches that we planted now have weekly communion higher church liturgy um you know all of this stuff and so that very much regeneration yeah well we don't get back to that fight in the netherlands um so yeah that has definitely been the trend but you know the the united states is a big country and the even though let's say in a place like sacramento and on the west coast things have gone very liturgical i see in the midwest they're still using sort of seeker methodology for churches so the christian form church is really going to have to once again sort of find what it's about and then learn to really work on that it inherited that from its from the population that affixed itself to it as dutch immigrants but they're really going to have to do it now as americans and canadians all right well thank you this has been great is there anything else you wanted to tell me that i didn't ask you about before we we wrap it up don't feel obligated to say anything but if i missed anything important set me straight well i you know anybody who watches the rest of my videos will know i mean i i know that this is an existential crisis for the christian form church but i am and i don't know where this is all going but in terms of the lord's church i i think all of this all of this kind of process is perennial the church is always figuring its way through and um and so i am optimistic about the church even if i don't even if i don't really know what's coming for my own denominational home but that's protestants sort of see these denominations as wineskins and um and while i i intend to stay in the christian form church for the rest of my life and we'll just have to see if there is one for me to stay in or if the thing changes and um yeah we'll see well thank you for joining again paul vanderclay is a pastor in the christian reform church thank you so much for giving us a look at what's been going on there there's lots and lots of of happenings as it were in that denomination and we'll certainly continue for some time and again he's got a great youtube channel very thoughtful stuff on a variety of topics i guarantee you there will be at least one thing in there that you will be interested in so check out his youtube channel i put a link i'm not sophisticated enough to put one of these fancy overlays that you could just click right now but if you go to the show notes there is a link to his podcast channel so be sure to check that out paul thank you very much it's my pleasure good to talk to you aaron