https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NJl_HaBaGVA

 Hi, this is Paul and some of you will recognize this young fellow with me. His name is Brett Sockold. He is the author of I still have your book right here in my book pile, Transubstantiation. I first met Brett when I don't know how this book got to me, but the publisher sent it to me and I was looking at it like I should probably look at that book and do a conversation. Then I started looking at the book and I was really excited by the book. So then Brett and I talked and we talked again. And so Brett continues to do his stuff and he contacted me with an article that we're going to talk about. Then we're going to talk about some more stuff. So thanks again, Brett for coming on. And let me give a shout out Paul to my mother-in-law because she's been watching you for a long time and she's the one who said, you know, Paul VanderKlay needs to read your book. So it was because she said that that I got in touch and said like, could the publisher send you a copy? And then they did. And then you actually read it. And then you got back in touch and said, Hey, let's talk. So, so yeah. So hi to grandma Susan. How did she find my channel? Jordan Peterson stuff. I think is the, yeah, she, she follows his, his thought and, and thought you were doing interesting things with it. So yeah, but she, but I guess you had had a conversation where transubstantiation had come up at some point in the past. Someone had offered a corrective and you were like, Oh, I guess I need to look into this more. And then she was like, he needs your book. Well, that's exactly what happened because I, you know, no, no spoiler here. Protestants, especially confessional Protestants aren't always generous with historic Roman Catholic positions. And so I had said something rather flippantly about transubstantiation and Mary Cohen, who's has her own YouTube channel too. She kind of corrected me on that said, why don't you watch Bishop Baron on transubstantiation? I thought I probably should. So then I watched him. I thought, Oh, this is a lot different than I remember from Christian school or even seminary and then wow. So that's how the book got to me. I didn't know that. But you know, it works in both directions. I once saw one of the best sermons I've ever heard preached was it was the week of prayer for Christian unity at Toronto school of theology. And it was the moderator for the Presbyterian Church in Canada gave a sermon on predestination. And he started by saying, like, my wife told me not to do this. Don't talk about predestination in front of other people. You're going to be misunderstood. And by the time he was done, my response, and this is what I often hear from evangelicals and other Protestants when they hear me talk about Catholicism is, oh, if that's what you mean by it, that's not so bad. It was it was a brilliant sermon on Esau and Jacob and their reunion. You know, when Esau has got all the camels and the rich man, it was it was glorious. I wish I could remember it. But anyways, it goes in both directions. You know, sometimes we're working with caricatures of each other. Yeah. And when we hear what the other person is actually trying to say, we're like, oh, no, that's not so bad. Yeah, yeah. I have that often. And in, you know, from what has happened to me in the YouTube space, I'm I'm always talking to Roman Catholics and now Orthodox. A lot of, you know, Jordan Peterson fans got big into orthodoxy along with Protestants of various stripes. And so it's it's been it's been quite good. It's been quite good for me. Let's let's talk about this article that this conversation sort of started out when you wrote an article and I'm going to screen share it here so that people can so that people can see it. And I I had, in fact, no idea this was an issue that people that Roman Catholics were wondering about the the ethics of the covid vaccines, because, well, why don't why don't you talk about how did this article start and why did you write it? Yeah, I mean, so Catholic teaching is concerned about vaccines that are produced in some form or other. There's a whole range of ways it can happen with with recourse to cell lines that were originally derived from aborted fetuses. And so there's a lot of confusion on the issue. And the confusion is often in two separate spheres. There's confusion about church teaching. So there's questions about moral theology. And then there's confusion about the actual science. So people will say things like, oh, you know, there's fetal DNA in these vaccines or something to that effect, which is if you look at it, these are MRNA vaccines. They don't have any DNA, so they can't have fetal DNA. But but basically, there's these there's these two intersecting kind of problems, the moral theology problem and the science problem. And there's just so much misinformation out there that I would that I was encountering in, you know, in my own circles and social media. And people like in my line of work, people share videos with me, you know, you need to look at this. And I thought, wow, there's a lot of confusion. So I tried to write this piece, I wrote it for Church Life Journal, which I they're a great outlet, Catholic, but I think non Catholics will find a lot of stuff on there helpful as well. And they've been a great sort of platform for me to publish a few things. But they're right in that intersection between the academic and the popular. So they're read by academics and by people in pastoral work and just sort of intelligently people who want to be up to you know, up on this or that topic. Anyways, so I decided to write this this piece to try offer clarity on on Catholic teaching on these vaccines. And the real question is, well, the real issue is, anyone who knew Catholic teaching, and knew about how these vaccines were produced, would knew in advance that the church was going to say like, thumbs up, they're okay. They're not they're not absolutely pristine and perfect. And we can talk about that in a little more detail. But they easily clear the bar, like easily. And everyone who knew church teaching knew this, but it intersected with a cultural moment, where there was already a whole range of conspiracy theories about COVID, before you even get to vaccine. Then once you get to vaccines, they get looped into the conspiracy theories around COVID. And so now the conspiracy theories are, you know, there's microchips in your vaccine that Bill Gates is going to use to control you from outer space. Or, you know, I mean, that's one of the more extreme ones. But but a lot of people believe it, right. But then within within sort of Catholic land, that gets that gets sort of mashed together with ethical concerns about the vaccines. And you're not always sure you get the impression that someone's just anti they're just against vaccines, and any stick to beat the vaccine will do. And so they'll they'll try to use the moral argument when that falls apart, they'll go to some other argument. And it's it's a kind of a game of whack a mole. Because it often doesn't feel like it's being done in good faith. Now there are people with legitimate questions, and I think they deserve straight answers. And I and I hope my article does that too. But there are also people who are they're opportunists, and they're using this thing, just like they've used the panic du jour for the last 18 months to grow their social media audience to butter their bread, you know, and that we have an increasing problem in the Catholic community with people who are sort of going rogue and claiming the authority to teach that properly belongs to the bishops, they're claiming it for themselves, they're denouncing the bishops teaching. And on this one, we've had several people just openly reject clear church teaching. And it's remarkable because they belong to the same group that under the papacies of John Paul, the second and Benedict the 16th, they railed constantly against liberals who rejected church teaching on this or that question usually around human sexuality. And now they're they're in open rebellion against church teaching on this question. And they've become they've become well, Gerard would not be surprised. They've become the mirror image of what they criticize, right. So anyway, that's that's some of the background that led me to write this. Well, when I this is a question before we even get into any of this, which sort of fascinates me because the I mean, I come from a theological tradition that says, well, the three marks of the church are the proper preaching of the word, the proper administration of the sacraments and church discipline. And so, you know, the the Roman Catholic Church is better organized than most, at least if you're coming from Protestant land. So what, you know, and part of I mean, the Roman Catholic Church is huge. So we have in, you know, in a few days, a Roman Catholic, another Roman Catholic president will be inaugurated. What does does the Catholic Church do anything with discipline? And again, you know, before we started recording, I was we're talking about, you know, transubstantiation and, you know, back in the day, as a Protestant, as a confessional Protestant, you know, we were sort of raised with the idea that, you know, Roman Catholics are the people who burden people to the state at the stake. Well, right, you know, survive it, survive this too. So the Calvinist got a kind of, you know, shrug on that one. But I think early modern Europeans, no matter what their confession were up for that kind of activity. But anyway, yeah, well, maybe we'll give the answer to that. Well, maybe we'll give the Anabaptist a little, except for a few other incidents where things got out of hand in their camp. Yeah, yeah. What happened in the church with I mean, how does, how does the how does the church try to maintain order when you've got such enormous diversity? And, you know, I, you know, I have now because of my channel been in more conversation with Roman Catholics. And when I look at the heat coming off of some of those fights, it's like, it doesn't look, you know, this looks like Protestant land to me. Yeah, no, I think okay, so that I mean, you've nailed something rather precisely, which is the people who most vociferously hate Protestantism, and who until five years ago, would have argued that the great strength of Catholicism is a central teaching organ. So, you know, what's what are now in open rebellion at several points from that central teaching organ. So you have this and but nothing makes them angrier than calling them Protestants. I mean, like, it's, it's, it is a kind of bizarre world. But but the bigger question that you ask is really interesting. So just a few thoughts. Um, yeah, church discipline is really, it's a matter of prudential judgment. And the big question is, will a bishop weighing in on a given question, give more air to the problem than it was getting, right? So should you step in and make it a big public thing? Because that's what these that's what these things thrive on, or should you let it sort of end? And where do you make the call when it's crossed over into big enough that it's worth stepping in? Relatedly, the internet has caused a major problem, because there's a question of jurisdiction. So it's the local bishops job to rein people in, but it's not clear always whose jurisdiction a given internet platform is under. And so you can have these sort of vague, like, okay, you can't speak in our diocese, for instance, that's a really clear one we can do, we can say, if a group in our diocese wants to bring you in, they can't do it in our church building. So they end up renting the Legion Hall or something. And then it's clear to everyone that the official churches said this speaker is not part of our diocese. Another thing they can do, and it happened to a group that now goes by the name Church Militant, is we can ask them to not use the word Catholic in their self identification. So they used to be called real, I think it was real Catholic TV. And the Archbishop of Detroit said you can't use the word Catholic in your branding in your name. So they changed to church militant.tv. So there were those kinds of things. The biggest one you can do is excommunication. Right. And the basic argument, I heard this, I saw Archbishop Shapu, who's recently retired from Philadelphia, I heard him speak in Toronto, and he's kind of a, you know, a leader for the culture warriors. And they they like him as someone who, you know, lays down the law. And they asked him, how come we're not excommunicating these politicians? And his answer was, in a culture where everyone is a member of the church, that excommunication might work because it essentially it cuts you off from the whole community. And the goal of excommunication is not to cut you off, but to help you to realize the seriousness of your situation so you will seek reconciliation. Right. So you don't do it to be vindictive, you do it as a medicine for souls. Right. And Shapu's argument was in our current culture, that won't work. All we'll do is we'll make a martyr who's fellow travelers will rally around them. And but they won't they won't actually get the message that you're supposed to be sending. And so it just becomes a sort of vindictive move, which could actually backfire. Now, whether you agree or disagree, I think what we can acknowledge is making the call in a given case about what kind of discipline is is most likely to be helpful, is a tough call about which people of goodwill could have genuine disagreement, right. And it's really tough. But but Bishop Barron, because of what he's had blow back on him from people like Taylor Marshall and others, has been asking questions about this. And I think in general, the bishops are starting to realize that the internet is the Wild West, and it's it's undermining their their authority to teach. And it's giving rise to a lot of division and polarization in the church, just like in the rest of society, and that they have some responsibility there. But I don't think very many of them know what to do about it. I mean, just like the rest of us don't know what to do. You have a bunch of guys who are, by and large, not going to be internet savvy. They didn't grow up in that time and place. They're leaning on maybe some advisors who know a bit more than they do trying to figure it out. They have to be able to often act as a body, which requires a lot of deliberation and, and agreement and consensus building. So the bishops are in a tough spot. But I think it's getting to the point where various groups and voices that are really causing confusion and division, the bishops are going to have to figure out how to do something. And I, you know, I don't I don't I don't pretend to know what the answer is. Yeah. Well, this this obviously, for Protestant churches has been a big deal as well. My denomination, the Christian Reformed Church has historically practiced discipline fairly effectively because at least 50, 60 years ago, the church communities were very cohesive. And to be the threat of being excommunicated from your denomination was, I mean, there were there were social familial, there were ramifications up and down the line. And, you know, there was there was only there was only one real case in my time as a pastor of this church where I, I, I threatened someone with formal church discipline. And the only reason I played that card at that time with that individual was I knew for that individual, I could get his attention. Right. And and in that case, he actually addressed some things in his life and which is which is again, what discipline is for. It's it's to help, you know, it's to help bring someone, help them correct something in their life that needs to be addressed. It is not and again, I repeat this often for people, it is not for people who are repentant or know something is wrong and are struggling with something in their life. That is not what discipline is for. That is that is what discipleship is for. And that is what we do. And so, you know, people sometimes when they look at discipline, they'll say, but look at those centers over there. And I'll say, yeah, but but these people are in dialogue with me about what's going on in their life. And so we're actually working towards something. And so I don't want them from the means of grace. I want the means of grace to be operative in their life so that they will in fact reform and move in a better direction. But and I think you've got there, you've got one side of a spectrum and the guy you you brought up the possibility of discipline with is kind of in that that sweet spot in the middle where it would work. Yeah. On the on the one hand, it's inappropriate because you're working on it in the in the way that's appropriate to what's being worked on. If you go to the other end of the spectrum, you have people for whom ex communication would be a badge of honor. Yeah. I mean, we have we have this joke among Catholic theologians, right? If you want to sell books, get yourself in trouble with the congregation for the doctrine of faith. Get a few news stories out there about about how you're, you know, heterodox, and you'll make a lot of money. And I mean, it happens all the while it doesn't happen all the time because the CDF is really quite careful about how they engage. But when the CDF or in a more familiar case, maybe the USCB engaged with the theologian, Beth Johnson, and her book sales went through the roof. And of course, the other the other problem is the issues with Beth Johnson, which I think were real issues, but I've heard her speak, she has every intention of being orthodox. And the the version of her thought that became popular because it was under investigation was a total caricature. I mean, it didn't really represent her, whether or not the the bishops and their investigators represented her accurately in the back and forth, all abstain from judging right now. What I will say is when it gets out into the public, it was not accurate, right? And so there's that you're always you always have these prudential considerations. If you're going to undertake that kind of thing, there's all kinds of unintended consequences that might be worse. You know, so anyway, it's it's not easy. I don't envy people who have to make those decisions, whether they're local pastors or bishops or bishops conferences or or whatever. But at some point, the rubber does hit the road, you know. Well, and in our last conversation was about conspiracy theories. And and to me, you know, I found that conversation very helpful, because we are we are in a time right now, where regular people on the street, you know, in a in a democratic society, regular people on the street with whatever information that they have access to have to make decisions about who to vote for, have to make decisions in terms of where they stand on particular positions or ideas. And as been evident in the United States, there's in many ways, what people believe depends on who they trust and who they're getting their information from. And in a situation like this, which is a long ways from from contexts where there was sort of one given authority and that was the there was sort of one given authority and, you know, people may be, you know, four against that one authority, but via the, you know, first the printing press and then, you know, electric, you know, mass media, and now social media and micro media, the proliferation of information sources is is just, you know, as Charles said, it's a supernova. I mean, there's so much out there. And on one hand, we should be we should have a degree of humility with respect to our own beliefs, and we should have a degree of patience with those who believe differently from ourselves. And and also, generally speaking, the way to deal with this is usually patient, relational, good faith conversation, because what we're looking to do is influence people. And, you know, pastorally, you know, that influence usually follows, you need to develop a platform of trust. If you develop a platform of trust, you may in fact, gain some influence and you may be able to make headway. But what I appreciated about your article, which we will get to was I thought you did a really good job of it was it was both a a sophisticated article in terms of the you could tell that you had a lot of background in terms of how you constructed your argument. But also, you were able to and this is this is why part of the reason I like talking to you, you also have an aptitude for taking complex arguments and relating them in ways that a lot of people who perhaps haven't had the education can maybe get a handle on. And that to me is, is a very valuable thing in this current information context. Oh, thanks. Yeah, no, I mean, that's, I mean, it's kind of my gig. I think we talked in earlier interviews that I mean, I'm a generalist, right, because of what I teach, I teach introduction to everything. And so my task is to get the basics, even when they're complex, across in a way that's understandable. So I hope I hope that in general, I'm good at that. And I hope that in this article, I managed to help people and, and the initial feedback is, is Yes, I have, you know, that, not to say everyone agrees with everything, but, but people have found it helpful. And so yeah, maybe a good, I mean, people can see the spoiler alert here on the screen. And you and I talked, we might come back to talking more about the good place. But I'll just, I'll use the same launch that I used for the article for our discussion here. Yep. Spoiler alert, spoiler alert, plug your ears if you don't want to know about the good place. But in season three, in the good place, the main characters find out that no one has actually got to the good place, meaning heaven in like 500 years, and they go digging in the files, basically. And what they find out is moral life in the modern world has gotten so complex that every deed you do is freighted by cooperation with evil deeds. So if you if you buy something at the grocery store, like, where did the seeds come from? Who who harvested it? Who planted it? Who tended it? How is it transported? What's its carbon footprint? How does the grocery chain treat their employees? Do they do they financially or morally support some immoral cause? You know, and you're implicated in all this evil when you buy a carrot. And so, so this basic problem is is at the root of why no one's gotten to heaven in 500 years in in the fictional show. And it's quite funny. But it's also it also makes you think like, yeah, like, how much responsibility do I have when I buy a carrot? Like, what what am I supposed to do if buying a carrot implicates me in this massive amount of evil that I don't intend that I barely know about? And how and should I know about it? How much research do I need to do to buy a carrot? Right. And is is it even practical to avoid all these things? Can I produce all my own food and everything else so as to extract myself from this net of evil that ensnares me everywhere I turn? This is the basic problem. And and so I use it as a jumping off point, because this this kind of problem is what Catholicism has considered under this rubric of cooperation with evil. So you've got it on the screen, they can see the subheading cooperation with evil. And that's the way we think about all kinds of things, including if a vaccine I'm going to receive had some some connection with abortion, can receiving that vaccine be justified? And it depends on a few things. It depends on what exactly that connection with abortion is. It depends on if you've got other options available. It depends on how serious your need for the vaccine is. It depends on all those things. But here's the basic Catholic response. Cooperation with evil is almost never justified. There's all kinds of categories of it. And we won't go into every one. There's categories and subcategories and subcategories, whether it was passive, or active, whether it was remote or proximate, whether it was material or formal, there's all these things. But the almost all cooperation with evil is not justified. But there's a recognition that a certain kind of certain tiny subset of cooperation with evil, which is evil, you don't intend. So that's what makes it material. Evil that is doesn't lead directly to the to the action in question. So that's called immediate rather than immediate. Evil that is remote rather than proximate. So there's some distance, not just in time, but in causality, right? It's several steps removed. If your cooperation with evil is those things, it might be justified. It's not automatically justified. It might be. And what does it take to justify it? Proportionate reasons. It's basically like if somebody if there's something else bad that you're working against, like, I don't know, a global pandemic, then it could it could justify it when you when you weigh it out. Voting is a classic example. You you're always cooperating with evil when you vote, always. Every party, every candidate will do something wrong. They're there even if it's unintentional, even if their policy has an unintended negative consequence, you will you are always cooperating with evil when you vote. And you're also cooperating with evil if you spoil your ballot or abstain from voting, because then you're letting the worst of the other options go uncontested. So you're cooperating with evil all the time. Other places people are familiar with it is shopping. You know, where did your t shirt come from? Where do your carrots come from? What do these companies support? One that we're becoming aware of is our participation in social media. I mean, how much evil on balance has been done in the world by social media? And if you judge that on balance, it's been more evil than good, then you need a good reason to participate in it. I think there are good reasons. But it's important to recognize it's not automatically justified. It's justified if you have good reasons to do it, right? So that's the basic framework. And then we go into applying it to the question of vaccines, particularly, and then the question of the first two vaccines out of the gate, and the specifics about them, because you actually need to know the specifics if you want to make the analysis. Well, we should mention that, that you are now on Twitter. So you are going to get a real brush with evil on Twitter because, well, these, you know, I really loved the way you put this forward. And I wanted to highlight some of the language that you used, because I suspect we have Aristotle and Thomas Aquinas lurking behind some of these words in some ways. And so I didn't want, because if you say, you know, remote material cooperation with evil, that's a very specific use of the word material that is probably not the way most people think about when they hear the word material. You want to expand that a little bit? Yeah, I mean, the basic distinction in these categories is between formal cooperation with evil and material cooperation with evil. And formal cooperation means you endorse the evil you're cooperating with. So if I vote for someone because of their immoral stance on, take your pick, immigration, abortion, whatever, if I vote because of that, then that's formal cooperation, and that's never justified. But if I vote in spite of that, but because the other guy's worse or whatever, that's material cooperation, and that can be justified with proportionate reason. So you're right, it's a very specific use of the term. And so with respect to vaccines, if you now it's hard to even imagine someone's doing this, right? Someone like, I'm going to go to get a vaccine, intending the evil of abortion that is 13 steps back in the production of this vaccine. I mean, it's hard to imagine, but I mean, but it could be a little grayer than that. It could be that someone says, I'm not intending to endorse the abortion, but I think the abortion was justified because it led to a good. Even that would be disqualified, you know, under Catholic. A Catholic has to think the abortion is wrong. It's always wrong. It's not justified because some good comes of it. This is a point of major confusion. People think if a good, if you believe some good came of it, you're saying it's justified. Well, like look at the cross, that's not how this works, right? We don't think deicide is justified. We don't think kangaroo courts are justified because God saved us through the cross. So we can acknowledge that a good comes from an evil without calling the evil good. And if you were to call the evil good, that would be formal cooperation with evil. And that's never okay, right? But material says, I don't agree with that. I don't think it's justified. It shouldn't have happened that way. But that doesn't mean that the good that comes from it must necessarily be rejected. Well, I think you might say, you might say, well, you don't, you can't imagine someone would agree with that, agree with, you know, saying, oh, I want to get this vaccine because this vaccine was, if it were, produced because of abortion. When I actually, and you'll, I think you'll probably see some of this on Twitter. In some ways, some of these causes and positions have gotten so, so they've, they've become such a part of people's identities and that the cultural position and the political positions are, you know, have gotten so strident in some ways that, I mean, for a while, there was this whole hashtag thing going on on Twitter about people were basically tweeting their abortion experiences. And it's, it doesn't, I'm not at all surprised. I would not be at all surprised for someone to say, I am so, I am so pro-choice that I would rather have a vaccine that has such and such. I mean, that is, that is really part of the context that we're working on. But I also appreciate, I also appreciated what you said about, you know, because again, as a Protestant, Roman Catholics whose entry into the United States is really quite late. I mean, really 19th century, you had major Roman Catholic immigration from certain parts of the world. And the, the rise of people who identify as Roman Catholic, you know, many in the Supreme Court, some of them were, you know, some of them were appointed by Donald Trump, which, you know, oh, look at the Roman Catholics that are going into high offices. And then they went right ahead and voted Joe Biden into office. And it's like, you know, where he goes to church. And if you ask Joe about his Roman Catholic roots, he'll, he'll speak very proudly about them. Now part of that is being a, now part of that is being a, being a politician. But, you know, so even in the Protestant world, I mean, there's been a big game of, you can only vote for this party or that party because of this or that. And obviously the, some of the nuance that you're employing with respect to one's position and taking a stand on things is, you know, there are a lot of things involved. And I know for some people that is, I, in fact, this morning, I just made a video about hard lines because one of the things that you see happening in social media is that in this context, there's a lot of power that can be gained by hard lining certain things. Yeah. And I was thinking that I knew you were going to cut it like the shout your abortion hashtag. I mean, a couple, I mean, on the one hand, I don't think it's helpful to imagine that everyone who disagrees with me on abortion will take that angle. Right. So, but, but the danger of Twitter and other things is that, is that it's easy to fight against the most extreme version of your opponent and thereby vilify everyone in between and therefore drive people to the extremes. Right. So you get this kind of vicious cycle. And I think one example, and I wrote another piece on church life journal about voting that, I mean, if you just Google it, you'll find it. But one of the arguments I made was if we recognize our own vote as cooperation with evil, no matter which way we went, right? If we went Biden, there's cooperation with one set of evils. If we went Trump, we cooperate with another set. We're not comfortable saying that we're cooperating with evil. And so we whitewash the evil of our own candidate and hyper highlight the evil of the other candidate. And that makes any kind of healthy discussion impossible. And so, so I wanted to encourage Catholics, but everybody really to, to, to like vote and then hashtag your, you know, tweet your vote and hashtag it, holding your nose. So that, so that we say, when I voted for Trump or when I voted for Biden, I was not endorsing X, Y, and Z. I had to vote for somebody and it meant cooperation with evil. And I acknowledge and label that evil and I do not endorse it. And I think if we're honest about the evil of our own side, we're, we're in a much healthier situation vis-a-vis the polarization. But if we whitewash the evil on our own, like if, if we can't deal with the fact that our vote was a compromise, then we can vilify anybody who didn't. The only reason for not voting like me is because you're literally evil, which is, which is what you hear all the time, right? But if you say my vote was a compromise and I felt I had to go that way because of X, Y, and Z and, and, you know, I think you should do, I think you should make the same compromise I did, but let's admit it was a compromise. There was no perfect vote. And, and so yeah, that a lot of the same reasoning that was in the background of my voting article came out in the vaccination article because there's the same moral categories, but there's also the same potential for polarization when we oversimplify. And I think these moral categories really help us if we understand them to not oversimplify. So a big thing that's in my sights here is essentially the polarization that's arising around any topic, whether it's voting or vaccination or whatever it's going to be next week, Yep. No, I think that's, I think that's true. And again, I thought a lot of the distinctions, you know, the foot, the material and the formal, the remote, you know, and the proximate. I thought these were, these were very helpful in part, see part of what I see us doing is, okay, so let's make in the political land, we talk about the single issue voter. Okay. We do too. Yeah. So here's your abortion is your single issue voter. That's your single issue or your single issue is, you know, same sex, right? LGBT rights or maybe defense or standing call it in China. The difficulty, and this is where I really like the work of Jonathan Peugeot, is that you're not going to be able to live in a world unless you actually construct a value hierarchy. There you are going to have to have choices and compromises all along the way. And so we have this enormously unproductive game that we play about around politics and religion, but around just about everything else too, where it's just, as you say, it's the Martin Bailey thing. You are evil because you voted for this candidate. And, and the truth is not only every candidate, but every human being in your life has issues. And so it's going to go to how you love your spouse, how you love your children, especially as they grow up and become adults and make their own choices. And how then do we relate with these others in a, in a world where people are going to, people are going to make wrong choices and they're going to do things that, that damage others and damage themselves and damage the community. And, and we have to figure out, okay, how can we actually be productive in, in moving towards better good and greater good and lesser evil, even when we're living in the wheat and the tares here and none of us are wise enough to really start plucking everything out here. Right. Yeah. Well, let me, let me say something about two different kinds of being, there's, I think there's two different ways to be a single issue voter, right? So there's, there's a really destructive way, which is to say, I will vote because of this issue, and then I will lie to myself and others about the compromises I made on the lesser issues. And then I will become, I will become what I think the technical term is, is a useful idiot for the party I voted for, because they don't actually have to do a thing policy wise, because you're committed no matter what. And so you've actually, you've actually silenced your own voice by saying, I guarantee my vote to the person who answers this question correctly. And even if they utterly fail to get any policy passed, and I can, you know, look at Canada, utter failure to get anything done on this question for decades, despite us voting for, you know, the most pro-light, now we, we have to vote for a given party because they're the only party that will even allow pro-life back ventures to talk. That's what our pro-life voice has been reduced to, because we've been single issue voters in the wrong way. The flip side is, I think there is a way in which everyone is a single issue voter. Everyone has something that they would never vote for, that they would, if, if there were two, if you had, you know, Hitler versus Goering, you might spoil your ballot. You might decide, well, let's say Hitler versus Stalin, right? Let's, you say, you could vote for Hitler or Stalin. Now, you might do the calculation and say, well, they're both terribly evil, but I think this one is slightly less evil. And so I'll make this terribly compromised choice. But a lot of us would say, I will vote for neither of them. I will spoil my ballot. If you would not vote for Hitler or Stalin, then in a certain way, you're a single issue voter. So you can't, you can't use that as a stick to beat other people. But I think you can say there's a bad way to go about it, that actually ends up limiting your voice and makes you into a puppet that can be manipulated by politicians to do whatever they were going to do anyways, as long as they answer your question correctly. And so that's, that's my worry about single issue voter. It's, it's, it's do we conduct ourselves properly? But I think we do. We all do have lines we won't cross. And we should. And we should. Absolutely. Absolutely. And, and I think, you know, I, so I grew up, you know, people who watch my channel regularly know enough of my story, I grew up in an African American community. And the Christian Reformed Church overwhelmingly voted Republican abortion was a tremendous issue for them. I grew up in an African American community, I think actually abortion is a many black babies are aborted in the African American community to the effect that it has that has seriously impacted their their numbers demographically. But I grew up voting, you know, quite consistently democratic. And, you know, and and and there we went. And then, you know, now and later times, I hear this this huge moralistic attack on Republicans and on Republican voting people and it's a look, I very much understand why abortion is very high on the value hierarchy of many voters. And I think that's right. I think abortion needs to be addressed. Now, people are going to be working on this. And so I'm not going to, you know, I am going to talk to both sides. And that's, you know, ah, you're in the middle. That's the worst of both worlds. Right. But but there we have it. Well, I'd like to I'd like to keep moving with this article, because there's a lot of good stuff to get to. Because let's talk about the vaccines itself, because you did go into, you know, a fair amount of detail about the vaccines with respect to this question of, you know, I am not a biologist. I've listened a little bit of Brett Weinstein and Heather Heying on this who are biologists, but mRNA and DNA and stem cell lines and, you know, why why is there a lot of misinformation out about these vaccines, at least to the degree that you as a theologian could access and write a bit about? Right. Yeah. I mean, obviously, I'm not a biologist, right? I'm a theologian. So I'm I'm working technically as an amateur. I'm reading what I can. I think I'm pretty good at discerning, you know, worthwhile sources from from bogus sources. And and I've been saying, you know, what I said here regularly and had no pushback from anyone. So I think I've got it basically right. But but it's important to recognize, you know, I'm an amateur working in this field. But but the basic the basic question was the one key. Here's what led into this. A key question in the Catholic community was are the cell lines derived from abortion being used in production or in testing? And the concern if they were used in production, some of the problem was that then they're then they're in the vaccine, right? They're an ingredient. You got dead babies in the vaccine, as well as Bill Gates chip. Yeah, which is which is not actually how it works. But but the the good news and my wife is very spiritually insightful. And she said, What's going on here is a failure of gratitude. People people who have decided beforehand, they don't want to be happy, and they won't accept good news when it looks them in the face. Um, the mRNA vaccines from a Catholic ethical point of view are a remarkable development because they can't use DNA at all. There's no DNA in an mRNA vaccine. It's purely synthetic. It's not derived from a virus or a cell line or anything else, right? It's it's synthesized. So you actually can't use a fetal cell line in the production of an mRNA vaccine. And some Catholics thought, Well, okay, these are these are okay. Because they're only used in testing, but not in production. And actually, the congregation for the doctrine of the faith came out and said, in either case, in production or testing, the the cooperation with evil is remote enough that the pandemic easily justifies the use of the vaccine. So it's not actually the case that that the line is is yes to testing and no to production, given the circumstances, and the degree of remoteness, it's yes in either case. But there is still a difference. Testing is one more step removed from production. And so it means that, in theory, if you had the choice between a vaccine that used them in production, and one that only use it in testing, you would take the one that used it in testing, because it's more remote cooperation. But right now, all we have is two that only used them in testing and only could use them in testing. Now, what did that testing look like? And this is what I didn't know. But I learned by by researching this. I don't know how many hundreds thousands many, many generations ago, a mouse had its genome altered with a cell line that was derived from a probably but not certainly aborted fetus. That mouse now exhibits human lung lining tissue. So so all of its descendants with this human lung lining are great for experiments on things like, you know, COVID, right? Any any disease affecting the lungs, these mice have been used in an immense amount of medical testing over decades. I don't know to what degree the cell line has been used in other mice to alter other things or whatever else. But the cell line basically reproduces itself almost infinitely. And so you can keep tapping into it. If you wanted to avoid anything that had any connection with this cell line, you would have to go far beyond vaccines, that all kinds of things, including the cocktail Donald Trump got when he was treated, were compromised in this way. So one question is, are we being consistent? Are we only saying there's cooperation here because we didn't like vaccines anyways? Or do we really want to say anything that's touched this cell line, I will have nothing to do with. And if someone was willing to do that, I mean, maybe that's impractical, but at least, at least they'd be taking it seriously. And they're not just using it as an excuse, right? So both Moderna and Pfizer did testing on these mice. And that's the cooperation with you. That's the connection with abortion is testing on mice descended from a mouse whose genome was altered by a cell line derived from a probable but not certain abortion. So when you get to that level, I think most people intuitively think, yeah, it doesn't take a lot to justify that co-operate. That bar is set real low, if we're honest about the science. But what we see in social media is really overwrought language about fetal cells in the DNA and all, which is all hokum, right? And one thing I point out in the article is, I think these people are right on one thing. They're right that when people hear that church teaching says that these vaccines are okay, it could give the false impression that abortion is okay. I think they're right. And I think we need to use very careful language to say that because good comes from evil does not make evil good. And there's lots of different ways to say that. But I think they shoot themselves in the foot when they use this overwrought, dishonest language to make the connection sound closer. They want it to sound really close so that you won't get the vaccine. But what they end up doing is communicating that the church has accepted a much closer form of cooperation than it actually has. So they actually make the teaching look worse. And they end up making the problem that I think they rightly identify. They actually increase the problem. And so part of the article is a call for like, clear, moderate, honest speech. Yeah. Well, and I thought the article did very well with that. Why do some people not want other people to get the vaccine? Now, maybe this isn't the best thinking on my part, but truth be told, if I were really concerned about the vaccines, either it's moral quality or the potential of health concerns, and I would actually want a lot of people to take it so that we might know something. And I actually think- Well, that presumes that you're actually in a position to have your mind changed by the data. I'm a pretty open guy. So that's one of my flaws that everyone points out. If no matter what happens, if millions of people get vaccinated and they don't all drop dead, but you're not getting into the vaccine anyways, then you have nothing to gain from watching the experiment play out at a population scale because your mind is made up. And some of these people have been honest. They said, I don't care what church teaching says. I don't care what you tell me about the science. I don't care that that is not going in my body. You will not change my mind. Well, if they tell you that, then I think you can take them at their word. On the other hand, I think one thing that- In this environment of infodemic, right? Where there's just so much data and you're hearing all kinds of things about the vaccine, I think it's not unreasonable to say, I'm a little nervous. I think you can do the research and get past this, but I don't think it's a false move from the start to say, I'm a little nervous and I'm not at the front of the line. And by the time I'm in the line, we're going to have months and months of data on millions and millions of people. And if all systems are go at that point, yes, stick me in the arm, right? That's not an unreasonable position, I don't think. But if that is- See, there's different ways you can do this. You can say that as a kind of standalone position, or you can use that as a safety net after you've tried 20 other things that have been shown to be bogus. So one of the things that conspiracy theory does is it's a snow job. It just overwhelms you with claims and you might be able to just debunk 10% of them off the top of your head because you know they're false. And then you could look up 10% more and find that they're bogus, but you actually can't debunk them all because they're growing faster than you can look into them. They're just everywhere. And the psychological move there is to just plant down without having an actual lockdown case. And so very often what will happen is you push back on the conspiracy theory thinking, you debunk this one, you debunk that one, the microchips, like here's one for you. The very smallest microchip will only fit through the very biggest needle. And once it's injected, you can only read it from very close up with a scanner designated for that if you know exactly where it is. My friend's a veterinarian. She says we microchip critters with big needles that you would know if that was what you got. It would hurt. But within within the body system, the microchip migrates. And then sometimes you can't even find it with your scanner. So there's no hope of reading them from satellites from outer space. Anyway, I mean you can debunk them one at a time. And often what you'll get to at the end is this, well I'm just going to wait and see. Well, I mean waiting and seeing is not irrational, especially if you don't have any choice anyways. Why not take all the data you can get? If you're not due up until May, so yeah, watch the news, right? Like see what's happening. But so it depends. That can be done in an honest way or it can be done as a kind of safety net when all the conspiracy theory ideas have been debunked, right? And then it's sort of the last resort for saying what I was going to do anyways. Yeah, yeah, yeah. We are in the midst of a vast experiment that will be quite interesting. You know, then you had, I thought, some really nice sections on dangers of misunderstanding, more ethical vaccines, does refusal of these vaccines constitute dissent? I thought that was quite interesting in terms of dissent. So talk a little bit about that. Right, so Catholics are, you know, really big, especially conservative Catholics who've been accusing liberal Catholics for 30 years of dissent now are very conscious when church teaching comes out that they don't like, am I dissenting or not? You know, because the liberals like to throw it back at them. Now look, you're the dissenter. And then they say, no, we're not. So then the question, when the congregation for the doctrine of the faith came out and said these vaccines are okay, the question was, do people who disagree dissent? And it is a really important distinction to make. If you in conscience say, I can't receive the vaccine, that is not dissent. The congregation's note actually says that people can refuse in conscience. Now there's a couple things to say about that. First of all, your conscience in, as in every case, needs to be an informed conscience. So if you're refusing the vaccine because you trust bad sources or haven't done your homework, you may be culpable for the, well, you will be culpable for any evil that comes from that. And that might mean grandma's death, right? If you're not doing your due diligence and you're following quacks and crazy conspiracy theorists, and then you reject it, and then that leads to somebody dying, there's culpability there. But if you do inform consent, it's not informed consent. If you inform your conscience and you decide not to receive, that's not dissent. But what is dissent is to say the church is wrong, no one can receive this vaccine, it's immoral. So there's room for prudential judgment for the individual to say, I'm not comfortable morally receiving this, but there is not room for the individual to pronounce over against the official teaching of the church and tell other Catholics that this vaccine is not, that the reception of this vaccine, but you can only justify actions, not inanimate objects. So it's not that the vaccine is justified, vaccine's an inanimate object. The reception of the vaccine is justified. If you tell them it can never be justified, and especially if you lie about the science or lie about the church's moral teaching, which is happening, by the way, all over social media, then you are dissenting, and you're responsible for that. Now I point out actually, dissent is actually allowed in Catholic teaching, but if you dissent, you have a certain responsibility. And one thing you can't do is misrepresent church teaching, and use your platform to denounce church teaching. If I don't agree with something, I can't will myself to believe something I don't believe. That's actually not possible. But I can say I will keep an open mind and I will continue to investigate because there's a better chance that I'm wrong than that the church is wrong. And then in my position as theologian, as teacher, as YouTube personality, as Twitter celebrity, as whatever my platform is, I will not use that platform to misrepresent, to deny whatever church teaching. So there are people in open dissent right now in a way that is not the way the church says you do it. The church says you can be in dissent if you do it responsibly, but this is not it. Every time I talk to you, I run into these things where, so in the Christian Reformed Church, we used to have the form of subscription. Now we gussied up the language a little bit. Now it's the covenant of office bearers, but it essentially runs over the same thing. That I can certainly have questions about church teaching and this is even in a Protestant church that is, you know, at least has a certain degree of comfort with dissent, having practiced it for so many generations, but I in fact can have my own private doubts. But yet what I do promise as an office bearer is that I will not publicly, you know, I will not publicly argue against the church in a certain way. Now obviously within, especially within the Protestant tradition, we in fact, and this part of my bigger agenda within my own denomination is I think we have in fact lost the capacity to productively continue to reform and refine and discuss and do this because one of the bigger casualties that we see with the dynamics of conversation today and with the fast polarization, the hard-lining, a lot of the tricks is that in fact legitimate discussions and working through difficult questions like you're dealing with with this question is now more difficult because people are not in fact engaging in the conversations and the discussions in good faith to say I want to win, I want to win an election. I care more about that than necessarily managing and cultivating the common ground of a truthful, healthy environment whereby people can, you know, basically by virtue of even temperamental differences, some people are more given to openness, some people are a little, you know, they're not early adopters, you're going to have, and actually that's a very healthy thing in a population, whereas in fact we maintain the language together and we do not stereotype each other and we are generous with one another and in this way the idea is that if we're actually practice living in this way, we can in fact have productive conversations come to consensus that is better founded than, you know, we're injecting dead babies and microchips into people's arms. When I teach intro theology, I teach about dissent and healthy dissent and the best example I know is Henri de Lubac, who's a major Catholic theologian of the 20th century, arguably the most influential theologian at Vatican II, and he was silenced in the decades leading up to Vatican II and he obeyed and he went about his business quietly, he dissented in the way the church asks him to and he was roundly vindicated at the Second Vatican Council and his views have become essentially the mainstream. We need people who ask tough questions and if the church's categories for thinking about vaccines could use some more precision, by all means ask good questions and I'll give you an example of that in a second but to add to your point about, you know, if I'm trying to win an election, in addition to folks trying to win an election, there's people who are literally, and I don't say that I know this about every individual soul, but I feel safe saying that this must apply to some of the people, though I won't judge which one's particular, there are people who are literally addicted to the feedback they're getting, the affirmation they're getting from YouTube and Twitter and Facebook when they make these wild, wild stands. It functions like a drug, we know it functions like a drug, we know about the brain chemistry and when you make this wild stand against the bishops on this or that and you get this overwhelming rush of thousands of endorsements for who you are and what you believe and you're brave and you're strong unlike these other cowards, never mind the financial implications, never mind that on YouTube you're monetizing these kinds of reactions, of course it drives you to the more extreme position and away from the way that the church asks us to dissent, but let me give you an example, here's something I didn't go into in my article, partly because it's an unsettled question and I don't know where I stand yet and I don't have the expertise to adjudicate. There are faithful Catholic theologians who are asking is cooperation with evil even the appropriate category here given how distant the connection is and particularly here's the real key distinction, given that receiving the vaccine now does not contribute to any future abortions, right? When you buy Energizer batteries or late potato chips, some tiny percentage of that goes to Planned Parenthood, you contribute more to future abortions by buying Energizer batteries than you do from getting this vaccine, so if you are simply benefiting from something in the distant past and not contributing to its enactment in the future, some moral theologians are saying the category we should be using is called appropriation, it still acknowledges that the thing in the past was evil, but you're not actually cooperating it if your action, in this case receiving a vaccine, isn't perpetuating anything, so they use a couple of analogies and of course you can pick the analogies apart, there's no claim that the analogies are perfect because you can't have perfect analogies, perfect analogies are just the thing itself and then you haven't learned anything, so pick them apart and see what you can learn, but analogies like this, we know things from immoral and unrepeatable Nazi medicinal experiments, now is it wrong for us to ever use that knowledge? Almost everyone would say no, it's not wrong to use that knowledge, it would be wrong to repeat it, to repeat the experiments, the experiments are certainly wrong and they're not justified by our use of the knowledge, but can we use it? If it would save a life today, should we not use it or should we use it? Another example they used is infrastructure in the American South that was built using slavery, you not ride in this railway because it was built using slave labor, now the analogies are going to break down of course, those railways benefit the descendants of slave owners and the descendants of slaves, whereas the vaccine doesn't benefit that baby at all, so you can find problems with the analogy, but still it's worth consideration if the basic point is if you're not contributing to further evil, is cooperation the right category? And now you can argue that you might contribute to further evil by giving the impression that abortion was okay, so that introduces something, well then you have to be very clear with your language that you're saying, I'm not saying it's okay, just like I'm not saying slavery was okay or Nazi medical experiments were okay, by taking advantage of the good that has come down the line from those, whether that's a functioning railway track or medical knowledge or whatever else, but I bring it up because it looks to me like this is the next frontier on the church teaching on this, is we have people responsibly dissenting, asking the question, putting it forward, making a reasoned argument and saying, you know church, what do we think of this? The people on the other side are not doing the reasoned argumentation, they're doing the fear-mongering, they're doing the misinformation campaigns, and that's not the way you do dissent, right, so it's interesting that right now there's people who think church teaching is maybe too strict and people who think it's too lenient, but they're conducting themselves in very different ways. Well and I want to swing back to the point that you made, I mean we're talking about you know appropriation of the knowledge or infrastructure of past evil, participation in social media, a couple of months ago, not even a couple of months, about a month and a half ago I monetized my channel and I monetized, I hadn't monetized my channel before for a number of reasons and then I learned that YouTube was changing their policy and they were basically going to start monetizing unmonetized channels on certain videos and it's like well then you know if YouTube is just going to keep all the money I might as well monetize and but the... It's a neat example. Yeah well and so now I you know it is if you're running a YouTube channel you've and you look at the analytics which you should, you want to know if what you're doing is effective or reaching people or you know whatever your goal is and you're watching those analytics it's completely obvious what kinds of videos will get more clicks and you know it's sort of like the old high school psychology example where you know if the whole class gets in as a conspiracy and decides every time the teacher makes a step to the left they're all going to smile you know pretty soon you move the teacher to the corner. The teacher has no idea she's being moved to the corner because the psychological impact is below the surface of the below the recognition of consciousness but this in you know in our social media context you know this is this is deep deep stuff and I you know for the last three years I've been doing this on YouTube but I often think about you know I you know the channel and the community that we've been able to develop through it and the conversations have all been enormously positive in my life but I am always concerned that you know all of this affirmation it it has an impact and and now that you have these enormous corporations that are enormously powerful Google, Twitter, Facebook these are these are tremendously powerful things and we we can't hope but imagine we will not be we will not be groomed and formed by these things and that all of this formation will only be for the good and and as I watch other YouTube channels and the dynamics that go on it's you know the same thing is true in a church where preachers very quickly learn that there are things you will talk about to get approval and ways to talk and I mean this is this is a function of human dynamics but these are these are these are real issues that go beyond abortion I mean just just trying to cultivate continue to cultivate um a context in which in which truth can be discovered and truth is discoverable. Right I'm having a Girardian moment because what I'm imagining is um the people on YouTube who are getting you know tens or hundreds of thousands more views than you who self-style as people who are willing to say the truth right who are there they're right the algorithm has played them they right they have they have learned from the feedback cycle that a certain kind of inflammatory rhetoric generates a ton of positive feedback but what do they tell themselves that they are the brave ones who are willing to finally stand up and say the truth well the whole system is rewarding and reinforcing this kind of behavior right and so you get you get this like delusional you know and so when I see you know your your numbers are way better than mine but if you want it if you wanted to be a kook you could get way better numbers if you wanted and it takes a certain spiritual discipline to resist the pressure you you're actually trying to hold that honest space that the algorithm is mitigating against and the people who full-on sold out to the algorithm think they're the honest ones it's it's it's a remarkable thing yeah well we see it in hollywood all the time and I I hear it in you know in church this person is prophetic because they are out there and out there you know someone in hollywood who was on stage you know spouting the most progressive things that's prophetic yeah right being prophetic is to say something that is going against the narrative probably being silenced or deplatformed but but that in and of itself is obviously also not simply a guarantee that their position is truthful just because it's counter narrative and I mean we just go round and round and round but then also as a as a pastor you also learn that another part of this is okay so I'm going to have the most bland boring youtube channel around well if I actually want to engage I am going to have to sometimes have a have a have a thumbnail that is engaging and you know you do the same thing in an article like this um COVID-19 it's a very salient thing vaccines right very salient and so I mean there's you're always in the midst of this of this dangerous world so yeah so here's I mean concrete example I just signed up for Twitter uh I just 10 minutes before we started I tagged you and said you know going on on with Vander Clay here in 10 minutes but before that I I had posted something a great quote from David Foster Wallace which I love I posted it I don't know five days ago no interactions nothing right and I I'm just brand new I'm trying to figure out how it works so today I've made three tweets that are a little spicy and I believe what I said but I'm also running an experiment I'm trying to figure out um what works on Twitter because I don't know how to use the platform yet I'm pretty good at Facebook I have no idea what I'm doing on Twitter and so I'm testing the water and seeing what happens and there might be blowback and I might have made a mistake I or I mean I might get I might get the wrong kind of affirmation and then there will be a temptation for me to run with it right and it's it's a very dangerous thing I had a I had a kind of fantasy the other day of a Roman Catholic religious community because what happens in Roman Catholicism is when the culture is in a particular crisis um often a sort of spiritual leader will rise up and a community will form around him or her and they will devote themselves to a certain kind of work and so maybe someone listening to this this is their call I don't know so but but my fantasy was a Roman Catholic religious community that is dedicated to evangelization uh using social media but what do you do you have a very rigid structure to your day that involves vigorous exercise communal prayer times of silence and meditation and you and examination of conscience uh and maybe maybe communal discernment you know or something like right you have you have a regimented life and then you put in I don't know what let's say three two-hour um sessions per day on social media and and and you build up as a community you build up expertise for how to engage in social media you you become experts in the science of communications and the psychology and you you learn from your experience and then you model for the broader community the best way to engage in social media but you also recognize that it is a spiritual battle and so that you are you are supported by the prayer of your community all these communities by the way have have um hangers on about them right if you're a Benedictine community you have groups of people who come to the abbey for different spiritual work or whatever right you have people supporting you financially and in prayer um you are modeling for them healthy engagement online and you are doing everything like exercise and contemplation and silence that is an antidote to the kind of evil you're dealing with when you're on social media I don't know I just had that I had that image in my mind of like people doing that work as like 21st century you know cyber monks they're cyber cyber monks oh please please yes cyber monks I mean you know the equivalent of the dominicans in the in the high middle ages or the jesuits in in the early modern period or whatever right yeah yeah no that's that's exactly right and I love it I love it I love it cyber monks someone found this community please tell me it might already be out there or if it's out there please tell me yeah yeah I imagine there are individuals who are doing it within community absolutely I that wouldn't be surprised at all well I you know I look at you know I look at bishop baron's operation too and um you know I mean he's he's an he's an exceptional individual I mean he's he's you don't find you don't find people you don't find many people who are uh winsome educated um articulate you know as as he is and he's got an organization around him as well and now obviously he he you you go into these spaces and if you do anything of consequence you will be controversial um you will take positions that you know you can't you can't go into this and be too thin-skinned and especially don't be too don't be too personally insecure because it's often it's it's our it's our insecurities that usually you know lead us into trouble and things like this because if you have an insecurity in in a platform like this if you get enough response someone will in fact tap into that insecurity and if you respond to it you in fact you know these things just develop these huge feedback loops and so more people you know there's his button push it all the trolls know how to do it yeah you better believe it they have a they have a um they have a real sense for it well let me let me let me jump back to the the article and see if there's anything else I want to justify abortion can good come from evil you know the um I mean that for many people pastorily you know what part of the part of what I do in my channel is is is I do a fair number of conversations with as has come to be called randos uh people that just want to have a conversation with me and I've you know as as demand for conversation has increased I always have to make choices back and forth about it but um I I have to this point I want to keep it I've really seen the value of it just kind of keep it an open line so that people who I have maybe watching my channel you know we can have an hour-long conversation with the with the possibility of posting it on the channel to you know I found that to be tremendously helpful for me but the you know obviously we come around again and again to this question of evil and lately I've been you know I've been thinking about the fact that it isn't really a full-blown theodicy but just recognizing that part I always people always throw at me the question well if your god is so smart and your god is so wise and your god is so powerful why didn't he and this is where I think there's a little bit of there's something going on why didn't he create a world without the capacity for evil and what they're usually there's a subtle change in there because what they're when they say evil they they usually are talking about suffering and and part of what you know I've been thinking of a lot about lately is this is is the reality that what what seem what what christ through redemption seems to do by the gospel is you know evil evil or the suffering isn't necessarily justified that's the wrong way of thinking about it but but by the use of that suffering something greater than than could be had without the suffering is accomplished and I think this is I think this is underneath the christ song in Philippians 2 I think that's I think that's exactly what that speaks of and where you know the you know epiphumi obviously the apostle paul uses that word is sort of an over desire it's almost often an evil thing but this one incredible passage where he talks about the the epithumia of the angels you know watching the work of christ around us you know you you get the sense that you know part of what I see god doing with our lives is is taking suffering and making from it things that things that seemingly can't be accomplished in any other way and we see that in movies all the time because if you were to go to a movie in which there is no suffering or no challenge or no threat you would never watch that movie twice because there's nothing there but every movie you know culminates in an achievement which is now because of the suffering and of course the book of hebrews talks about this as well that you know this to me speaks of the majesty of the gospel and the hope of you know the life of the age to come that the suffering and the evil of this world you know will not finally win because god uses it to accomplish something greater still than we can imagine right I say in the article that the more is something like the moral structure of the universe is such that good keeps showing up out of evil yeah like if you pay attention to life it just happens I mean I haven't explored this but I mean it's almost an interesting argument for the existence of god but evil just evil never gets the last word it just doesn't you know it's it's it's it's remarkable that way and and you can test this because you can look at your own life so humans are remarkable in this way give me an option for suffering or not and I will take not give me an option now to get rid of some piece of suffering in my past and I'm gonna hesitate a lot and most of the time I'm gonna actually leave it there yeah I like where I'm at now more after that suffering than if it had never happened now I'm not that's not you know that's not universal there are certain things we would take back absolutely there are but even in those things right so the but even in those things right so the death of my brother would I would I take my brother back given the option absolutely I'd take him back but also do I see beauty and goodness that came out of his his illness and death I see he saw it I saw it we all saw it we we watched it transform him in a beautiful way so um it's it's funny you know I mean it's not clear cut that we would just take any suffering right and but it's it's from the very I say this in the article it's from the very extreme cases right that that um wars give us like life-saving technologies um and this pandemic has given us mrna vaccines and if you don't know about mrna vaccines they're amazing like they're they are a massive leap forward in vaccine technology um both from a point of view of science and from the point of view of ethics um they should be able to if you don't test them on on things that have distant connection with abortion if very little uh yeah I mean of course anyone who makes billions of dollars can do something bad with it so there's there's other ways of being can you know cooperating with evil but um they're they're amazing they're fast they're responsive um and and they came out of this but but the next time append you know uh a virus jumps from an animal to a human population we're going to be so grateful that we have mrna vaccines um but but the but the most mundane thing the most mundane thing I pull into the parking lot at the gym and I think I put I put the car in park and I have this feeling of I do not want to be here I don't want to go in there and sweat and and breathe heavy and like this is gonna suck and then I go in and never never do I leave the gym thinking I wish I hadn't come never right and it's just this this this suffering there is some suffering that that can't be answered that easily but there is something about the moral structure of the universe where suffering is never the last word and and I think that's that's really interesting if if we want to communicate to people that you can never do evil that good may come of it but you can but you can accept good that comes from evil right like there's that line yeah um part of the way we get there is by reflecting on when we've done that in our own lives when we've accepted the good that came from an illness or a death or or whatever I mean just look back at your own life and think um but but none of that just that doesn't justify evil you know the pandemic is not justified because it gave us mrna vaccines right uh but there's something else going on about this the the moral structure of the universe um which and and and your icon of it is the cross yeah you know you have the greatest tragedy and from it comes the greatest good does that justify it does that mean you know this happened with the debates around judas a few years ago where some people suggested like oh judas was justified because jesus needed him to betray him that no that's not how it works right um jesus and the father can use that uh and incorporate it into a bigger picture but that doesn't justify it yeah yeah no I I think the same way and I I don't know I I think I think Christians of all people should be should be the most optimistic because at least this world affords that addressing of suffering and that utility of suffering whereas when I when I speak with people who you know for whom well this world is all there is when you go into the grave there's nothing else I I think actually that perspective has a far more difficult issue with suffering and evil than a Christian worldview with redemption because at least all of the suffering and and again we can't do the math on this but at least we see we have good reason for the potential that what comes out of this long story of humanity on planet earth is is something good and and something and something that that people who have had very little opportunity for for joy and um and realization in this age will in fact be able to participate in it in an age to come which is larger than this one and and again I in in my conversation with many people who who don't who don't share our faith um I this is something I I love bringing up and saying you know not only and they might say well that's a nice thought but I don't believe it okay fair enough but I think that that thought is even useful for making the world better because what it does is afford Christians the um and afford Christians the the you can you can you can now enter into cruciform vocations with justification to say I I don't need to maximize my hedonism or my pleasure or my suffering avoidance I can in fact pour out my life for the welfare of those who have less than myself because I believe that in fact um the the suffering that I even voluntarily embrace which I think you know the cross is this funny thing where he is both the victim of this kangaroo core and these political realms but he also goes into it voluntarily you know it's amazing the way the gospels lay this out but but I can in fact pour out my life for the welfare of others because that is actually a responsible use of of the stewardship of my time and treasure and body and being because of the promise that this in fact that my small acts of redemption will be amplified and glorified in an age to come and and again I look at that and I say to me that far that in terms of the value for this world the joy I receive it is far greater than a vision of well let's be stoic and and a little bit greedy and maybe out of pride a little bit generous with others but because this is all you get and I I find that worldview to just I I don't think it's going to give people what they want and it certainly can't afford both the joy and the cruciform generosity that Christianity has long afforded. Right have you read Pope Benedict's encyclical space salvi on Christian hope? No. So I'm going to recommend it to you and your readers I it's a great encyclical and and it's what is it called space salvi so that's latin for saved in hope okay um but it's his encyclical on hope he wrote three encyclicals on the three theological virtues faith hope and love and lots of people love the the love one best keratos and veritatis but my personal favorite is space salvi and um and when when the catholic tradition talks about the virtue of hope a lot of what you've just described is in the background because you know that the atheist critique that like if you believe that you know this isn't your permanent home and you know you're just trying to get to heaven then you're not going to be any earthly good right what's the what's the line to heavenly minded to be any earthly good right um and and the argument he makes at one point in space salvi is very similar to what you say but he invokes the the virtue of hope and he says like if we hope um then we we don't have to win like I can actually enter into cruciform living because it doesn't actually depend on me like if christ has already won the victory I can participate in that and if all I see in this life is failure after failure after failure I can still continue to live in that way because I know that that the the battle doesn't depend on me I'm participating in a battle that's already won um and and that gives that gives immense freedom to work for the liberation of our brothers and sisters um because we don't have to win but but what happens if my horizon is this world alone if I see that the that the proletariat around the world is suffering and I have a this worldly horizon then I can't lose I have to win and and what's the next step well then anything anything that serves my victory is justified and so and so violence is justified because my victory is necessary and I'm on a timeline yep and and so what happens is we get a revolution that where the cure is worse than the disease because we're willing to justify anything uh because we don't have any hope right if we don't have hope we become we become monsters uh and well we can become monsters on the one hand or we can become cynics who don't do anything right I mean you're if you're going to change the world you might be a monster but or you could say to hell with it you know I'll just eat drink and be married for tomorrow we die right um but it's the virtue of hope that allows us to hold that middle ground and and fight for what's good and right with our lives even when we can't see the victory you know yeah no amen I to me that's that line of argumentation has been you know hugely influential in you know people people often say to me well you you work with mentally ill people and homeless people and you know you you live in neighborhoods that I I chuckle every time I I look at certain narratives of salvation for um of world of this of this worldly salvation for people of color and the poor and the mentally ill because I've lived in these communities all my life and it's like do you really think that all of these solutions are somehow you know I I certainly welcome making things better and I'm more than happy to talk and participate and look at that but if if all of these white folks are simply crippled by their their white supremacy is is changing their mind a realistic opportunity to somehow end racism I mean these narratives just don't go anywhere you're not going to get you know so so New York City I visited I visited Patterson in 2013 when we did my father's memorial service in Patterson I hadn't been back to Patterson for years and when I'd been back in New York City in 2006 I was amazed at how New York City had changed I mean it was clean it was full of full of young healthy beautiful people with all of their progressive ideas and New York was rejuvenized and then I went to Patterson just 16 miles away and it's like ah this didn't change at all nobody was interested in Patterson there was no sex in the city and Patterson sex in the city and Patterson doesn't look like it did in New York City and and so I the the optimism that people have of of of their their political capacity to save this world I've just always been a doubter in that because I've seen people try and it's like well I ain't buying it it's often worse than nave it's it's often positively counterproductive because if if the person who disagrees with me um is it is the well they're the only obstacle right I mean yeah I have this perfect plan for saving the world except for this you know uh white supremacist across the way or whatever whatever pick your problem right um does my way of engaging that white supremacist or whoever or whoever does it actually help them or am I pushing them further away and I think this is part of the dynamic we see is both sides think they know the answer and the only problem is the people on the other side but they both believe in a kind of this worldly salvation even the most even the most explicitly Christian you know trumpist is preaching a kind of this worldly salvation it's just a different one than the leftist is preaching yeah but if you're preaching in this worldly salvation and the only problem is the idiots on the other side who don't agree with you you you are rarely gonna gonna engage with them in a way that actually gets you any closer to this worldly salvation you're preaching anyways that's you're making it worse that's that's gonna be my hashtag every time I see you're making it worse you know um you know we I saw something about deep programming we need to deep program these people uh who were you know marching on the capital well and then a friend of mine wrote the group this the best response yes they need to be deprogramming yes they need to be deprogrammed do we know anything about how deep programming works because what's implied in the statement about deprogramming them is almost certain to make it worse that's right that's right that's right now that's that's exactly right well maybe maybe this is a good transition to talk about the good place because yeah because when salvation yeah yeah because when so I watched the good place it came out on netflix and my family started watching it and I'd first seen it I was a little bit intrigued because oh this should um I'm always intrigued with these kinds of shows and then I began to watch and of course there's twists and turns I've made some videos about it on my channel and I kind of wanted to wait until the fourth season came out on netflix because then you know I'm a little bit more comfortable talking about spoilers but I watched them I watched the good place and then I watched there was another show on amazon prime streaming called upload which was similar the amazon upload show was a little bit more cynical because basically the the context was well we have finally arrived at the singularity and when people when people are going to lose the physical function of their bodies their brain and the consciousness can be uploaded into a server and then for and then this is the fun thing that well people on earth can you can purchase your server space but of course dependent on the amount of money that you have or that your relatives down below are using you know well I can only afford to be on this server because the really wealthy people are on this server and then there are freemium upgrades and you know all this kind of stuff but what struck me about both of these programs was the you know spoiler alert on the good place have you seen the fourth season yet yeah I finished it in time for this okay so I'm ready you get to the end of the show and basically at the end of the show they acknowledge what had been you know on my mind throughout the entire show is that human beings are not capable of imagining the good sufficient to eternity or or even beyond the you know we we can't even paint a picture that says happily ever after it's like happily for a while and then you know somehow annihilation is in order right and it's it to me that the entire show just exposed the poverty of our limitations without acknowledging that it was doing so right yeah I mean my sense was that from from a purely like um I want to be more specific I was going to say from a purely human point of view what I mean more specifically is without revelation we can we can reason out some things and what the good place manages to do is propose a solution for the problem of evil um that that is workable on human terms right and so anyone anyone who's who didn't get a fair shake in this life is going to get a fair shake to the point where they can fully realize themselves and have a good life at some indefinite point in the future however long it takes but then then they're stuck with the problem what do you do once you get there and the answer is well eventually that will get boring I mean that's a little blunt but that's that's more of that eventually like you can spend thousands of beautiful days with your parents who were so abusive to you growing up but but you're going to tap out you know and I mean God is God is the missing piece right because there's no infinity right it's it's a reflection on our finitude that we we would um we would get bored because there's only so much we could do we can master all these skills we can perfect all these relationships but then but then what eventually that will run out and so I I think you know CS Lewis would say um but our desires are always bigger than than what we use to fulfill them we actually won't ever tap out or we're we're actually built with it with an infinity drive you know we we can't get there but the but the good place gets to this place we're like okay yeah we've solved the problem of evil by giving everyone a fair shot and everyone gets there and and at a human level it's appealing and it makes sense if you if you mean human level in a very specific way um it and what what theology might call at a natural level but if the human is actually supernatural and built for infinity then you get to the end and you're like well really that's like that's all like it still leaves open the question is that better than if nothing ever existed at all yes I saw I solved the problem within the system I made it just in the end within the system but what was it for but like is there any good from it as a self-contained unit I can now justify it using this mechanism um but I'm still like but but what's it about there's still no answer to what's it all about yeah what are humans for in the end therefore balancing off the scales and evaporating yeah well that's the same as never existing yeah yeah no I felt I felt the same way and and if you if you do any research on the show it's it's the background and the creation of the show is really quite interesting too because you know they they have they they consulted with philosophers and they went through all of this and it's a it's a well-crafted show it was it was really an excellent show but to me it it just exposed the poverty of our limitations and I I don't know and I what what's I guess I guess what what surprised me is that well can we be satisfied with this and and in fact if you look at many of the reviews at the end of the show because when it when the show ended there are a lot of reviews and a good number of those reviews basically come to the point of really is is this all there is and I think it lands exactly where where you just described and right okay so then what is the point it's an evangelistic moment because I mean it's it's a really careful exploration of a certain worldview to its end point yeah so if if if it's done consistently and honestly which I think by and large I think it was done consistently and honestly yeah um and that's not satisfying then that tells you something about humanity right you know at the very end there's this scene where where uh uh Chidi the philosopher says to Eleanor the main character you know uh you get there's a wave and you can measure it and you can understand a wave in the ocean but when it hits the rocks it's it's just gone but the water from the wave goes back into the ocean and whatever else but it's it's no longer identifiable as a wave and he says that that's buddhist thinking and she says you know not bad buddhists and I turned to my wife and I was like yeah like like not bad that's that's true it's like it's it's not the worst thing you could come up with it it works within its its own sphere but but is is is the human heart oriented to like when I get to the end of everything am I gonna be like not bad you know like it seems I think the Christian argument is that we're made for more than not bad right I don't disagree with the buddhist thing that's the idea that the buddhist solution if that and I don't pretend to know if a buddhist would find that an acceptable presentation of their own thought or not but I don't disagree that it's not bad I just wonder if but are are we built for something more and the Christian conviction has been that we are we are built for something more and so if people in general find the good place interesting quirky funny but ultimately unsatisfying then that just tells us something about the Christian vision all along that there is something in us that desires something more and is that a cosmic trick or are we or are we built for something more because there is something more right and and I so often in conversations get to people and they say well you're just hoping for more than you should and the problem I have is well in your world view why shouldn't I you can't generate an art that says to me that somehow I'm being irresponsible by looking at what is you know as CS Lewis said you know making mud pies in the backyard and saying no I'm I'm I'm going to the beach and you might say well you foolish person you're you're a prisoner of the backyard and and then I would say well why don't you be honest with people about about what you're selling and what you're claiming right and and I will I will offer them mine and hey if I'm wrong so be it but I I see no reason to adopt your position easy to play the deconstructionist and offer nothing else right um I think I mean if I can connect this to vaccines uh something I I just had a conversation with someone that I found so interesting um I think one of the problems that people are wrestling with when we're inundated with conspiracies and stuff is how do we actually teach critical thinking in school and we've been talking about teaching critical thinking for decades but as far as I can tell what we what we generally mean by critical thinking is deconstruction so we teach people how to take apart claims and that's that's a valuable skill but it's a it's a very limited skill it it does one thing and if if what you train is two generations of people to be skeptical and to take apart things but to never have to put them back together again then they can dismiss your idea without feeling any responsibility for offering something in its place or they might be offering something in his place and not even be honest or even conscious that that's what they're doing and it it happens with vaccines too we we're training conspiracy theorists if all these people learned the basics of how to deconstruct how to distrust an authority we taught them how to do that but but that's that's one step in getting to the truth that's not the whole thing and so what happens is if if you don't have constructive critical thinking if all you have is deconstruction you say I know how to reject any authority I don't like and then I pick any authority that I do like and I follow them uncritically and so what you get here's Gerard again you get the people who call everyone sheeple for following sharing things on Facebook without ever double checking accepting any meme that agrees with their worldview as as completely above question not doing any of the digging that they blame everyone else for not digging with respect to the mainstream narrative they do no digging with respect to the conspiracy narrative because all we've introduced is deconstruction and and so I think we need to think we need to think really seriously about what we're doing in our educational institution we think we're very progressive to teach people how to deconstruct narratives about authority and what we have now is a bunch of of extreme post-modernists on both sides of the political spectrum what happened with with the right wing on on January 6th was a cataclysm of post-modernism and these are people who think they hate post-modernism but but but they know how to deconstruct the narrative and not put anything in its place and it's it's it's Gerard would tell it they're a mirror image of what they hate yeah and the same applies the other way yeah yeah and it's okay I'm getting too worked up here no but it's true because I mean you watch okay you're you're pushing through the police you're gonna go in the capital and what do you think is gonna happen you know have we have we paused and okay you're gonna take some you're gonna take some selfies in there and you're gonna put them on social media wonder what's gonna happen the day after that and it's like but but you're right we have and so we have we have sort of given this back to social media since we've sort of given this this beatific moment in the in the adoration of of the social media likes and clicks and you know another another favorite movie of mine the truman show you get to the end and truman is ready to walk out of christoph's great stage and and transmission and then you see all the people watching and and actually one of the guys who plays the security guards one of my favorite people and but it gives two security guards that are watching he actually watches my channel and then in one comedy says I was one of the actor who played one of those security guards because and transmission okay what's next is there and okay is there is there nothing real is there no is it simply tricks of our mind or or is there something finally enduring and I think about the the one ghost in CS Lewis's the great divorce who was trying his best to pull something real from the from the other world back onto the bus because if you can only get it to the city then we'll be able to establish an economy and the the angels like you don't have a sense of proportion you don't have a sense of proportion here because that little world you came from is so tiny and you're just in the beginnings of this far larger world and so there's no space in your world for this real thing you know I'm fascinating I never would have thought of this but the the the dissatisfaction at the end of the good place and the dissatisfaction when you get to the senate floor after you've overrun the police and then you're like now what like what what was the substantive image of the good that you were aiming at that is achieved here because I think I I've seen some interviews with some people who managed to breach the capital and one of the things that some of them say I don't know what most of them are saying but I just from a few of them they're like we didn't know what we're supposed to do when we got there we we went there to be heard we said things that we felt we needed to say we don't know if we're heard now we might get arrested and we're not sure if that's okay um it's like it's it was it was a this worldly image that had no picture of the substantive good at the end okay no wait I got I got I got a good amount of that rant that they got there and you know just and and you do get the sense that we're running on narratives that well we're always running on narratives that are that are half thought through but the the ideal behind you know standing in the midst of a community of people that actually goes back centuries means we are we are blessed by the thinking and the practices of all of these generations and we are heirs of it so that maybe in this moment when um you know we we come to the moments of our great decisions we might be a little bit better informed as to maybe we should think these things through a little bit and maybe we should you know maybe we should understand a little bit about authority having experienced authority in our lives and how to submit and when we dissent and and and when we see propaganda coming us from from one way or another because there's much propaganda that comes when to you know how to suss out the propaganda and to say okay well these claims these sound pretty genuine and here's some information I can discern and and maybe amongst my group of people I can you know if I've in fact developed trust amongst this group of people I can have something to offer but I'll continue to listen to them as well because I may very well be wrong so seems seems to me a lot of the practices that that that we learn in church have have a great deal of salience today yeah well and I I think that there the church is threatened by uh this cultural milieu where where these things aren't thought through right and that I think the pure the purely deconstructive mode of critical thinking uh I think the church is the place where we push back and say okay yeah deconstruction I mean there's there's something to say for it but then what are we what are we building up what's substantive picture of the good what are our actual goals and and we need to figure out how to end I appreciate your channel because you're you're you're providing a space to do that in a culture that's not good at doing that and I you know when I when I first encountered it and I don't know if you remember on the first the first interview I was like two hours people are going to watch this for two hours like we like really but but I think people do watch these things for two hours because you've actually tapped into a major vacuum in the culture uh in terms of building up some common image of a substantial good that we can work towards even if we disagree or whatever else you know um but but a purely destructive version will get you a lot more hits um but but it's it's going to make the problem worse and it's going to lead you wherever you know pick your metaphor it's going to lead you to the senate floor with nothing to do and nothing to say that's maybe a that's maybe a good place to land the plane um because that's a that there's there is a salient image of okay there you are now what you know and that's replayed so often in our culture you know tom brady wins another super bowl and you're going to go back to disneyland what else is there tom you've married a supermodel you've you know you've done all of this no you know you're in the good place from what the rest of us can see but you know and then you know again and again people who have reached the top of these hierarchies say is this all there is it's like well you got a lot but uh no there actually isn't you mentioned the truman show jim carrey i think he has said something like everyone should experience the pinnacle of human success so that they know that it doesn't satisfy it's a good line yeah i may not have it exactly right i'm paraphrasing from memory but something to that effect he's another canadian too isn't he he is we we certainly benefit from your country so glad you send us with the brett the canadian brain drain so you should stay there you should stay there brett so we don't want to bankrupt canada too much i am happy to have friends and conversations on both sides of the border amen but i but it's it's pretty good living you know i i'm happy to be in canada right now i'll tell you that i don't even like my prime minister i think he has totalitarian pretensions uh but man i'm glad to be here good good anything so you're new on twitter and i'll i'll put your twitter handle below i'll i'll follow you when i get off this and i get back to the computer and yeah anything else you want to plug while while we got you there i'm writing a book for catholic teachers so maybe maybe someday we'll come on and talk about that my manuscripts do on may the first with our sunday visitor uh and and yeah some of the themes people would recognize you know the idea that there's no neutral that like teaching from a catholic perspective is not brainwashing teaching from a supposedly neutral perspective is brainwashing if you own if you own the narrative that you're you're teaching from that's not brainwashing that's healthy engagement but then i try to walk through every subject area uh from the you know not every subject but the main subject areas so i'm working on that and i'm trying to learn how to use twitter uh so if any of your listeners are on twitter and they want to help me out uh yeah feel free to show me the ropes there because i'm just trying to figure out how it works well it's uh it's twitter but i'm but i'm you know i i think it can be used i think it can be used for good it's it's just like with everything else you gotta you gotta keep an eye on yourself in this thing and and learn when to shut up and learn when to grace someone who has just attacked you and um try to uh if more people like you are on twitter i think twitter will be a um a more life-giving place so here's hoping but it is hard spiritual work i get a lot of compliments for my work on facebook but people don't know that i think they get the impression that i make it look easy it's not easy and i screw it up um it is hard spiritual work like it requires a lot of self examination uh and a lot of prayer and a lot of discipline yeah yeah and i don't expect twitter to be any any easier no no it's different it's different but it's i i find it a helpful platform just the brevity of it um the part of the problem with brevity is it allows so much projection you don't really have a clear thing but at the same time you can scan a lot and it is it is good for little quips and things so right um well brett again it was just a pleasure to talk to you and um we'll talk again sometime i know we will and thank you for your work and thanks for coming on here and uh i'll uh i'll i'll link this on twitter and people will find you it's always good to be with you thanks so much for having me paul all right brett take care you too bye bye