https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xNbDJZdDMl4

 This is part of my Rough Draft for Sunday sermon series where I walk through my current state of my sermon. I've, as some of you know, had a busy week. I've got a wedding today, so I've got to wear a suit. But I'm just going to walk through my draft of my sermon so far. And those of you who also come here to Living Stones on Sunday, things may change. So there's fair warning to you. Last week I began with this question, how could a good God allow a world with this much suffering? And this is something I hear from people on a fairly regular basis. Also implicit in this, people often say things like, we could do a better job at running this world than God. I think that the, not necessarily pushback, but the question I often have for people who make that statement is, well, aren't we running the world? And when we start these wars, isn't it us that starts them? And so this idea of, is God running the world or are we running the world, that in and of itself seems to be a very interesting question, especially for people who don't have faith. And last week I talked about this Spectator article, Does Aid Do More Harm Than Good, following the scandal at Oxfam over revelations that they've covered up, situations in the Haiti earthquake and other places in Africa, where some of their aid workers were exchanging food for sex with young girls. And last week we looked at the covenant of Noah, and I believe the thesis statement of the Bible, what the story of the Bible is about, is that God rescues the world from us, which is a difficult statement for those of us who don't believe in God, because then it's just a fairy tale. Or it's a difficult statement for those of us who may or may not believe in God, but have issues with the God of the Bible. And we may very well have issues and say, well, we don't want to be rescued from, we don't want you to rescue us from ourselves. We'd like you to leave us alone. And I think that is essentially a definition of what hell is, where God finally says to his creation, I won't bother you anymore. And so some of you might say, well, that's exactly what I want. And so I'd say, good, then you get what you want. I don't recommend it, but I understand how people say that. And the story begins, of course, with this story, and this is the Genesis 1 representation, the story of heaven and earth. And then in Genesis 2, there's the Garden of Eden, and the Garden of Eden is really a royal garden. It's the palace garden of the great king. And there's no separation in the beginning of the story between heaven and earth. Heaven and earth are one. And those of you who know the end of the story in the book of Revelation, heaven and earth get reunited. And if you look at Jesus Lord's prayer, thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Jesus prayer, in fact, asks for the unification of heaven and earth. But what happens in the rebellion is that the man and the woman basically say to the God, we want to run the earth our own way. And this would be shocking for, let's say, Israelites who are accustomed to Nebuchadnezzar and his hanging garden. If the gardeners of the hanging garden came to Nebuchadnezzar and said, we'd like to take the garden in our own direction, they wouldn't last 10 minutes. Nebuchadnezzar would call the butcher and off with their heads. And that's pretty much how every ancient Near East potentate would act and pretty much how most great men in the history of the world act. The definition of great men and leadership in this world is that it's my way or your death. And so this is quite dramatic in Genesis 3 where God exiles them from the garden and God separates him from their presence. But in a sense, he leaves the earth to them. And so what happens, according to the book of Genesis, is that in the first family, there's the first murder. And then the children of the first family multiply, but the earth becomes full of bloodshed. And God regrets having made the world and humanity and so decides to drown it, to flush it, if you were. But he picks the best man in the world, Noah, and he saves him and he tells him to build an ark. And then we get this first sighting of this thing that is called a covenant. And the sign of the covenant is a rainbow. And so basically what the rainbow means is that the firmament, this vaulted ceiling of heaven and earth, God will maintain the vault. He will not send the waters above crashing in and the waters below emerging up so that the earth is destroyed because the violence of humanity. But what he does then is enter into a covenant. And you see this frequently in the Hebrew scriptures that covenants usually have parties. And the parties of the covenant of Noah is God on one hand and humanity as stewards and all living things that draw breath on the other. These were the group that he saved in the ark and these were the group that he told to be fruitful and multiply again on the earth. And these are the two parties of the covenant. And the covenant basically goes like this, that God will maintain the firmament if the people stop killing each other and honor the death of the animals. At this point the animals are rightly given by God to the people to eat, all animals, not just clean. And in the Noah passage, as we talked about last week, there's clean and unclean. But they must not eat it with blood in it because the blood symbolizes the life and they should respect that the life of the animal belongs to God and human beings are merely stewards of it. And the sign of the covenant is in fact the rainbow. So every time water starts falling from the heavens, humanity might get concerned that God's going to flood them and wash them out. But the covenant says, no, I'm not going to destroy the whole earth with a flood anymore. But your side of this agreement is in fact to stop shedding, to honor the animals in an appropriate way and to honor my image in each other by not killing one another. Well, what you find at the end of the book of what you find as continues in the story of Noah, that after Noah, humanity pretty much picks up where it leaves off. And they build the Tower of Babel because they hope to be able to get up to heaven to take control of the earth. And so God confuses their language. But here's God's problem. What to do with a group of people with whom that can't keep their word? How do you make an agreement? Why do you establish a covenant with people who who don't follow through, who don't keep up their end of the stick? And when it comes at least to the covenant of Noah, humanity has a moral credit score of zero. We we did not stop killing each other. We don't honor the life that the animals have. And we simply continue to dominate the world and and do with it as we see fit. And, you know, sometimes that, you know, sometimes we do better things or worse things with it. But in terms of our ability to keep our agreement with God, we have none. And now people will say, well, Pastor, I'm a very reliable person and I keep my agreements. And there are so many religions in the world and so many different rules. And, you know, how are we supposed to know what God wants? Well, actually, Jesus deals with this within his own cultural framework. At one point, hearing that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees and the Pharisees, the Sadducees and the Pharisees got together. One of the interesting things about Jesus is that it was constantly sparring with the people around him and they couldn't seem to overcome him. And this this raised their annoyance with him. And so they they continued to try to test him with the questions that were that were pertinent to their time. And so one and so one one of them comes, an expert of the law, to test him with this question. Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law? Jesus replied, Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like it. Love your neighbor as yourself. All the law and the prophet hangs on these two commandments. Now, one of the things that you might notice about this is that this isn't terribly this isn't terribly inventive of Jesus. This answer had been around for a long time in Judaism. And you might even notice that this answer isn't that different from what you'll find in other religious traditions. The golden rule before it was before Jesus before Jesus spoke it and it's recorded in the New Testament, you will find it in the Old Testament. You will find it, in fact, in you'll find versions of it in many, many other religions in the world. And so C.S. Lewis at the end of his book, The Abolition of Man, has a table that he calls that he calls the Tao. And and this he basically says, you know, this moral law is surprisingly uniform across cultures. And so here Jesus says, well, well, here's the moral law. Can you keep it? Well, do you love God now? Love meaning, you know, especially in covenantal terms, give him the respect he deserves, give him what you owe him. And in most religions, it boils down to worship and worship, meaning that we we appear before God ceremonially symbolically. We offer our gifts to God. We we declare we declare the parts of our of our side that we had let down in the Christian tradition. This means confession of our sins. And we we we praise the God verbally. And and so a lot of people will say, well, why should I go to church? Well, this is this is part of loving God. And, you know, it's not it shouldn't be totally foreign to us. If you went to a public school, you probably were used to saying the pledge allegiance of the flag. You pay your taxes. This is in a sense the way you love your state and you are loyal to your state. Well, in the ancient world, and this is carried forward in religions today, part of the way that you love God is you learn to you learn to respect the God. And you show up ceremonially for the God as a as a person should do. And you you pledge your allegiance to the God and you confess the ways that you failed your God. Now, now maybe you don't believe in God. And so, OK, well, it's it's interesting that I find many people even who don't believe in God have this sense of honor and respect that maybe they want to pledge towards nature or towards fellow humanity or towards something like this. But this this basic impulse persists. And and in a sense, the clearest this clearest sign that you don't have a relationship with a God is if you if you don't quite know how to worship, don't quite know how to pledge allegiance, don't quite know how to to show up and show respect. And and as I said, I think this these basic impulses and these basic formats are transcultural and each specific religion and each specific culture learns to do them in their own fashion. But but the basic impulse of loving God is is, I think, you know, nearly universal. It seems almost baked into us. And then it gets even more baked when we say, well, you should love your neighbor as yourself and especially in the West with the results of Christendom, people will all say, well, yeah, love, love is it. And love is my religion. What is what what people owe to each other? Love is what we respect in each other. And so then the question is, do you love your neighbor? Do you love your neighbor to their satisfaction? You say, well, I bet that certainly can't be the criteria by which my loving my neighbor is. Well, if you don't have a God, then suddenly the question is, well, if you love your neighbor to your own satisfaction, then, you know, that that's rather convenient and self-serving. Certainly you should love your neighbor to the satisfaction of someone else. And if you have a God, the God is in fact the judge of that. So so to whose satisfaction do you love your neighbor? A second test, I would say, is do you keep even the standards you demand of them? There's a little there's a little pastor, there's all these little stock pastor stories that pastors use. And one of them is imagine that there's a tape recorder around your neck. And every time every time you tape here, maybe it's a cell phone in your pocket. Now we've got to update these these pastor stories. There's a cell phone in your pocket. And every time you express a standard that that someone should should be held to, maybe that means keeping up their yard or maybe that means how they drive or maybe that means what they should do with their money or what they should do with their body or how they should treat their own body or how they should treat the animals or something like that. Imagine that every time you express a standard to someone else that that your cell phone kind of, you know, Siri or Google Voice or whoever kind of clicks on notices that you're expressing a standard and records it. And at the end of your life, someone hauls you into a judgment room and says, OK, we're going to play back the standard that you have held the world to and we're going to judge your life against that standard. How would you hold up? Now, this is where we get into the trickiness of of self judgment. How would I hold up? And we're all suspicious of one another and we're and we know that we're biased towards ourselves. And and so then we begin to recognize that that actually the people who know themselves the least often show themselves to be less self critical. And often the people who who show themselves to be to know themselves better are more self critical. And so again, we have this need for for someone else to hold us accountable. And, you know, in democratic societies, we imagine that the community does this and that community is then expressed through a judge who is elected or a government who is elected. And so what do we do that goes beyond well meaning? Now, in a sense that the the story of of God's redemptive act through Noah seems to be a failure. And so in Genesis 12, God changes course and he he selects a man named Abram and he tells Abram to go from your country, your people and your father's household to the land. I will show you. I will make you into a great nation. I will bless you. I will make your name great and you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you and whoever curses you, I will curse and all the peoples on earth will be blessed through you. And so Abram goes. So Abram, as the Lord had told him, Abram went as the Lord had told him and Lot went with him. Abram was seventy five years old when he set out from Haran. He took his wife, Sarai, his lot, his nephew Lot and all the possessions they had acquired and the people they had acquired in Haram. And they set out for the land of Canaan until they arrived there. Now, what's interesting is why the inclusion of Lot and why the naming of Lot. Now, as you'll find out soon that Abram and Sarai have no children. So why would they bring Lot his nephew? Well, anyone in the Near East would know. Well, he's bringing his nephew because his nephew is his heir apparent because everybody needs an heir because in the in the ancient world, you live, you don't live into the future as we imagine now through somehow we're going to conquer death and keep ourselves biologically alive. You live into the future through your children and through your heirs. And it's through your heirs that that you that your thoughts, your ideas, the things that value you. And so fathers, you know, children are supposed to respect their fathers, assume their father's belief systems. They inherit their father's property. And so in a sense, the parents live on through their children. But Abram and Sarah have no children. And so Lot is the child that they've never had. And so God comes to Abram and says, I'm going to fulfill my promises to you. And then God doesn't seem to. God approaches Abram at the age of seventy five and says, you know, I'm going to make you into a great nation. And he says, well, Abram in the back of his mind says, OK, Lot, Lot will be your nephew. Lot will be my heir. And, you know, Sarah isn't having any children and no one expects Sarah to have any children. Abram's seventy five and she's sixty five. This is this is a bit long in the tooth. And she's you know, she's not about to have any more children. And so he's thinking, well, and what the story of Abram actually is, his adventures are him trying to prime the pump on this promise that God gives him. But all of his priming the pump exercises are really expressions of Abram's distrust for him. And so Abram's adventures in priming the blessings pump go on and on. Abram's wife is beyond childbearing years. And this is symbolic for his culture of having no future. And so that's why that's why he's got he's got Lot. You beat death through through your children. And this is this is in fact very Darwinian. But trials come. There's a famine, which again in in the in the communication of the Bible is symbolic for an uncertain future in the land. And so he flees to Egypt. And Egypt is in the Bible the great symbol of empire. And he risks his wife, Sarah, because he's afraid. And this this begins the the very interesting and long relationship between the rivalry between God and empire throughout the Bible as it unfolds. And God intervenes with a dream and threatens Pharaoh. And Abram leaves with stuff with riches, but no reputation, which is very interesting, which is something that another theme that that picks up in empire as we as we go through the Bible. And then in kind of the second story, Abram and lots of men quarrel and they are they are symbolically rich. And so God, in fact, has been blessing them because in the Old Covenant bless, you know, wealth is a symbol of blessing. And their hordes can't get along, so they separate. And then, you know, Lot is so rich he gets kidnapped and Abram has to rescue Lot. But, you know, in the back of Abram's mind, he's probably still thinking, well, maybe Lot, but now Lot's far off and Lot's kind of establishing his own house. And and so where's this going to go? And then God, then there's a strange story in in the book of Genesis where God cuts a covenant with Abraham and in the in the in the language in the in the language of the Hebrew scriptures, that's the word that they use. They use cut. And you hear you have this story of of these animals that are cut in half. And generally speaking, you would cut the animals in half and both sides would walk through the walk between the animals. And in a sense, it would be saying symbolically, this is a lot more than signing a contract symbolically. If I break my side of the covenant, then I should be as one of these animals that I will be cut in half. And, you know, it makes me think of, you know, the Godfather movie with Luca Brasi sleeps with the fishes. This is the Sicilian message of the of the fish wrapped in a wrapped in a suit. And so then when the sun set, when the sun had set and darkness had fallen, a smoking fire pot with a blazing torch appears and passes between the visions between the pieces. And this is, in a sense, God saying to Abraham, reiterating what he had said in Chapter 12. Now, look, I'm telling you, I'm going to keep my promise to you. And if I fail to keep my promise, I alone will pay the price of the failed relationship. Now, this is this is never done because, you know, we all know how to establish justice in the world, you know, trust, but verify. And if, you know, fool me once, shame on you, fool me twice, shame on me. This is how the world works. And here God walks through and says, I will pay the price. And this is amazing, too, because, in a sense, with this covenant, God hasn't asked anything much of Abraham, yet leave your country. He's essentially saying, begin to trust me. And what belief is, is trust in action. That's really what belief is. And so and so God says, I'm this determined to fulfill my promise through you. But Abram doesn't believe. And so the priming of the pump continues. Sarah, Sarah, I doesn't have a child yet. And so she has a bright idea. She says, take Hagar and sleep with my maid servant. This is a common way. So so one way to if you don't have any children to make a way around it is to adopt a nephew. Well, things with a lot haven't worked out so well. So another way is to sleep with one of your wife's maid servants because they're not really they don't a slave doesn't have the status of a person. So anything that slave produces belongs to you. So you can take this son and and make him your own. And so Abram does this, but this doesn't turn out so well. And and in fact, what happens here is that Hagar has the child and Hagar starts to nag Sarah. And yes, she's a slave. She has no status, but she's still a human being and she still use her mouth. And she in a sense is using the leverage of her son to gain status over her mistress. And so Sarah says basically, oh, I know what to do with you. You're dead. And and so demands of Abram. First, she demanded that he sleep with her. And Abram probably thought, well, and second, he demands that that they send her out into exile and death. And now Abram has a problem with this and God intervenes. And we won't go into that whole story. But there it is. Now we get to Chapter 17 and Abrams, 99 years old. God has been stringing this poor guy along for 24 years. And the Lord appeared to him, I am the Lord. I'm God Almighty. Walk before me faithfully and be blameless. Then I will make my covenant between you and me and will greatly increase your numbers. Abram fell face down, which is what you're supposed to do. And God said, as for me, this is my covenant with you. You'll be the father of many nations. No longer will you be called Abram, but your name will be Abraham, for I've made you the father of nations. And I'll establish my covenant with you and goes on about your offspring and your flesh and circumcision will be the sign. So God shows up again and says, well, you know, my deal is still on. And and here circumcision is going to be the sign. And so that's what you should practice. And so the covenant with with Abram gets clarified. The parties are God and Abraham and his descendants and the agreements are God will give descendants in the land and blessing and all of those things. And Abram's part. Well, you know, that's that's a little fuzzy. You know, be do do the right thing. You know, walk before me. Be you know, be loyal to me. But but really the main thing here is trust and trust is played out behavior. Trust played out and behavior is what we call belief. And the sign of this will be circumcision and also the name change of Abram. But Abram's always had trouble trusting and Abram's got a point here because he says, hey, look, you've been you've been stringing me along for 24 years and we don't live that long. And and that's a long time. And so I've been you know, I've been working my side of this to try to make these blessings happen. And God keeps coming to him and saying, no, it's not going to be a lot. No, it's not going to be Ishmael. And so when Abram falls face down, he laughs. And of course, in the next story, Chapter 18, it's very famous because Sarah will laugh. But Abram laughed first. He really does. Here he laughs to himself because he doesn't believe he doesn't believe God. And the reason he doesn't believe God is biological because he says, you know, will a man will a son be born to a man of 100 years old? Will Sarah bear a child at the age of 90? And Abram said to God, if only Ishmael might be your blessing, why don't you adopt all of the ways that I've tried to getting around believing you? Adopt that for me, please. And God says, no, I am going to fulfill my promise. Remember cutting the animals in half? I am going to fulfill my promise. Ishmael, he'll be fine. He'll be fruitful and multiply. And so he goes back into the broader pot of Noah's covenant and Noah's children. But my deal with Abram here, this is special. And so Abram doubles down and he continues to follow even after all of this, even after he left, even though he's got his doubts. So he takes Ishmael and his whole house is circumcised. But we can begin to see a pattern developing. God's makes promises with people who can't keep them. And God asks the people who can't keep the real promises in practice, trust or belief to believe in them symbolically to, you know, in a sense, fake it till you make it. You know, show good faith. And the covenant signs? Well, the rainbow is the covenant sign. And in a sense, the rainbow, which was a symbol of God's faithfulness, in a sense, becomes a reminder of us who are faithless. And circumcision is now a covenant sign. It's kind of the counterpart to the woman's curse. Now, just jumping ahead, I'm not going to go into this, but in Christianity, there's a new covenant translation that Christians become adopted children of Abraham through the blood of Christ. And circumcision becomes gets replaced with baptism and the land which is promised for Abraham begins expanded in the New Testament, in fact, to the entire earth. The meek will inherit the earth and blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. But what's critical here is that Abraham laughs. Abraham doesn't believe. He's and but at the same time, while he's got his doubts, he keeps trying to keep formal covenant. He's he's working it. The kingdom has not come. It has not arrived. But but he's facedown. And even while he's worshiping, he's he's laughing to himself because he can hardly keep a straight face because he can hardly maintain his beliefs. And Sarah won't be able to in the next chapter. But but he waits in that mode of saying, I'm going to be faithful. I'm going to love God the best I can. I'm going to love the neighbor the best I can. And so I am going to my life is going to be marked by faith, not by sight. And even though you keep coming to me, God, and making promises to me, and even though I don't see them panning out, I'm not giving up. I'm I'm holding fast. And this then, I think, is why Abraham later in the book of Hebrews is is seen as a hero of faith, in a sense, almost because he laughs. And so here we are. We wait on the covenant. And some of us try to keep the covenant signs. And we might be sometimes going through the motions. But in those moments, we laugh in a sense, laughing and giving up, laughing with our face to the ground is in worship is in a sense, you know, staying right there in that tension and staying right there in faith and staying right there and saying, I, I have my doubts. I don't know. I'm I'm really struggling here because the promises have not do not seem to be fulfilled. How can I continue to believe that I will remain face down in worship even as I laugh? And I will keep faithful. I will I will I will try to keep my side of the covenant. Now, God keeps his side. This is the point of walking through the halved animals. Abram is waiting for a son. God sends his son and he is brutalized and murdered by empire, by us, our rivalry with God. And God does our side for us. And that is, in a sense, what we see is that in the in the crucifixion of Jesus, it is God walking through the halved animals. It is God paying the price for our covenant unfaithfulness. And so then the question is, we're on our face laughing. And and if you're trying to love the Lord your God through worship and and you're still at worship and you've got your doubts or you you're struggling to find a church or you're struggling to believe or your you know your prayers sound like God if if there's anyone listening. That's in a sense Abram falling face down and laughing. But then the question is, will we start to believe? And maybe we're in that we're that position and we we don't believe yet or we want to believe. And and and so then the question is, will we start to believe and what kind of actions do we need to take to start to believe and will we will we be laughing to ourselves while we're doing this because it seems crazy and it seems like lunacy. Will we will we start to even try to keep covenant? Will we will we try to love God and and keep our keep loving God in in symbolic ways? Will we will we try to love our neighbor? And obviously we can get far more concrete and loving our neighbor. We can get concrete and loving God too. In a sense if you if you go to church and you confess your sins and you you praise or worship God and you and you give your offerings, that's a concrete way of loving God. And will we find concrete ways of loving our neighbor of faithfulness and generosity in our relationships? And again, the point here is not that you do these things because these things somehow give you status with God. The point here is that that God has given his promises. And I always end my you might notice already that I often in my sermons with misery, deliverance, gratitude that we are not able to keep our side of the covenant. God has, in fact, through Jesus walked through the halved animals. And and and so that in a sense, God is the rescuer. But the question is, how will we respond? Because in many ways, Abram's response to God doesn't save him from anything that the kinds of things that that Abram does, they they might participate in the land. Well, a lot is still out there and Ishmael still out there. But God says, I'm going to give you Isaac. And of course, the climax of the story will be God telling Abram to sacrifice his son and then Abram following through. But God's stopping him at the last minute. And all of this comes together in the story of Jesus. And so then the question is, well, if you believe that, in fact, God has already done this, how must we then work? And then the real questions are, how does our work then actually participate? And that's where covenant is interesting, because covenant says in a sense that this is something that God has done, is doing and will do. He does the heavy lifting. But in a sense, like a father does to his son, if the father is, let's say, working on the car and the son comes along and says, I want I want to help. It's to the father and the son's glory that the son gets to participate. And that is, in a sense, what we do. And so then the question is, even if we're laughing like Abraham, even if we're on our face laughing, we're doing worship, but we hardly believe what we're doing. And we there's pieces of our heart that says God's never going to come through. We we will be lost. We will be cut off. I'll never have a son. It'll it'll never come to pass. Yet I will worship still. Yet I will love my neighbor as I love myself. Yet I will do this even if everything fails. And at that moment, we begin to understand what faith is. You