https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=LH_QrLvuA7I

 Good morning. This is our 11 a.m. Pacific Friday question and answer at the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. If you'd like to join us, Rick has updated the link. It should be below. You can also ask in the comment section and tell Rick the link doesn't work if you really want to annoy him. And he'll give you exactly the same link that you can find in the comment section. I'm going to refresh this little computer over here. And it tells me, yes. It's April Fool's Day today. So buyer beware. Rick wanted me to announce that I'm joining the Orthodox Church. It is April Fool's Day after all. So he's laughing. He's laughing. Well, that's I, you know, I get I get here on Fridays and I think there won't be any questions this week. We'll just turn on the cameras and chat like I do the other days of the week. But no, there are questions and some of them might be good. There aren't a lot of short questions. Some people had some short questions. Some people have long questions. So we've got two hours. So let's let's get at it. Let me see if anybody's in the room yet. We got some people in the room. OK. Hi, Paul. This is from Josiah in Vancouver. I always feel like I'm on a radio station when I have Josiah from Vancouver says I work in a gospel mission context in downtown Vancouver, B.C., working with people on the streets. A big part of my job is helping folks find and navigate alcohol and drug recovery. I believe it's a big part of your job. Vancouver is different than other North American cities. It's almost fully embraced a harm reduction response to drug use. City sponsored safe injection sites, wide prescription opioid replacement programs like methadone, et cetera, as opposed to an abstinence based one. Our mission is one of the few abstinence based places left. But despite our abstinence policy, folks still routinely use drugs in our restrooms and such regularly. Why am I not surprised? Thus we find routinely thus we must routinely respond to overdose situations, though those who formerly enter our drug and alcohol and drug recovery programs often find great success in maintaining sobriety. Lately I've wrestled with these two perspectives, harm reduction versus abstinence, as they deal with our daily realities and face influence from the rest of the city. Yet it remains my strong theological and experiential conviction that it's better to participate in systems that are life giving and liberating, meaning abstinence generally in this case, rather than ones which bring about a degree of death. I was wondering if you had any thoughts or wisdom to share on this. Wow, this is a great question. So I'm almost done listening to Michael Schellenberger on Joe Rogan, which I've, I was surprised nobody's usually when something like this comes on Rogan, which is very much in line with what I've done. People contact me on Twitter or send me emails or all kinds of different ways to say, oh, you better check out the Michael Schellenberger on Joe Rogan conversation. They spent a fair amount of time talking about it and I haven't finished San Francisco. My guess is that Schellenberger would probably be more on the harm reduction wavelength. In some ways, theologically, perhaps this could map onto, let's say a Wesleyan holiness approach versus a Calvinist, you know, we're sinners until they put us in the ground approach. I think I definitely agree with you that all things considered abstinence is more ideal. I mean, how much heroin do I really need in my life? At the same time, oh, I seem to have frozen. No, no, I'm back going. OK. At the same time, there are people who, especially for a while, let's say, transition into methadone or something else. And then once they get to that halfway step can make a bigger step. It might be easier for them to achieve abstinence if they spend a few years on methadone. I don't know. I'm by no means an expert in this. I'm not a recovery counselor. I'm not even a 12 step. I'm not even a 12 step sponsor or anything like that. I do know that when it comes to dealing with sins of various natures, especially sins that are stubborn, the way out varies widely. I've known people who, let's say, after they get a DUI, just stop drinking. And I know people that get multiple DUIs because they can't stop drinking and they need a program. Anytime we set up a program for something, we sort of take a broad approach and people are going to interact with that program in different ways. I think it's probably good in a context like yours that there is both harm reduction and abstinence based programs available. My guess is just having worked with people that part of the reason that you still have people doing drugs in the bathroom and every now and then an OD on site is because in the aspirational enthusiasm and despair of wanting to get sober, certain personality types want to go all the way right away and they can't achieve the same results. They don't have what their aspirations would lead them into. That could be for some why they're using the group pressure to try to look sober at the meeting, but then sneaking off to get their fix. Again, this isn't my area of expertise. I think people who have a lot more experience with their own recovery, who probably have more insight into this, I would think in a context like yours, you've got a lot of people around you that you can ask these questions of. In my experience, part of the difficulty of a church, let's broaden this out beyond just chemical addiction things, part of the downside of a church is its same upside. I would imagine once you've achieved sobriety at a certain point, stumbling and falling is a cause for shame, so you don't want to stumble and you don't want to fall. In some cases and at some points that helps keep you sober. At other points, it might contribute to your stumble or your fall. This stuff is tremendously complex, which is generally speaking why it almost always has to be engaged at a personal level. For each individual, their path will be unique and different. Chad, I was just cruising through the questions a little bit later, says, good morning Paul, I've been particularly neurotic and fearful of late, some might say pessimistic. I describe it as fearfully realistic. I want for hope, but lack for faith for it all over. Truly I am terrified by the horizons. Is it really as bad as I think it is? So just in dealing, let's say with people who aren't dealing with sobriety, that spectrum of personalities that Peterson maps on his big five personality profile, that's still there. People have, people are so complex. Some people really struggle with stability. They wake up one morning, they're happy. Everything's great. They wake up the next morning, they got out of the wrong side of the bed. And that's why we have that saying, it's just that random. All of those dynamics are also in all of the addicts. And probably more so in some cases, some of them are struggling with mental health issues that are probably sort of borderline. Some of them have had difficult upbringings, which haven't equipped them with something that people who've had good upbringings have had. But yet you'll find people in addiction programs that have had a lot of problems with their So I don't know. I think, and you know, it'll be interesting, Chad, if you want to weigh in on this at all, I'd be really curious to hear what you have to say. But I think this is a great question to keep struggling through. Keep working your program, but be honest. Just like you said, you're not going to be able to do it. Keep working your program, but be honest, just like the question you're asking. And talk to the people that are in the programs. Get their opinions. I bet you there are people in your program that were in the other programs. And I bet you there are people in the other programs that have failed out of abstinence programs. And it may very well be that some programs work better for some and some work better for others. But I think your instinct that in the long run, you don't want to be 80 years old in the nursing home and still getting methadone. By that point, you're probably on morphine. So this stuff is complex and you're asking good questions. Now, a lot of times people want to do the weakness of idealists is their practicality and the weakness of the weakness of pragmatists is settling too soon. So there's that dynamic in there. So it's a good thing the world both has idealists that say, come on, get completely sober. Stop screwing around in the mushy middle. It's good thing that there are idealists out there because that idealism is going to inspire some people to get completely sober. At the same time, there's other people that will not get completely sober, but they'll manage their relationship with whatever substance they're using. Whatever substance they've been struggling with. So I know that's probably not a satisfying answer. And one of the videos I thought of making coming up is something about the attraction of the hard line. I did that some which some of which in the Grime lines, my Grime line video a number of months ago. But hard lining has an attractive quality to it. So, you know, in some of my videos this week, I talked about Doug Wilson and of course making a video about someone gets more comments about them and more input. You know, someone like Doug Wilson is sort of a hard liner. And hard lining achieves some goals that pragmatists in the middle sometimes never achieve. In the Schellenberger Rogan conversation, about 45 minutes into it, they have this talk basically about, you know, you wake up in the morning and they both were talking about the fact that for them, exercise and good exercise and good diet is really a key part of their mental health. If they don't exercise, if they don't eat properly, then they slip into sloth, they slip into depression, yada, yada, yada. But everybody knows that when you wake up in the morning, the last thing you want to do is go to the gym for your workout or go out there for your run or do the exercise that you have to do. And so what you really need to do is just be really mean and brutal to yourself and make yourself go out there and about, you know, a little ways into your exercise routine, then suddenly you'll start feeling better. That's true. And that's sort of the beauty of the hard liners. And, you know, Peterson has some of that in him, you know, no matter what, tell the truth. Oh, okay. And that's attractive. But, you know, I, there's a friend of mine who, he's older than I am, you know, had played football in college, keeps himself in terrific shape, would go to the gym and would just really overdo it for a man his age. And his doctor's like, what are you doing? You know, you don't, you don't need to, you know, I want to, I want to, I want to be in, I want to be in the weight room and do everything that those young guys are doing. Yeah, but they're not 60 and you are. He's probably 65 now. And, you know, my father was doing this. My mother was complaining about my father. And I mean, the first time he passed out, he passed out once and then a month later, he had a heart attack and died. But the first time he passed out was right after his workout. And my father at that point was 77. He was same height as me. He was probably then maybe 200, 195, 190. He was the older he got, the skinnier he got. And he was in the gym, you know, just because when he was a young man, he worked on farms. He was always very strong, was always very proud of that. You know, would, would lift up the front end or the back end of the Volkswagen all by himself. He was a very strong guy and very proud of that. And so he'd be in that gym lifting those heavy weights and everybody'd be looking at him like, should a guy your age be lifting those weights? Hey, hardliner. You know, don't let age be an excuse. I hear people say that all the time. Yeah, but it's also a reality. So I'd say keep doing what you're doing, but make sure that you deal with each person individually, because there might be some people for whom a harm reduction program is perhaps the best next step. You might think that and you might be wrong. I mean, that's just the way it is with people. So I don't know, Chad, do you have anything you want to say about this? Sure. I am Chad. I'm alcoholic. Anyways. Yeah. So even in like, like the 12 step program I'm familiar with, which is alcohol and synonymous, they'll suggest if you're not, you know, if you, if you think you're not quite ready or something, then you know, you're free to go out there and go, you know, go drink until you're ready. You know, and I think a lot of the problems that happened is like we put these, there's a lot of weird narratives out there where people want to control what other people are doing in the bottom line. I think with probably most people, not just alcoholics or addicts is people don't want, don't like to be necessarily told what to do. I personally haven't, I wasn't like a, like a junkie. Like I did drugs, of course, but like I never had to be on anything like Suboxone or methadone or anything like that. But I, you know, unfortunately have met a lot of folks who have, and I don't, I rarely see it at work because it's, I don't know. I just, I've just not seen it work. I think the thing that that works probably best is if somebody isn't back interested in truly interested in the recovery program, get them in touch with people who are just like them. Like not kind of like them, but just like them. And I think the problem that I see a lot of what's happening with recovery houses and, and like, you know, sober houses and places like this. If they bring them to meetings, they just put all of like the, all the alcoholics and all the heroin addicts and all the, everybody in one van and take them to one meeting. And it's like, it's not a good idea because there's a lack of identification that can happen. And so part of it's on the alcohol, on the, on the alcoholics to like help get those folks in touch with the right people. You know, like, Hey, so you don't think you're alcoholic, but you definitely believe you're like a heroin addict. Well, here's a guy I know who's a heroin addict who has recovered. You should give this guy a call because he's going to know exactly where you've been. And I think that that's a huge part of the recovery process. And so, yeah, I think that's a lot of what that is. Another thing I've seen a lot of is where folks go into like halfway houses or, or whatever sober houses. And oftentimes it's just an opportunity to kind of get the heat off, get some shelter, get three squares a day, you know, and maybe they have something of an inkling to actually recover. But deep down, maybe they haven't fully conceded their inner most selves that they can or really want to. So it's difficult to submit yourself to a process that's, that's, you know, requires as much honesty as you possibly muster plus submission to the actual work, not just going to meetings. So, yeah, I think that's a huge part of the recovery process. I don't know, man. I think usually when somebody truly wants to recover, they will go to literally any length. They'll walk through any fire. And sometimes if that means even say you relapse like tick around, you know, just let it go. So yeah, I don't know, man. I think usually when somebody truly wants to recover, they will go to literally any length. They'll walk through any fire. And sometimes if that means even say you relapse, like stick around, don't leave. It's like, you know, probably like something like the church. If you deconstructed and you're like desperate, don't leave, stick around. Let's talk about it. Let's get honest about this stuff. So I don't know. I don't know if that's helpful, but that's kind of my perspective on it. I think that's really good, Chad. Thank you. I agree. I agree. And I really like what Chad said in terms of find people who are like them. Part of what AA does pretty well is that sort of like churches, there's different meetings. And so you'll find meetings in certain zip codes that tend to attract certain types of people. So if you grew up in a rough neighborhood of a certain ethnicity, of a certain culture, you probably will do better with a recovery group that's of that culture. If you're, let's say, a Wall Street investor who is, you know, has trouble with a certain drug or a certain substance, you're probably going to be better off with people who have similar temptations to you because the kinds of temptations in one area are not going to be the same kinds of temptations in another area. So yeah, it's... Well, I'd agree with that to a degree, Paul. But part, I think honestly, it really, because I know guys that are like myself who don't make a lot of money. Like I sponsor a guy who's like makes far more money than I do. And, you know, like he's like 20 years older than I am. He asked me to sponsor him and I work with them. But the identifying factor is that we're alcoholic. And he knows I'm alcoholic because I'm able to talk about that and all that other stuff. Like it's really hard to explain. Identification with that particular thing is paramount. So I understand what you're saying, but I also rail against it because this is a lot of stuff that gets kind of brought into AA that's it's not true. And I think that this is what kind of some kind of bad information that kind of prevents people from trusting the process of just an alcoholic helping another alcoholic, period. You know, so I understand what you're saying. I really do. But mostly I think it's not true. I think another issue with this, and I thought about this during the Schellenberg conversation with Rogan. The government wants the government has an agenda in this, which is harm and cost reduction. That's different from, let's say, a religious organizations agenda. And part of what was missing, it was touched on briefly in the Rogan Schellenberger conversation is in fact, of course, the religious layer. And Peterson doesn't minimize that. Getting people, people need, people need spirituality as a part of life. It just it just simply is. And I know that sounds terribly vague. But if you if you don't have anything working on that level, you're probably going to have other issues that come up. But even so, you know, so one of my best friends who was a friend of Bill, who he he had. So he he had a degree in anthropology from from Berkeley way back. He probably graduated in the 50s. It was about my father's age, maybe early 60s. He had a thriving insurance business up in Alaska and he was an alcoholic and he drank himself. You know, and in Alaska, he told me that often, you know, people would often just keel over and, you know, die in a snowbank because they'd find them later. You know, part of I'm sure Alaska, you've got seasonal affective disorder because it's dark for so long. So all these kinds of issues. So, you know, he he so he got into, you know, he detoxed in the hospital and he got into an A program and, you know, it eventually costed him his marriage, you know, all of the stuff. But he worked a years and years and years and years. And then he'd worked a for a number of years. And then he finally found his way to this church before I got here. He was an elder when I got here of the church. And, you know, he was a great friend, but he always had it was always an addict. He and that he was the music buyer for opera and classical music from for Tower Records back when Tower Records was a really big deal. So when he died, he left his poor widow with about 15000 albums and that many CDs and probably that many cassette tapes. They were his house was just full of this media when. So she had to figure out what on earth to do with all those records and tapes and CDs, which eventually she did. And then she found for a while he was collecting pipes in this massive pipe collection and cameras, this massive camera collection. And then she discovered, you know, screwdrivers and the guy wasn't handy at all. She found boxes and boxes full of screwdrivers. And it was like, what's with this? Now, it's wonderful that he wasn't womanizing and he wasn't drinking and all of these things. But yet at the end of he also ate. He he was tremendously overweight, which eventually caused his death. And so someone could say he had, you know, he was addicted to to certain kinds of food. And then because of his diabetes and all of his weight issues, he was perpetually on painkillers. And so then even though that wasn't seen as an addiction at that time, I'm sure this was before the whole opioid scandal. I'm sure he was taking significant amounts of opioids by his death. So certain personality types are just really obsessive or addictive. And a lot of that for him probably would have been better if he could have had more generalized management. And whereas A.A. was the perfect course to help him stop drinking. And, you know, it also wasn't the case that he didn't do a lot of the other work, his 12 step work. He he made amends. He, you know, he had his book. I mean, all of this 12 step stuff. I mean, he was he was really down. In fact, he was he was about as addicted to the program as he had been addicted to alcohol before that. It was just the way the dude was wired. So for for many of us, let's hope that our. Addictions. I'm looking at you, Rick, and that motorcycle. Let's hope that our addictions aren't too costly or damaging or they don't, you know, they don't they don't kill us or drive us to divorce or. But we've got lots of people have lots of funky little addictions. And sometimes. Those addictions bless the world. I mean, you will find people who obsess about little corners of the world that mean nothing to anyone. They're experts on beetles or on fungus or on molds. And they spend men do this more than women. Again, that's a Peterson thing. They might be the world's expert on a particular kind of mold. And perhaps they are addicted to that mold. And because no one has paid anywhere near that much attention to that mold. Now, for some reason, the world's knowledge of that mold is increased because this crazy person over here couldn't think of anything, couldn't didn't find anything more exciting than mold. Now, hopefully this person's fascination with mold didn't destroy them as a father or destroy their marriage or or ruin their life in some dramatic way. And hopefully in the grand scheme of things, it blessed the world in a way that, let's say, being an alcoholic usually doesn't. But this, when it comes to human beings, we're super complex. And so, yeah, I'd say continue doing what you're doing, ask good questions, keep an open mind and keep learning because you'll keep learning and there'll be surprises. All right. Half hour on the first question. We're going true to form here. Hey, look at this. A short question from Runaway. This fun Runaway has been in the live stream, so it's fun to finally connect to face with the name, Kansas City, Missouri. Do we need a change in cosmology to help us escape the meaning crisis? It depends on what we mean by us. Cosmology is not unaffected. And we can see that, I think, by the way, Verveki sort of maps out. And I like the way he maps it out. When you look at, you look at the discarded image and Galileo, I mean, I never until getting into all of this stuff, thought about the fact that, you know, physics, working in space, being the same physics that works on earth impacts cosmology. Well, we don't think anything of it. We just simply assume it. But before the discarding of the classical medieval image, where you have the earth at the center and then the moon, the sun, the moon, the sun, the sun, the moon, the sun, um, where you have all of this, all that impacts it and cosmology, heaven is up. Hell is down. Um, this stuff is really deep in us. So I think, and maybe this sort of is analogous. Why does every other question in my question and answer always sort of refer back to the first one I spent a half hour with? Well, that's just the craziness of my own brain, but there will be, there will probably be some people that will have to wrestle with cosmology in order to address their own meaning crisis. And there'll be other people who the cosmology won't matter a bit in terms of the whole us. See cosmology is also not just one thing because there's the cosmology that says that the moon revolves around the earth and the earth revolves around the sun. That's sort of one layer of physical cosmology, but cosmology is also the degree to which the physical realities impact our sense making and the it's clear that in the transition from the medieval to the modern system with Copernicus, with Galileo, with Newton, and later again with, with quantum mechanics and new updates in physics. It's clear that cosmology is not disconnected from sense making. And, and so, so yesterday, I thought yesterday the, the, the live stream was a really good one. And I really loved how part of the reason I like getting a bunch of you in the room together instead of just like one-on-one with me is a bunch of you on the discord server have gotten to know each other. And so to have CW sort of really lean in to Mark, that was good. And because what that did was we all have sort of this comfy space where we can sit here. And for some of us, it's all the thinky talky stuff. We just sit here with our thinky talky stuff and Mark is super thinky talky. You just are Mark. And that's, it's not a criticism. It's just how you are. But Mark is super thinky talky and then CW really leans on him. And I was thinking the same way, but CW got there first say, what about you, Mark? What about you and this whole religious thing? You, you ex Catholic thinky talky guy in your house down there. Um, and, and I thought CW pushed Mark and I thought that made Mark's answer better because, you know, CW pushing Mark really forced Mark to, to dig deep and respond from the heart. And we almost always hear Mark's ed, but I thought we really heard Mark's heart. And, you know, I really enjoyed what Mark said in that he spoke a lot of truth when he said, you know, you religious people, you religious people, you religious people, it's good. You got your narrative. It's good. You got your cosmology. It's good. You got your stories. It's good. You got all of this stuff, but there's certain people. This is where we sort of get into the harm reduction versus abstinence. You know, is Sam Harris ever really going to get there for you guys? I don't know. But, and then when I say Sam Harris, I don't just mean Sam Harris. I mean people in the wake of Sam Harris who are so religious. People in the wake of Sam Harris who are sort of like Sam Harris. Are they ever going to get all the way there? Do you care about those people? And of course, Mark was in a sense talking about himself because Mark, I'm sure if you and his personality profile, profile Mark is, is highly rational. And again, that's not a criticism. That's just sort of in a distribution in our culture. And so, you know, when you talk about Mark's personality, some people are just very emotive from the heart, feeling intuitive. Mark is very rational information, you know, navigating patterns and the connection of people challenging each other. And when you, and when you get a, when you get a context of trust where Mark doesn't have to be defensive, he doesn't have to worry that CW is trying to harm him or hurt him, that you have a, that you have a context where you can just say, you know, I can speak honestly here and I can let my hair down if Mark and I have any. I can, I can relax and speak from the heart and tell you what I really think in a way that I can't just sort of do out there in the open ocean. Beautiful things happen. So, you know, part of what's been really cool about this little corner of the internet is that we have had bridges of meaning, which is its own thing. That's not easy to describe. And we've got awakening from the meaning crisis discord, and we've got a lot of people that sort of hop between them and we've got the symbolic world. So we have a Calvinist pastor and a post-Christian, post-Buddhist cognitive scientist who's working out a religion that's not a religion. And we've got an Orthodox symbolic prophetic dude, and we're all talking to each other. And we've all developed a degree of trust with one another. And we've developed spaces in which we all sort of know each other and have a degree of trust. And, you know, we talked about how, you know, back in the iron route days, good old, good old St. Man, Manuel was spending hours and hours amongst all the religious people and the bridges of meaning, but then, you know, sort of wandered over to awakening from the discord and found some real help in meditation. But, you know, it's fun when you look at Mark and St. Manuel, where they are both very thinky talky rational. They're both different, too. But, you know, talking about psychotechnologies, but, you know, Manuel is going to church and has a relationship with the church. Mark really isn't, but Mark's living in the Bible Belt. And so what's happening is that we've created spaces and all of these problems that work all the way down, like cosmology, are always in the background with these things. So who is us in that is really different. And so for some people, they'll and again, back to the addiction thing, I think we'll all have, to one degree or another, low level meaning crises in us by virtue of our context and our environment. But for a lot of religious people like me, it doesn't surface too often because I've got so much resource built into me that is pre-meaning crisis of religion and all of that stuff. And so a lot of people who are deep in religious context aren't having a meaning crisis. They've got plenty of other crises and they've got plenty of other questions. So they're involved in the conversation, but theirs is not a meaning crisis. You've got others who have been, who have not had the benefit of what religion offers and how religion provides meaning. And so they're working in, you know, some of them are much more in the rebel wisdom camp or in the verveky camp or in sort of the Peterson psychedelic camp or, you know, some have become orthobros and some are trad Catholics or some are still working on their Protestant Christianity. So people are going to be all over, but cosmology will continue to be a part of the conversation. But exactly how won't be the same for everyone. So anybody, that was kind of a long answer. I don't know if anybody in the room wants to say something about that. I picked on Mark and Manuel and I don't know if they want to cuss me out or anything. Well said, Paul. I'll just add, yeah, thinky talky, but also actiony, right? You can know me by my deeds. Thank you very much. I don't need to answer for the things that I just do. And I don't do them right on BOM, but we did run meditation. It's been over two years now with with John Verveky. So and that's seven days a week. Yeah. Yeah. So I want to respond also a little bit because what is theology? Why like theology is, yes, trying to make sense of sense making in some sense, right? Like how to relate to the world. And like what I and Mark are doing is we're having a bit of a different angle, right? Where it's not that we're we don't we don't want to engage with with the theological stuff, right? But we're trying to to go through it systematically and from our perspective. And when you're talking about talking from the heart, right? I think I and Mark are have a really cautious relationship to to the things that we say. And we want to have a sense of certainty from the place that we act, right? And I've been thinking about the Tory and like what's the authority that you appeal to when when you're stating something, right? As a Christian, that's fairly easy because you got the Bible, right? So you got some heavy stuff to back you up. But if you want to ground it in your experience and then your understanding, right? Where understanding is the grasping, right? Like it's a more dynamic nature. It's the ability to hold something for yourself. Then that's a lot harder. And you want to have a spirit that is generated from the understanding that you then can participate in. And I think when you're talking about being really in the head, it's that we're still seeking the right quality of spirit that we can have agreement with. So that's maybe a different frame to look at. That was wonderful. This is why I like doing this here. And I like doing it with people that we've at least gotten to know each other. And I like doing it in a stable space where, you know, a bunch of us have been in the space now three, four years. And we've gotten to know each other a bit and we've gotten to trust each other. And that level of trust is absolutely key. I trust Mark and Manuel. I trust them both. And because I know that they're acting in good faith, they're reliable. If I had a need, they would be there for me in some appropriate level. They care about me. I care about them. Now, of course, there's lots of levels of care. Their moms care about them more, I bet. So, no, this is why we do this in this way. Because you can actually be more accepting of each other in this way. And I think in the long term be much more productive. So I really appreciate you guys. All right. BR Brian, what are your thoughts on Swedenborg? I know I don't know what that means or is or anything. I can understand why traditional Christians have issues with his writing and thought. I guess he's an author, but it is curious that he remains obscure even in this spiritual, but not religious area. Well, he's obscure enough to have me and have no idea who he is. So I'll leave it at that and I'll have to, you know, see if someone sends me something from him. I'm way behind on my, I just, I get, I get this. I'll keep going. Okay. All scars back with another short question. Hopefully I'll understand it a little better this time. Hi, Paul. I attempted in a previous question to provoke you into thinking critically about a divinely approved metaphysical and ontological hierarchy of beings. I'm understanding this question a lot more already. And I don't want to abuse this generous format by pushing my own agenda. Well, you certainly wouldn't be the first. I will make a last attempt, however, because I felt that you didn't see the radical implications of this. And because I would like to tease out a genuine critique of Peugeot and Peterson from you, if you would feel comfortable in airing it, assuming it exists, I will state the problem very simply. God approves or affirms a hierarchy of being powers, principalities, et cetera. Then we humans will model our relationships on this higher, our relations on this hierarchy, which will inevitably lead to an oppressive ontological difference between man and man. There's a further spiritual and theological danger in Christianity, affirming this idea since Christianity itself is the critique and the subversion of this very hierarchy and how anybody can square the theology of St. Paul in the words of Christ and Mark 10, 42 to 45 with social hierarchy is beyond me. Let's just pull that up. 42 to 45. All my logos is, I'll keep reading. Hierarchy, meaning vertical as opposed to horizontal relations of authority and power. I realize that Peugeot has a Christian inversion of hierarchy, but I don't think he goes far enough and the whole Aragorn dream of benevolent self-sacrificing Christian king is unrealistic and even un-eschatological. A proper Christian hierarchy would not be infantile and bloodthirsty, but foolish in Paul's sense and canonic. Do you as a Christian approve of the idea of interpersonal and or social hierarchy or not? Dum dum dum. It's a great question. I understand it much better now and it's a, oh shoot, I don't want Kindle. I want logos. There we go. All right, let's close all windows. Let's go to Mark 10, 42. Study layout. Bum bum bum. Too many windows. Let's close some. James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came forward to him and said to him, Teacher, we want you to do this for us. We want you to do for us whatever we ask of you. How lovely. And he said to them, what is it that you would like me to do for you? Jesus is amazingly, amazingly gracious. And they said to him, grant us to sit one at your right hand and one at your left in your glory. But Jesus said to them, you do not know what you are asking. And I think that's almost always true of us. We don't know what we're asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink or be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? Now, right there is a degree of hierarchy. And is it meritocratic? And if so, based on a capacity to endure and prevail over an adversary. Listen to what he says. You do not know what you're asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink or be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? Now, remember, a baptism is an ordeal. It's a ceremonial drowning. In other words, part of why Jesus is at the top of the hierarchy is because he is able. You hear that in the book of Revelation. Who is able to open the seals? The lamb upon the throne. The lamb can open the seals. The lamb upon the throne. The lamb can open the seals. You can read the Heideberg Catechism. Who is able to save us from our sin? We need someone who is fully God and fully man. He has to be man so that he can, in fact, he can be part of us and atone for us, but he has to be God because he has to be able to undergo the baptism and drink from the cup. So right away in this passage, there's definitely a hierarchy. And Matthew, or I'm sorry, James and John are like, we want to sit at the top of the hierarchy. Let's have a hierarchy and let me be on top. And Jesus says, you don't know what you're asking for because what's at the top of the hierarchy costs you everything. So it's not just, and this is part of the reason I always bristle at imaginary cosmic lottery relationships with Calvinism. It's not that some Calvinists don't think or talk that way, some Calvinists don't think or talk that way. But if you read a passage like this, oh, there's a hierarchy, but it is in some ways a meritocracy. And part of at least what substitutionary atonement does is say that he who conquers the world does so at infinite cost. So I caught on Twitter that California wants to start paying reparations to the descendants of former African-American slaves, which is kind of interesting because number one, California was a free state. So you would imagine that the former slave state should pay, well, even should the former slave states, I suppose so. And of course, the former slave owners, but you have the absolutely awful reality that if you're looking for the genetic heirs of former slaves and former slave owners, they're often the same people. So this is part of the complexity of history. And what's immediately going to follow the reparation conversation is how much money can you pay to restore the damage done by American slavery? Does such amount of money exist? There's a movie on Netflix about the people who had to decide what the insurance settlement after 9-11 was going to be. You have this terrible question. What amount of money paid by an insurance company, not by Al-Qaeda, paid by an insurance company, what amount of money can compensate for what has been done to these families? You're immediately confronted with the fact that money is the wrong currency. And I point at this with the Chairman Mao question. Does Chairman Mao, did elderly Chairman Mao have in his body that which could atone for what Chairman Mao did to the country? Wow, that's a big example. Well, let's cut it down. Let's say you're a father or the son of a particularly unworthy, particularly poor father who did things to you that you have had to spend your whole life trying to get over. Does your father have the currency to make whole the damage he did? Part of the uncomfortable truth about human beings is most of the time we don't. Let's say I'm driving my nice little red car down the road and I'm listening to a podcast and the podcast is over and so I pick up my phone and I'm changing stations and a kid is playing in their driveway and the car, the ball rolls into the street and I hit that kid. And it's because I was changing the freaking podcast on my phone. What could I do to make up for what I've done? And the answer is nothing. And human history is full of that. So hierarchy, now I want to get around to the being part of it because that's important later. So right away, if we don't start reading at verse 42, but we start reading at verse 35, Jesus is not saying there's no such thing as a hierarchy. I think denying hierarchies as such, we're going to keep that abstract for now, doesn't work. There are hierarchies and when James and John say, we want to be at the top of the hierarchy, Jesus says, you have no idea what you're asking. So when Michael Schellenberger was on Joe Rogan and Michael Schellenberger wants to be governor of the state of California and Joe Rogan says to him, I want to talk to you four years from now if you get elected and see how much you've aged, because being president of the United States or governor of the state of California or at the top of any hierarchy is aging because it costs you plenty. At least if you're doing your job. They replied, we are able, we want to be at the top of the hierarchy, we're able to do it. Are you? Then Jesus said to them, the couple of you who are able to do it, then Jesus said to them, the cup that I drink, you will drink. Is that informed consent? Are they at this point in any way to have any conceptualization about what is going to happen not too far into their future in terms of betrayal, crucifixion and resurrection? Are they in any way able to give informed consent about the cup that they are just saying they are willing to drink? No. But they said it. The cup that I drink, you will drink and they will. James is one of the first disciples killed. He's the first martyr of Jesus' crew there. John, potentially the last. And with his baptism, with which I am baptized, you will be baptized. They should have at that point been scared to the core of their toes. But to sit at my right hand and my left hand is not mine to grant. Wow. Really? Yeah. Wow. What does that mean? That means that there are others in Jesus' group who rank higher than James and John. And the father alone will grant them their place. I call that hierarchy. Then the 10 heard this and said, hey, wait a minute. Who says James and John can be at the top of the hierarchy? Who says James and John can be at the top of the hierarchy? We want to be at the top of the hierarchy. Shouldn't Peter have preeminence? What about Judas? Peter and Judas are going to have a much bigger hand in what happens holy week than James and John. They became angry with James and John. No, no, no, we want to be at the hierarchy. We want to be in the hierarchy. We want to be. So Jesus called them and said to them, you know that among the Gentiles, those who they recognize as their rulers lord it over them. What do they mean? It means that when they're up in the top of the hierarchy, they play hierarchy games and they play rank games and they, you know that among the Gentiles, those who recognize as rulers lord it over them and they're great ones are tyrants over them. But it is not so among you, but whoever wishes to become great among you must be your servant. And whoever wishes to be the first among you must be slave of all. For the son of man, Daniel seven, came not to be served, but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many. This is the crazy thing about Jesus. There's both hierarchy and it's both ways. Well, how could it be both ways? Well, I think it's both ways in lots of things. And if you've ever worked in an organization, there even in a tiny little organization, like a little local church, as small as living stones, there are many times when even being the pastor of a little church weighs on you singularly because you're the only one by virtue of the situation that can do it. But now what's also true of us is that there are lots of hierarchies and in a good organization, there are lots of different hierarchies within the hierarchy. For example, if you are a pastor and you have elders and deacons and committee leaders, the last thing you should do is take away the agency of the other people in the organization by making decisions instead of them or flippantly vetoing their decisions. Why? Because the day let's, you know, Rick knows who nine is, not the other way around. Because the day let's, you know, Rick knows who nine is, Nina, when we have a hospitality function, Nina is often in charge and Nina will get here and because I'm, you know, Rick's younger than I am, but there are very few young people around the church. I'm on the young end of this church. And so when there's, we're gonna have a function and there's tables that have to be set up, Nina starts giving me orders, set a table up here, set a table up there, go get this, go get that. And they say, wait a minute, I'm the pastor here. I'm in charge of the hierarchy. No, but I'm also younger and stronger and the tables are heavy. And so I dragged the tables around and I set everything up and Nina is in charge. And the reason I defer to Nina with that stuff is that she's been running it for years and she knows how to run it and I don't. And someone could say, but you're the pastor, you should tell Nina what to do. You know what happens when I tell Nina what to do? Then suddenly I'm in charge and Rick's shaking his head. Yeah, it wouldn't be good. Then suddenly I'm in charge. Do I want Nina's job? No, in an organization we all have our role to play. Okay, that's how organizations and hierarchies work and they work all the time. They function like that. Now, in a number of my videos, I've gone back to this Arthur Holmes video where he talks about middle Platonism and neoplatonism. And what he lays out there is sort of a fusion of Pythagorean philosophy that got merged into neoplatonism of the, basically, instead of using Yankee Greek, I'm going to say seeds of the logos. And what happened in that philosophical system was that they had a ranking of hierarchy of being by, in a sense, measuring how much seeds of the logos are in that. Let's say, let's put a number on it to be all sciency. Let's say maybe a human being has 100 logo seeds and a dog only has 20 logo seeds and a rock only has three logo seeds and a plant has eight logo seeds. And by that, in that system, you have a hierarchy of being and you have sort of these logo seeds become the currency by which you can evaluate and measure the hierarchy of being. Part of what happens in nominalism is that whole system gets deconstructed and that's why Vervecky keeps talking about nominalism and in some sense, a neo-neoplatonism by which we can have real relations out there in the world. Okay. I think part of the reason the Pythagoreans and the middle and the neo-platonists went down into the, basically the seeds of the logos thinking and hierarchies of being is to try to get a handle on ontology and I think also agency. I have, if we conceive of a conception of a hierarchy of being, I have a higher hierarchy of being than this little sheet of yellow paper. I can chew it up, I can chew on it. Thank you all. I can write on it. I have a, now is hierarchy of being, does that make much sense to us? That just sounds weird. We might use agency. We might use value to use, let's say, Sevilla's ideas. All of these systems are an attempt to try to get at something, but it's really hard to conceptualize what that is and I'm not really surprised when you think long enough about it that Vervecky is looking to sort of resurrect a new version of neo-platonism because even though a lot of this stuff was sort of formally rejected, it continued to function in what Vervecky and Mark talk about too, sort of this, the language that we use. And we bump into it all the time. I don't think you're better than me. Better than me at what? Is Rick a better coder than me? Yep, I can't code at all. Is Rick a better motorcycle rider than me? Yeah, Rick's an expert motorcycle rider. Is Rick a better preacher than me? I don't think Rick wants to preach. Is Rick a better pastor than me? I don't think Rick wants to pastor. Is LeBron James a better basketball player than me? Yes. Am I a better basketball player than a three-year-old? Yes. There's lots of better and worse, but what we do mentally, when we have all of these questions about, let's say, gender equality, I think that men and women are equal. That makes no sense. Ah, but what are we doing? We are, through our language, reaching way, way back to this medieval system of hierarchies of being and saying men have more being than women. Now, we've mostly gotten a lot of that out of our system. Not all, but now, we've got multiple systems vying for each other, competing in this way. And so we see this now when we talk about, let's say, racial quotas and hiring. So let's say you're trying to put together a group of workers in your organization, and you notice that, oh, you're Google, and oh, there's a whole bunch of white and Asian male engineers here. We want more African Americans and Hispanic and women in our organization. Well, that's not a bad thing, because you're running a commercial organization, and if you only have people of a certain cultural ethnic group, and you're running services that service a very large, diverse world, and if you don't have people in your organization that have viewpoints and perspectives that are in a lot of the organizations that you're marketing to, you're gonna have some huge blind spots. So it just makes sense to have some diversity in hiring. But if you're looking to hire the chaplain of Google, well, you're probably gonna look at me over Rick, but if you're looking to hire someone who's gonna manage Google's networks, don't look at VanderKlay, look at Rick. Rick knows a lot about networks, VanderKlay doesn't. So are Rick and Paul equal? Now, some of you say Rick and Paul are the same person. Rick's younger than I am, I'm older than he is, I've got more experience in some areas and more expertise in some areas, he has in other areas. Are Rick and Paul equal? It's in many ways a dumb question, because you're gonna have to tell us more if you want to evaluate us because you're evaluating us on something. And I think being at this point, unless you're deeply embedded in a philosophical system that has these little seeds of the logos, in terms of being, are Rick and I equal? Now, suddenly you're gonna have to ask really deep questions about being. Because certainly if you put both of us on a motorcycle, Rick's just gonna zoom away and he's gonna be able to drive fast and avoid deer and do all kinds of different things. And he's gonna do it without thinking a thing of it. Me, I'm gonna have to be like, oh, I haven't ridden a motorcycle in 35 years. That you have automatic transmissions on your motorcycle now? I'm gonna need five minutes just to orient myself on this and then I'm gonna start out slowly in the Livingstone's parking lot and get a feel of this. And then I'm gonna head out on, you know. So, interpersonal and social hierarchy with respect to what? Are there better or worse Christians? Ooh. Because we can't even agree how to measure whether or not someone is a Christian, much less measure some evaluation of them as a Christian. Yet, in the verses preceding the ones you pointed me to, Jesus clearly stakes out a hierarchy. So, and I think also implicit in that hierarchy that Jesus lays out. There's a lot of meritocracy, as we would call it. But now again, using that word, it's a huge anachronism in terms of that passage. Yet, we can't read that passage and not assume a meritocracy of sorts. So, is there hierarchy? Absolutely. You want me to critique Peterson and Peugeot? That hierarchies form? I've got no critique of that. They form all the time. They form within me. My right hand is able to do things, my left hand is not. I've got hierarchies in me. My mouth is able to talk better than my hands. My hands are better able to grasp than my toes or than my mouth. I can grasp things with my mouth. Lots of hierarchies within me. It's just value differences. And when you have multiple variables, you'll get a hierarchy. Now, hierarchies of being, you're gonna have to tell me the scale on which being is measured. Is it seeds of the logos? Well, is it midichlorians? So, the neoplatonist, middle platonist Pythagorean system remains in our language and our imagination. And it gets trotted out. I don't believe a black man is better than a white man. Better how? At making vitamin D from small amounts of Northern hemisphere sun. We've had those conversations now with COVID. Why do African-Americans get COVID more? Well, maybe because all this pale white skin and light eyes which developed over centuries in Northern climate so that my light eyes are more sensitive to light and my light skin more able and quick to make vitamin D at low amounts of sunlight versus darker skin. But when I live in California, I see old men in California with the skin on their head, top of their head is like paper. African-Americans, they look great. When it comes to dealing with a degree of sun, African-American men are better than white men because their darker skin handles higher degrees of sun because of histories of hereditary. So there are hierarchies, they do develop. They're certainly part of the Christian landscape. Jesus made that clear. Yet hierarchy is based on service. And so that's why being governor of the state of California or president of the United States or CEO of a corporation and doing it well means serving all the employees. And that's why when we run a potluck and Nina says, Paul, go get the tables or she'll call me Bubba sometimes. Go get the tables and set them up and set them here. Don't set them up there, set them over there. Someone would come and say, aren't you the pastor? You act like the janitor. Yeah, being pastor means being janitor a lot in this church. There we are. So do I approve of the idea of interpersonal and social hierarchies? It depends how, when, where and with what. It's always gonna be that way. PK Josh, do you accept the term metamardin to define our current age? Do I, I get a lot of questions about approving and accepting today. Do you endorse or not endorse? Who cares, it's just me. Meta is sort of above modern. I don't know. I haven't used it much and so, we'll see how the words are living things in many ways. We'll see how it, we'll see what happens to the word. As Christians, what part of postmodernism can we safely accept? Safely, there's nothing safe. Postmodern, postmodern is sort of a, a way to address some of the insufficiencies of modernity. Is, is it true that there are motivational aspects that infiltrate systems? Absolutely. Is it true that in any given individual, their desire to maintain status in a hierarchy or money in a bank account motivates what they do? Absolutely. But the pervasive trying to explain the entire world through those vulvarisms is also an overreach. So it's sort of like, it's sort of like asking, is, is bleach safe to accept? Bleach is good. Don't wanna drink it. Get some stains out of your white clothes. It can ruin your colors. It can help keep your pool water sparkling clean, but it can damage your skin. So like many things in this world, in its proper way and place, it can be helpful. Sometimes a little bit of deconstruction is a good thing. But as C.S. Lewis noted, and you know, solvent, solvent is good, but you want to, you want to see through things or get under things in order to see something true. And if all you do is deconstruct everything away, you're left with nothing. And which is why there's, there are just as many lying games played in post-modernity as there is in modernity. Bleach is a wonderful thing, but don't drink it. Theolalusa, Theolalusa, that's kind of cool. Both East and West are deeply rooted in Christianity. The West went through the enlightenment, but the East supposedly didn't. However, communism got a hold on the East because atheism was spreading rapidly at the time. Isn't atheism characteristic for modernity? Does this imply that the East has not been as immune to modernity as likely to suggest? Am I missing something here? What are your thoughts on this? No, those are good questions. So, colonialism brought secularism to the world. And the colonialism and the secularism brought modernity to the world. So, communism, it's very interesting the way, we think of communism as one thing, but communism in Russia did not end like communism in China. Because Russia was sort of built on first the Viking, and then the Eastern Church, and then communism comes on top. In China, you had all of this Confucianism and other religious groups, Buddhism, and then communism came on top. And with the communism came this atheism. And so, you know, so, Kale Zeldin this morning, he and I were sort of messaging back and forth about Protestantism and the French Revolution. The French Revolution happens in France, a country that kicked out the Protestants and was very anti-Protestant. In some ways, the French Revolution is ultra-Protestant. Why would ultra-Protestantism flourish in a country that had repressed Protestantism? It's funny how these things go. So, even though, think about it this way. When I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, if I wanted to go talk to a local pastor, I had to get into my Jeep and drive out on some really bad roads and go out to one, either down to the Bataille, he might be there, or he might be up in the hills, or he might have gone into town. I had to track down these guys if I wanted to talk to them. So, most of the time we just talked at, basically, we always have this meeting at this time of month at this time of day, and so that's where we'd find each other. But if I wanted to go find these people, I had to get up and go look for them. And that was different from, in North America, that if I wanted to find a pastor, now remember, this is back in the 80s and 90s, if I wanted to find a pastor, I would open a book that has all the numbers of the Christian Reformed ministers, and it would say, Office and Home. I'd say, okay, well, it's middle of the week, business hours, I'll try calling the office. No, he's not here, okay. Then I'll try calling the home. No, he's not here. When is he gonna be home? Back in the old days, boys and girls, you used to have to wait till someone got back to the office or back to home just to talk to them on the phone. You weren't gonna call random pay phones. Well, but then, later we got these little phones we carry around in our pocket. Then we had the home phone. Then we had the home phone, the office phone, and the cell phone. If you don't know the guy, maybe you call the office. Maybe if you know him a little bit, you call the home, but if you get his cell phone number, then you're in. So then, if I wanna talk to my colleagues, you call the cell phone. Now, the pastors in the Dominican Republic, they didn't have an office. There was this church building sometimes. Their homes didn't have phones. There were no phones in those communities. There were sometimes electricity, but usually no phones. And then I was talking to a friend of mine who was back on home service once, and he said, I just called the pastor. I said, what? You can't call a Haitian pastor in the Dominican Republic. He said, they all have cell phones. What do you mean they all have cell phones? They all have cell phones. Oh, in other words, they jumped over wired telephones. Well, France jumped over the Protestant Reformation and landed in atheist French Revolution. They jumped over the Protestant Reformation stage. The East jumped over the Enlightenment and Reformation and landed right in communist atheism. They skipped steps, but they still landed in similar places. But because they started in a different place, the outcome would also be different. Communism in Russia, different from communism in China, different from communism in Cuba. So definitely people jump steps, but a bunch of those things still get integrated into it. So that's just part of the complexity of the world. All right, Kaleppa. Oh gosh, the questions have kept, oh my gosh, the questions have kept coming. Kaleppa, curious if you're virtually attending Preston Sprinkles Conference, either way. No, either way, would love to hear your commentary on the first session linked below if you haven't seen it. Frances Chan has a lot to say on editing the protest and other topics discussed in this little corner. I will, I will, I will, I had no idea about this conference streamed 19 hours ago. I will like it and I will check it out. I got together with Preston when he was in Sacramento recently and he asked if we wanna do another conversation online, I said, sure, anytime Preston. So I'm sure we'll do it again. But I will check it out, Kaleppa, thanks. Chad the Alcoholic, I already read this one, but you know what, Chad? Hang in there, my friend. You know, we have our good days and our bad days. We have our ups and our downs and that's part of the reason that God gives us each other because, and I'm glad you, I'm glad you shared this. You know, there's, some of us, some of us are very happy, very stable. We don't live chaotic lives. That's really good. But sometimes we're boring and underachievers. Other people just, you know, I've just been thinking, women are generally speaking, this is a Peterson thing, higher in neuroticism. And I noticed that, you know, my wife gets anxious quicker than I do. And so I calm her down and ease her mind. And, but there are other ways that she helps me. So that's why we have each other because if you're having a bad day, maybe I'm not, maybe I can encourage you. And this is where we lend each other our agency and our strength and we pray for each other. And it's good that we're not alone. So keep the faith, my friend. Glad you're here. All right, Michael. Have you often used the idea of a child asking, where do babies come from? You have often used the idea of a child asking, where do babies come from? As an example of how our thoughts and words require nuance and care. Recently, my four year old daughter asked me, how do baby piggies come out of the mommy piggies belly? Well, back before YouTube, you probably, you probably couldn't have a way to answer that. You had to go to the pig farm. And a pig farm might be an overwhelming experience for a four year old. Now you can probably take your four year old to the, well, you should probably go to the computer and pick the video first. But I'm sure there's video on YouTube about pigs giving birth. So, and part of our poverty, I was thinking about this, let's turn again to Rogan and Schellenberger. We build these cities with all of our conveniences because it's nice to, it's nice to not have to go out there and slaughter the pig to get the bacon to have our breakfast. But when we skip all those steps, there's other things that we're missing out on. Like the cost of the pig for our bacon. And people who grow up on farms have a lot of advantages over people who grew up in the city. They've also got some disadvantages. So I'd say visit a farm or show your daughter a YouTube or because someday once she sees the pig giving birth, she's not gonna connect it right away, but far later when she's born, later when she begins to hear about where human babies come from, she's gonna remember the pig and the mommy and all of that. And that will address her intimacy crisis with respect to reproductive questions and she'll be blessed by it. Christian Golden, what can we do to help care for you? It's very kind that you ask. You know, I feel myself, I feel myself enormously blessed by all of you for your time and attention. You know, you tolerate commercials on my channel or you have YouTube premium. Some of you support me on Patreon. Some of you support Living Stones Church. There are lots of ways that many of you support me and I'm deeply grateful and I often don't feel like I am worthy of it or give enough back. So I would say pray for me and pray for this ministry. Pray for my church, pray for my family. I've been debating whether I should say anything, but Rick has a nephew who had, was in a pretty terrible accident and it's the son of one of the guys who comes to our local meetup. And it's a very, it's a very difficult situation. We still don't know if he will live or recover. It was a very, this individual suffered tremendous trauma to the skull and it's really amazing what hospitals can do. But this young man is, he's only in his 20s. He's in a coma and he's kept in a coma, basically to see if his body will respond and start healing. And so I'd say pray for Rick's nephew. And yeah, prayer is a big deal. So just pray for us and pray for Living Stones. You know, I don't know what's gonna happen to this little church that I love, but God is good and we'll see what comes of this little church that I love and we'll see what comes of me. I've got about 10 years to retirement or so, I think probably, maybe less. I don't know how retirement will be feathered. I'm gonna, Vervecky talked about this a little bit and his question and answer over at Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. And John and I are gonna have a conversation about this because I heard it and I thought, oh, that'd be fun to talk about. So John and I are working on a date and I think that'll be a fun conversation about how this late in life changed to, in new media and greater visibility and reach the changes that that brings. So wrestle with all those things, but thanks for asking. I'd love to hear you look at Tom Holland on trigonometry, talking about Christianity. Was Tom Holland on trigonometry? Gosh, the internet, I can hardly keep up. Let me look. That's, that would be an amazing crossover. YouTube. What's terribly boring watching me. Tom Holland, trigonometry. One year ago, gosh, wow. All right, well. I'll put that one in the queue too. So, oops, I gotta get the correct window up here. Correct window up here. There we go. Has needed a new birth ever so often and juxtaposed against Jonathan Peugeot's latest video about winter festivals, where the guest stated that Christianity in England before the Reformation was great. It sort of relates to your video from Thursday about Hollywood. I'd also like to hear your thoughts on Doug Wilson's use of modernist style analysis to divide Christians into three separate categories, as he criticizes modernity. I did a little bit of analysis on that on Doug Wilson, and that's in a video I don't know if you caught this week. But yeah, these are good suggestions. I'm interested in all of them. I haven't yet listened to the Peugeot on the winter festivals, but I really love his Universal History series. So that's definitely something that I want to listen to. I'm still trying to get my, I'm still trying to figure out what I think about Doug Wilson. He's a complex, that's a complex situation because, he's sort of running a Benedict option thing there, and that's powerful. But like I keep saying, if the goal of your community is not to change, you always have to be selective about what not to change. You know, this is part of my critique of communities that sort of major in traditionalist, conservative communities that say, orthodoxy was the way, Calvinist, neopuritanism is the way. Okay. How does that relate to all of the different changes? In the video, I made the point that when I was in this one church recently that was voting to leave the Christian Reformed Church for conservative reasons, that church at the congregational meeting, many women stood up and made bold speeches about how women should listen to the Bible and be silent in church. And it's like, so you're telling me loudly in a congregational meeting that women should keep silent. There's lots of stuff that happens like that in traditionalist conservative. The conservatives rightly are cautious of change. That's their strength and gift. They are something sometimes blind to the change. So that's always something that conservatives have to watch. They have to really continue to be self-reflecting because they are participating when a conservative is out there promoting change, but it's change in terms of slowing transformation or progress or change back to something, it's still change. And so conservatives have to be aware of that. And again, I mentioned this video that Julian recommended about David French and this Roman Catholic sort of posterity about David French and this Roman Catholic sort of post, a conservative post-modernist, conservative reactionary, sort of like Mary Harrington with some deep and penetrating critiques of modernity debating David French who's sort of a classical liberal. Even though Jonathan Pujo is orthodox, he's more radical than Jordan Peterson who is classical liberal. Now that's really weird because in one way of thinking, Jonathan Pujo is super conservative. He's advocating structures that haven't been around in the West for centuries. Peterson keeps identifying as a classical liberal. So in some ways, Peterson is more conservative than Pujo and you can see where these language games get wild and Vervecki points that out too. Jonathan Pujo is radical because he's advocating, bringing back ways of thinking that haven't been publicly practiced in a public forum for centuries in these places. So it's, dealing with labels is hard. All right, how we doing on time? Now we're doing pretty good. I might be able to get through. Eric Youngart, hey Paul, can you speak to the Christian idea of spirit and other things besides humans? Animal spirits are an ancient idea, but what about spirits and plants and fungi? From my perspective, modern people have treated the last two categories as background objects with little more agency than rocks. A rock can have a lot of agency if it's partnered with gravity and it's heading towards your head. So you're right in asking a very good question like this. But at the same time, we recognize that certain flowers and certain fruits from these organisms have an extremely physical, emotional, and spiritual effect on us, absolutely. Christians eat and drink bread and wine. From my understanding, these spiritual effects are usually seen as demonic by Christians. Sometimes. But numerous people experience these things. They say they've awakened their spirituality and reshaped their perspective on materialist reality. Psychedelics, mushrooms, those mushrooms have spirits. This has brought many people back into religion, but usually they go looking for the shamanic and the far eastern side of the territory. How does Christianity evolve its understanding of these plant and fungi spirits and reposition them in the spiritual, I think you want to say hierarchy, there it is again. So these experiences direct people back to the church and not to the forest. That's what a great question. That's a hard question. Because it's one of the questions that I am always trying to figure out how to talk about and haven't made many videos about, but want to at some point when my thinking at least gets to the point that I can make a video about it is, okay, what are we pursuing? The church itself is not the end. Christ is the end, but then you say something like that, that's like way up there. What are the songs at our wedding let all things now living a song of thanksgiving to God its creator triumphantly raise? The church itself is not the end. The church itself is not the end. What is the end? What are the things that the greatest creator triumphantly raise? Abram Kuyper, every square inch of this world Christ claims. Book of Colossians, the son gathers all things into himself and gives it to the father. It's, you know, part of my, part of my quest to, what word is best? Part of my quest to help us understand spirit is about understanding the spirit, let's say in the walls of this church, the spirit that this church has. Now that's difficult. And we see the poverty of language because I am now we're getting back to levels of being. I am more spiritual than this building. Well, what do I mean by that? How can I set up that relationship and that comparison? Well, there's agency involved, but you're right. There's I'm going to have to look at, I've been thinking about going, looking this up, how to change your mind. This book about psychedelics from Michael Pollan. I think it's in there that he has this chapter on mushrooms and basically this, this one guy wrote a book basically showing that fungi mushrooms have had a huge impact on the development of the world. And if you look at it through a particular lens, you might ask, are people serving mushrooms or are mushrooms serving people recently on the rest of this history, they had two episodes on oil and they had an author on who had just written a book. And basically this book, Dominic and Tom read this book and, and began to see the history of the last 200 years through a very different lens by virtue of oil. And it almost looked like, well, it's the, the history over the last 200 years has sort of revolved around oil. Whereas most of us would say things like, no, the history has revolved around development of government or around evolution of the world. Or around evolution of class struggle or around Christianity's rise and fall, or around decaying enlightenment or modernity. In other words, there are all these different frames that you can see the world through and it might be fungi. It might be oil. It might be oil. It might be liberalism. It might be Christianity. It might be the industrial revolution. And when you look at the world through those different frames, the world both makes sense in some ways, new things emerge, new insights remerge emerge. And now if we take back this idea of spirit, well, oil has a spirit that has colonized the world for the last 200 years. Petroleum has a spirit, the spirit of petroleum. See, if I say it that way, we don't kind of blink, but when I say petroleum has a spirit, well, that just, that just doesn't sound right. And to figure out what on earth we mean by those words, you know, does, does Kermit have a spirit? Yeah. This little thing here participates in the spirit of Kermit. Is the spirit of Kermit contained in this little doll? And when I put Kermit and the count next to each other, the spirit changes a little bit because now I'm bringing in the bigger spirit of Muppets and Sesame Street, but now I add a non Sesame Street little monkey. And those of you who have watched my videos know I'm talking about Joe Rogan. So now when I put this up here, we've got something of the spirit of Joe Rogan and Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson. And the spirits have changed. You might say, well, what, what, what, what do you mean by spirit? And I say, oh, that's right. What do I mean by spirit? I'm not quite sure. I use the word, I'm not quite sure. I'm not quite sure. I'm not quite sure. I'm not quite sure. I use the word. I'm very comfortable using the word because the words in the Bible. But when I say, well, wind and spirit is the same word in Greek and in Hebrew, well, that's true. But what does that mean? And in terms of, well, what, what, what do we want for people? We want people to be filled with the Holy spirit. Well, what does that mean? We want people to be filled with the spirit of Christ. Well, what is that? What, what, what do you mean the spirit of Christ? Well, the thing that moves us to love the Lord, our God, without our hearts, whole mind and strength and love our neighbor as ourself and being the greatest of all, be the servant of all. Wow. Easy words to say. Drink from the cup, undergo his baptism. Ooh, I thought we were talking about a little felt thing made in some probably Chinese sweat shop that looks something like a frog that is associated with a television show on public television in the late 20th century that has a girlfriend that's a pig. Yeah. Pigs and frogs together. How dare you, sir. Yeah. This is part of why I talk about this word. And yet spirits are all over the world right now. And if you can see the history of the last 300 years through oil, is spirit too big to actually function as a frame to help us see and participate and have procedures practice these four P's. Great question. This might be slightly related to the question above. Do you believe in fairies? Every time a child says, I don't believe in fairies, this is not fairies. There's a little fairy somewhere that falls down dead. All that language has meaning. And I think it has more power than we dare to believe. Tinkerbell is a fairy. Tinkerbell is almost as real as Santa. Oh, now we've got now backward. Now we're now we're back to hierarchies of beings. Does Santa have more seeds of logos than Tinkerbell? Kind of. Santa is way more powerful than Tinkerbell. See, this is why we closed all this stuff down. See, this is why we closed all this stuff down, because this stuff is hard. And it's terrifying. We disenchanted the world for a reason, you know. Dare we open our eyes up to just how enchanted the world really is? Oh man, can I get through these questions? All right. 10 minutes. Howdy, Paul. I've been dwelling on the nuance between the identity of the self, how our shadow and light interact with our consciousness and the effect that has on how we perceive and express our reality around us. What I was wondering is if you have any idea on how this construction of emerged or integrated self occurs. I probably do, but I don't know if I can talk about it. Or even if I'm conscious of it. Peterson and plenty of others got into it. As a Christian, I'm struggling to control both my compassion and my aggression. Like a flame from an ember. I have these intense waves of emotion and it merges with the mysticism in my life, which I think has helped me to draw closer to Christ and not rely on myself. But how do I create a new life without suppressing the new person and their intentions that I feel erupting from within me? I'd say Christ gives you your new life. What on earth does that mean? It sounds like he's working already. And so you submit the construction to him. All good. If this doesn't make the show, I've just been hanging on this thought for a while. After last week's videos, I'd finally get up the nerve to ask. Well, I'm glad you did. Thanks again for taking the time for opening a new platform for question and answer. To clarify, it's an issue with the stability I have in my new identity in Christ. I think you spoke well on drug addiction counseling. It can be progressive for some others. They have to undergo a revelation of being. There's that word again, that pushes them away from addiction. There's that word again that pushes them away from addictive, destructive lifestyles. Yeah. I think many of these things you. So, so there's a reason the church is called the body of Christ. And sometimes that body is instantiated in a church with a pastor and a building and a board or a council and elders and deacons and members and kitchens and pews and chairs and things, but also the church. So all of this transformation that you're talking about should be done with others. And what would it mean doing with others? Well, you'll have to be embedded in and around people that can help walk with you through. So we have these eyes and they see this way. And now I can see myself in these little screens that I've got in front of me, but I see a little two-dimensional picture of a beard that's really unkempt. And maybe I'll give myself a haircut this weekend. I don't know. But there's, there's that's the little picture in front of me is a real reduction of what I am and who I am. And so I need to be embodied in relationships. And what's nice about church is that ideally these relationships that I'm embedded within are in relationships that go through thousands of years together. So in that sense, I'm not only in relationship with Rick and Nina and Reggie and Freddie. I'm in relationship with Calvin and Kiper and Bobink and Augustine and Paul and Jesus and David and Moses. And that all of these transformations you're talking about happen in those relationships that go through time and in the relationships that are local now. And that's what the church is for. Short questions, long questions. Dennis likes the long questions. OK, I got to put this here. End of questions. For one, I haven't had a near enough April Fool's jokes today. Far too long. We're going to scare Paul off. I tell you, I'll need to get a go right if you don't need to go write a few books. Greetings and salutations. Pigs and spiders. Do you think that some Christians have more faith in Jesus? See, that's it's back to this question of hierarchy. More faith. And again, now Jesus uses that language is fair. Oh, you have little faith. If you have sufficient faith, faith of a mustard seed, you can tell that mountain. Be moved over to the edge of and, you know, you can tell a mountain to move. What on earth did Jesus mean by that? I remember talking to my father about some of this stuff. He says, I've never heard a story of a mountain moving. What does that mean? Well, that's not entirely true. If you go into places in the East and places like Pennsylvania, you'll see that they move mountains all the time. So what on earth are we talking about? So I don't think it's, I don't think it's impossible to talk about great faith because clearly there's a hierarchy there and some are greater than others. Yeah. I've also seen some people have great faith in some things and no faith in other ways. So life with us is, is like that. If so, do you think that those who have more faith experience God's grace and influence on a deeper level? Again, it's greater, lesser, deeper, shallow. All of these are comparisons and we use them and they're helpful. And they tell us things, but so let's use a story from the Bible. Shall we? Pastors should do that. Elijah had faith enough to go toe to toe with Ahab and Jezebel and have a showdown on Mount Carmel and not only best, but slaughter the prophets of Baal. And Jezebel utters an oath that she wants him dead and he runs and hides like a kitten. Did Elijah have faith? Yeah. Did he have great faith? Yeah. Greater than mine. Probably, most definitely. Yeah. He got scared and ran. So the kind of faith that we want is durable, wise, courageous. Some people have great faith, but it's not very courageous. Well, how can that be? Well, it gets expressed in different ways. So it's complex, deeper level, same issues. Again, it's not bad to talk about. It's not bad to strive for it. It's not bad to think about, but it's really complex. And you know, there's, we have these celebrity Christians with major celebrity falls. So Ravi Zacharias had a sex problem. Does that mean that all of his books are trash? No. Does that mean he doesn't make good points? No. Does it mean he didn't have any faith? I don't know. I never knew the man personally, personally, probably not. We're complex that way. So Peter denies Christ and Judas betrays him and Judas is lost, but Peter restored Peter and Paul have a confrontation. Who's greater, Peter or Paul? How on earth can you answer a question like that? Greater in terms of writing New Testament books, Paul greater in terms of planting churches in the early church, probably Paul. We don't know is Rome or Philippi greater. Well, Rome had more people, Rome had more status, Rome had more influence. But if you're from Philippi, Philippi might be greater for you. World is complex that way. Paul, if Christian started being persecuted in the U S right now, how would that change us denomination a landscape? Well, first of all, you have to figure out what you mean by persecuted. I mean, if they started their places in the first of all, a lot of the persecution in the Roman empire was sporadic and local. So let's say here in California, the mayor of Sacramento decides that living stones, Christian reform church with its mouthy pastor and it's motorcycle riding technology guy is too big of a threat. And so they're going to lock me up for, I don't know, what would they lock us up for? Good looks maybe. Yeah, that's it. That's it. Um, I think you'd be hard pressed in certain parts of the country to lock Christians up for being Christians because most of the cops and the people who would have to do the locking up are Christians too. So that's part of good being in a major population group. Um, we've already seen that changes in, in culture have brought Protestants and Catholics and Orthodox together. Politics works that way. Make strange coalition sometimes. So yeah, persecution in the U S it would look a certain way, but you know, there's a lot of question about would let's say Christian colleges losing access to the federal student aid program because they didn't support new sexual norms in society with that be persecution. Hillsdale decided to opt out of the programs completely so as to not have to deal with it. Yeah. So it's complex stuff. All right. Chad, the alcoholic. I want to see a rom-com where Dutch American liberal pastor of receding church becomes somewhat of an internet celebrity. I'm a married man and see the relationships with the homeless living on the church property and his home life. Something like 1990s home improvement. How do we get this project off the ground? It could be called living stones. I don't know who we're going to cast for Pamela Anderson, Rick. We don't have, do I have anyone around here that looks like Pam Anderson? All right, Paul, what do you think about representing hierarchies as mountains on a landscape? Each skill or domain or outcome is a mountain in the range. Oh, that's pretty cool. Few mountains exist in isolation, usually only eruptive volcanic formations. And so that with the metaphor where you will, there are different mountains at different heights in three dimensions for if you include seasonal variations in time. So are people differentially skilled in groups of people too? So a person is also a mountain range on one topographic plane level, representing their varying skills and identities united in the person on the other communal or skill group plane, they represent a mountain relative to other mountains in the range, united by the pattern skill. Together, they may combine their various skills to support an ecosystem, to embody a telos. What matters as much as the relative heights is the ranges, coherence, capacity to embody a living telos, maintain an ecology and time. That's really cool. Thanks Noah. That's a great, that's a great image. Yeah, that's pretty good. I think it's good to have awareness. We have to use language of comparison. Again, and I think this goes all the way down to consciousness. Consciousness is monofocal. The monofocality of consciousness begets dualities, A or B. Yes, no true false, but out there in the world, there's so much. Beavers are greater than Jackrabbits. Well, they're better swimmers. They weigh more. They're better dam builders. Jackrabbits are greater than Beavers and other things. How can we compare Beavers and Jackrabbits? So no, that's, that's. It's the language we have and it's the best we can do. So men and women are equal. Well, equal under the law. Well, what do we mean by that? And again, that David French video with us, so Robbie, you forget his name. He's an interesting guy too, but that was a good video. Cause David French actually laid a bunch of things out fairly well. He's, he's a smart guy. I know he gets it. He's a smart guy. He's a smart guy. He's a smart guy. He's a smart guy. He's a smart guy. He's a smart guy. He's a smart guy. I know he gets a lot of crap, but, um, yeah. And that's, that's part of the problem with our system. David French bad, Doug Wilson, good. Doug Wilson bad, Sam Harris, good Sam Harris bad, Jordan Peterson, good. Consciousness is monofocal. We create dualities. We want to compare Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris. Kermit is greater than the count. Say more higher definition. Let's have a better conversation. So anyway, Oh, Andrea had to leave. I, you know, I was going to make a very special effort this week to not just. Duck out and run away. But, um, Andrea, I guess did that already because she expressed her disappointment. So anyway, Rick, I guess, uh, that's it for the show this week. I've answered all the questions. We'll see if there are questions next week. Um, but yeah, but yeah, but yeah, but yeah, but yeah, but yeah, porky pig. That's all folks. You can end transmission.