https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Qk0EsovF7Ts

 Hi, this is Paul. Now that I'm back and sort of settled in, there's some things that came up over the summer that I want to take some time to deal with. It was difficult to take time over the summer to deal with these things given my travel schedule. And, you know, my, this is, YouTubing is not my primary job. My primary job is being a pastor of Living Stones and so YouTubing sort of comes second. Now this summer I did a lot of estuary work and as some of you complained, the channel wasn't terribly flush with new content this summer and I told you going into it that was the case. But Nathan had made quite a bit of a certain amount of noise complaining about myself, not, especially not addressing some of his concerns and some of his critiques. And so I was delighted to see that he did a video with John Vervecky and it's very much a worthwhile video to watch. And I think, I thought John, I think John was actually the right person to address a lot of Nathan's critiques. And, and then, well, let's, let's just jump into it. And I'll have a few things to say about some of this, but I think John, you know, I, I pretty much, I'm very satisfied with the way John handled things in this video. So there's sort of a unique set of spaces that kind of intersect, I suppose, around you and some of the people, most of my audience will be familiar with people like Paul VanderKlay, I've had a number of conversations with him. And Jordan Peterson, obviously because he's fairly famous now and I do quite a lot of videos about him, so my audience, and you're sort of in those spaces and Jonathan Pigeot as well. But I suppose you're, even though you're kind of broadly, I don't know if you would self identify as being kind of like an intellectual dark web type thinker or something like that. And you can tell me if you, if you self identify that way. So yeah, I won't put that label on you then, but I'd say so. And I think that's, that's helpful to know because John very much doesn't identify that way. Jonathan very much doesn't identify that way. David Fuller called me the pastor of the intellectual dark web. And so I sort of chuckle when I say that. But I think Jonathan's, John I think has some critiques of the movement, especially because the movement became really wrapped up in the culture war in a way that John has very clearly distinguished himself from. John does not get into culture war issues very overtly. I think, I don't know how much of awakening from the meaning crisis Nathan had watched prior to this, but I think a good going through awakening from the meaning crisis, even though it's a big assignment, it's 51 hour videos. I get that. But if you really want to get a sense of John Vervecky and the project that he's on, the videos are out there. It's a lot of, it's a matter of doing the homework. And so even though John is a, you know, was a colleague with Jordan and has known him for years and Jonathan Bejeaux is a personal friend with Jordan and has known him for years and both of them continue to collaborate with Jordan on a variety of projects, the truth is that when it comes especially to let's say culture war politics, John, Jonathan and myself are all really quite distinct from each other and in many ways from Jordan. Part of what makes this, what we call this little corner and you know, somebody on the last video said, Paul says that in about every video. Yeah, because we haven't, we don't have another name for it. And I didn't come up with the name. Savilla King came up with the name, but that's the name we're using because it's the only name we have right now. But this little corner has never been about politics or political agreement. This little corner has not even been about social agreement. If we were to talk about, let's say how we stand on social practices, myself and Jonathan and John, you would find three different positions on whole ranges of things. It's also true that amongst the four of us, if we're going to include Jordan Peterson, I'm the only American. The other three are Canadians and Nathan is from the UK. And so when it comes, you know, because American politics tends to be this maw that sort of sucks everything in, I'm the only one that votes in American elections. And you know, plenty of people around my channel have plenty of thoughts about the way I conduct myself with respect to politics. And the truth is, there you have it. So, yeah, none of us so much in the IDW, except perhaps me, just because David Fuller sort of brought me in in a joke as the pastor of the IDW. Some of your ideas are sort of appealing to people who are in those communities, maybe you accept that much. And I suppose from my point of view, I'm kind of at the heart of the caricature boogie man, because I'm like a reductive naturalist and a postmodernist and all these horrible things that mean that my life is meaningless and that I kill babies and eat them and stuff like that. So I thought this conversation could be interesting, just from the point of view of, you know, I'm someone who kind of adopts, I suppose, very different positions to yourself. But I also sort of think that I do understand a lot of your ideas. And I guess I've not seen a lot of conversations with people who, like, you know, really take the opposite position to yourself. I've seen lots of conversations with people who sort of are broadly accepting of lots of these ideas. But I don't know if you wanted to just comment on my initial thoughts there, maybe. I know it's not much of a question, but just to give you some space. No, no, no. I mean, I think it's fair. I mean, in some ways, I think you're right. But in other ways, I find that I'm often talking across significant divides. I'm talking to people who are committed Christians, and I'm not. Or I'm talking to people who are Jews and Muslims, and I'm not. Even talking to Buddhists, and I don't identify that way. So I often am getting pushback from people having sort of established worldviews that I want to challenge. Do I get about broadly challenges around some of, I guess, the cognitive scientific things I'm saying? Not so much on the YouTube, but of course I get it in my professional work. I get it. I mean, I have to go through the peer review process. I have to present at conferences. I just came back from one and take the difficult questions. So that's a bit of a disjunct for me. There's a bit of a difference between the interactions I have in what you might call my professional world and the interactions I have on YouTube. But part of that is also I'm trying to do a lot of experimentation with this medium, and I'm trying to get out. I'm not precluding anything we want to engage into here, but I'm trying to get out of the sort of people yelling at each other and listening that is chewing up YouTube. And as far as I can see, to no good purpose. So entertaining. Yes. And I think right there is noting some people find it entertaining. This point that he makes about that John, Jonathan and I, and Jordan, Jordan does a lot of talking with reductive materialists. He's had significant conversations with Sam Harris. He's had significant conversations with Steven Pinker. He regularly talks to people who are reductive materialists. And there's an aspect of Jordan Peterson that remains a reductive materialist. John himself is a physicalist. John's very clear about that in many of his videos and many of his conversations. But probably one thing that John, Jonathan, Jordan and I all have in common is that we see a lot of the debate type new atheists versus the old atheists versus God people. We see a lot of these kinds of, we've seen a lot of these kinds of videos and we don't think it's going anywhere. And so part of what the three of us try to do when we get together is we try to have productive conversations across different lines and we try to have clarity and charity. And we're not really looking so much to entertain people with the blood sport of winning online battles that seem to go round and round and go nowhere. And I think if you want an example of that, look at my conversation with Vouch. Somebody set that up a number of years ago and Vouch and I had a perfectly lovely conversation. It didn't sort of reduce down into these debates where there's a winner and a loser because I think all of us feel there's not a lot of winning that goes on in that. It's just not a terribly fun or productive game. It helps keep corporate capitalism going and all those wonderful things. But I'm also interested in can this medium serve to give people the kinds of connections that they're hungry for and seeking for. So that's a bit of a difference. But I'm happy. It's also the case that the differences between John, Jonathan and myself are significant. There are significant differences between an orthodox icon carver and a Christian Reformed minister. There are significant differences between a non-theist cognitive scientist and two people who have crunchy Christian faith. Now the overall criticism that we're not spending enough time with reductive materialists, I think as John noted rightly, we live amidst reductive materialists all the time. I just had to open the doors for an Anglican, a Nigerian Anglican church that is using our facility. It would sort of be like criticizing them for not engaging American culture. And I think a lot of those immigrants would say, I live in American culture. I engage American culture all the time. It'd be sort of like telling African Americans that they're avoiding white people. And they would look at them and say, I'm living in the midst of a very white society. Thank you. And so I think that's the thing. I would love to, I enjoy having conversations with secular materialists on issues of faith. I just don't think that the old model of this apologetics debate really goes anywhere. Also to have a good faith discussion with somebody who disagrees with me significantly. Like I say, that's a, that's a, that's a mainstay for me within my academic world. Yeah, I think we sort of agree in goals there because I mean, I certainly find myself with a lot of people who have and de-converted sort of congregating around my channel, you know, and there's a bit of a community of people who regularly come back and maybe, I mean, maybe there's even a sense of people sort of processing a kind of trauma. Like how did I give so many years of my life? Now this, what he's talking about here, you should sort of stick a pin in it and sort of Sam Harris talking, you should sort of stick a pin in this and there's a freedom that they're enjoying of people who have sort of left the church and are deconstructed and whatever language you want to use and there's an enjoyment of being together and I'm not saying they should stop. John's not saying they should stop. Jonathan's not saying they should stop. Part of the American constitution is freedom of association. And I would say you should continue to have conversations amongst yourselves. Now part of what sort of seems to arise later with Nathan in this conversation, but also with some people in my channel is there's this sort of this sort of this overbearing motherly fear of unsupervised people doing things on their own that I'm afraid this will go badly. And this again is a critique I often get of estuary. What if, you know, what if Christians don't win? The big point of a lot of our conversations is that the conversations are not about winning because that framework of winning we believe is counterproductive to the larger and more important aspects of conversation that have to do with community building and truth seeking together. To this thing or, you know, how do I, you know, just unable to kind of leave this thing behind in the past. And so that, you know, like being able to have a community where you can joke about it or look at the apologetics and stuff and go, you know, it gives you that a bit of that meaning and community maybe that. Again, remember what he's saying right here, because that's going to be important a little bit later on in this video. Yeah, I think so. And I mean, I'm speaking from my own experience coming out of that, the deconversion process. You know, it's probably also a factor that I was taught for a long time as a kid, but it took me a long time. And I see it taking a lot of people a long time. They go through sort of different stages. And so I have a lot of sympathy with people that are coming out of a religious framework and struggling to find a reorientation in the world that makes sense for them and makes sense with others for them. So I'm hoping that my interviews and get a couple of. And quite frankly, and I know this bothers some Christians, but that's also a function of for some people what happens in estuary and what some people why some people watch my channel. Some people are, in fact, moving towards faith and some people are moving away from it. And I know now I'm talking more to Christians. A lot of people or some Christians have criticized me because they look at this and say, well, are you facilitating people leaving the faith? And I would say, look, pastorally, it looks like this. What often happens in churches is that people are deconstructing or deconverting quietly sort of out in the background. And the pastor doesn't know it because they're avoiding the pastor. They don't want to talk to the pastor. They're staying away from these issues and they're just sort of doing it with other like minded people or doing it on themselves. And then suddenly they're outside the church realm and they've done all of this processing completely apart from the church. And pastorally, I would far rather have someone come to me and say, pastor, I've got a lot of doubt. I'm wondering if I'm still going to be a Christian. I'm wondering if I want this or not. And I would say, let's talk about it. And I wouldn't say I'm going to talk about it so I can keep you in the fold. Certainly is a motivation in my mind, but it's not within my power to give them faith or take away their faith. It's a little bit more probably to take away their faith if you look at passages about millstones and the bottom of the sea. But as a pastor, I want to be in on those conversations. I want to be there in the room. I want to take I want to have a part of that. And anybody who's watched me at any length in this channel knows I want I don't think it helps for pastors to be sort of mercenary headhunters in conversations like that. They need to be helpful for people going in or going out, but hopefully helpful to say, have you considered this? Have you considered that? And I don't think I'm alone pastorally in this sense. I watched my father do that for years because that's what pastoral care is care of the soul. And often what happens with people is that they might deconstruct out of one particular aspect or area or evolution of their faith. And they might be for a while outside the church only to come back later with a better, more robust, stronger, more real faith. And and as a pastor, my job is to help them move closer to faith and truth in Christ. And so this is part of the reason that I am not overly bothered by the idea that some people are going to listen to Jordan Peterson or be involved in a necessary or listen to my channel and stop going to church. I don't think they're going to get initiated into that by what I'm doing, but I certainly want to at least have a seat at the table as they work their processes or processes in Canada. Cross is sort of too negative, but I do have like a number of criticisms of things that you said from my point of view. And I hope you can see that I'm asking these things because I genuinely disagree and I'm not just trying to make you like I'm not trying to do a gotcha thing or like be comfortable. As long as it's coming in good faith, I'm happy to talk. So I think the first question that I have is sort of from your work and sort of circles around you, people like Paul Van de Klay, a lot of people seem to adopt kind of idiosyncratic uses of language, right? So terms like deologos or relevance realization, things like that. And I personally have struggled with people using these terms. This has been a big part of Nathan's criticism, and he's brought this to me a number of times. And I think John, partly because John part of what John what part of what all of us have done, at least between the three of us. And if we include Jordan, the four of us, we've all had different roles to play in this. And part of what John has done, and we've talked about this quite a bit, is offered a vocabulary that many of us are finding helpful. Now, I remember when I first started engaging John's work, I got a lot of pushback from Christians, you know, Buddhism and cognitive science and a lot of Christians sort of boundary policing with respect to Buddhism. And, you know, why are you talking to him? And for the most part, over the last two, three years, a lot of those people that started out telling me I shouldn't engage John's work or I shouldn't talk to John or I shouldn't do any of this. A lot of those people have come to really value John's work. And this is exactly the kind of dynamic we're looking for. This is exactly the kind of dynamic that we're seeking where we, despite our differences, could have good faith conversations that people find helpful, whether or not in the moment they are crossing one of the boundary lines from one of the different silos or camps into the other. I guess I don't see them doing that much more than the sort of English cognate that we already have, like dialogue, or maybe with relevance realization, it's like, maybe like just focus or paying attention to something like that, right? And anybody who knows John knows that it's almost like filing cabinets are going up in his head because John's got all of this stuff. And I think what John does here in terms of over the last few years, I've really seen John grow in his ability. And I think it's because of YouTube and because of these interactions and because of all of these conversations, he's figured out how to take a lot of these complex ideas that he arrived at in the academy and has written peer reviewed papers on them and scientific journals. But now he's able to sort of. Captulate them in small ways. And I think part of it is, I assume that I'm much more familiar with understanding them because they're not necessarily easy to understand. But I think John's gotten a lot better at explaining them. Maybe you would dispute that if you're using it in like a more technical sense. But those are the ways I broadly see these terms being used. And then I see them because it sounds like you're kind of speaking in a classical language or something that a lot of people in these communities from my point of view, then sort of think that they're saying something quite profound because they're using like a technical sounding term. But they're actually just saying like an ordinary English sentence, like I want to have when they're like, oh, yeah, because we want to have the logos. From my point of view, they're saying like, well, we just want to have conversations. But it's like, but from that point of view, they. Now, now this has been a significant part of Nathan's criticism and on Twitter and on YouTube, Nathan has used words like the exhausting nonsense that is PVK's Christian pseudo profound drivel. And a lot of it has been this criticism that, well, people around are using these words to sort of sound important or feel pseudo scientific or pseudo profound or or something of this nature. And again, I think John takes on all of these aspects and really speaks very clearly. And that now it might it might very well be that a number of us are continuing to try to get up to speed with John's language and are perhaps not using his words in with the technical precision that John is. I'm sure that's the case, because in many ways, John's work, especially for those of us who are not in the academy and we are not cognitive scientists and we don't have all the erudition or education that John has. We're probably sort of like children growing into this language, but the charge against it is that this language is pseudo scientific drivel that is leading people astray. That that's the anxiety that I continue to hear from Nathan, and he's in fact going to articulate this more fully a little bit later in the video. I think they've sort of like said something more and I think that this almost functions like a, you know, like an in-group out-group marker if you've adopted the language versus if you haven't. And now I think that is true. It does function as an in-group out-group marker, but that tends to be inevitable. And there are many such aspects of that. Theologically, churches are full of in-group out-group language. The Academy is full of in-group out-group language. In fact, I think a lot of Nathan's criticism of what's been going on in this little corner of the Internet involves in-group out-group grind, which because he continues to say that you're not you're not dealing with this stuff philosophically. And my response to that is, I'm a pastor. I'm not trying to. But I don't know that it's actually like doing any work in terms of helping people figure something out who are then in the in-group rather than. Okay, so it's not helping the people. He's worried. He's anxious about people on the in-group that it's not helping them. Well, appreciate your generosity of spirit. Appreciate your concern. Is it the case? Well, and part of me would say, well, I think, you know, for the most part, most of our audience is 25 to 40 and on up there. And we appreciate your concern, but we're grown adults and I think we're we're allowed to use language. And just providing like a social function of delineating who's on the in-group and who's in the in-group. Now, remember when I said to stick that pin in something earlier about the social function before he's talking about what he does on his channel as having a valuable social function for people who are de-conferring from Christianity. It's important they have their community. It's important they have together. I bet they have their in-group words. In fact, I know they do. So that social function is OK, but now he is worried about now notice this anxiety again. I pointed it out earlier. So what you see is a recurring pattern sort of it's sort of again sort of this anxious mothering that there's these there's this little corner of the Internet and they're using these in-group words. And there and and maybe they're using them wrong. Someone should come in there and fix them. Really? These are adults here. Yeah, and I wondered what your response to that would be. Just because obviously I think you've coined some of these words and so you perhaps think there's something more going on. Yeah, well, let's do the easier of the two. I mean, relevance realization is an actual published theory about trying to solve a particular problem in the explanation of intelligence, which is how it's not captured by a word like focus or attention because it deals with the very specific problem. How do you get a system to zero in on the relevant information, ignore the irrelevant information without checking all that information and determining that it's irrelevant. And that and so. I think that. The reason why people might be seeming to use it the way you're saying the relevance realization is by you know, I can't control the degree to which people have paid attention to the, you know, the extensive explanation of relevance realization. And you know, and I keep publishing on it. I published in the Journal of Phenomenology and Cognitive Science to two articles this year on relevance realization theory, integrating it with predictive processing, for example. So I think it's a bona fide theory and and therefore using it is is is meant to be an explanatory use. It's trying to explain a central function. Now, it's important here to notice that you have the Department Head of Cognitive Science of University of Toronto explaining to someone who is not a scientist who does not have a PhD in cognitive science about basically this term that has become a term within cognitive science within that discipline that he is published at a high level. Basically to someone who has worked in computer programming is considering to getting an advanced degree in philosophy, but doesn't know cognitive science. It's sort of like someone coming to me and saying, you know, these these weird words that you use like transubstantiation or dispensationalism or. Or superlapsarianism. I hear some people using those words out there and I'm not they might not be using them correctly. And my response would be how much do you understand about transubstantiation, dispensationalism or superlapsarianism? These sort of are sort of technical words in a certain community, but. And of cognition and link that functionality to particular phenomenology like the notion of the way salience is playing out the connections between attention and salience that are not intuitively obvious when you use words like focus. Even the notion of focus is, you know, using a spotlight model of attention, focusing a beam of light that is, you know, actually misleading in powerful ways. And I go into that in the series. And so I'm trying to get people to understand attention, understand salience and understand intelligence with this notion. So I think that is how I respond to the relevance realization. The deal logos is I'm trying to put my finger on these these practices that I've engaged in like circling like empathy circling like Buddhist dialogue in which people are creating a different set of guideposts and normative structures for how the conversation will unfold. Because what they're trying to do is not just converse, not just share information, but they're trying to engage in generating something like a mutual flow state that often puts them into an ability to understand themselves and other people in a more profound way. Just like the flow state within, you know, playing a game of hockey will put you into optimal performance or getting into the flow state while you're in martial arts is conducive to optimal performance. I'm trying to understand what are the conditions and the constraints both within and without that bring that about and why people are like. As far as I can tell independently all around the world creating these communities. Why are they so central? What are they doing in them? That seems to matter. And what seems to matter is this ability to within that shared flow state to get ways of having insight about themselves, their social and emotional relationships to other people, and even their relationship to the world at large. And so I do not think that is conveyed by the word dialogue. And that is what I'm trying to convey with the notion of theologos. And I'm generating a whole new series around it called After Socrates to try and articulate what exactly that process looks like. And so basically what John is doing is essentially what we often do when we want to talk about something, but we want to take the meaning that is sort of close to something else, but a little bit different. And so language has that flexibility. And so if you use that other term, again there is an insider and an outsider aspect to that. If you say dialogue goes to someone who's not been around this little corner of the internet, well they're not going to know what you mean. And this again, if you go back to the Thunder Bay conversations, this is an issue that I have brought up. I brought it up on stage when we had the four speakers with Richard Mondrell, John Ravecki, Jonathan Peugeot, and myself when we start sort of nerding out in our little intramural things to continue to remind. We can use these words, but we're going to have to use them carefully. And again, we're going to have to pay attention to insider and outsider things. This is something I'm very accustomed to in church. I'm very accustomed to in church planting especially. And we often talk about it with respect to Christianese. What do I mean by that? Christianese is not a word, but if I say he's speaking Christianese, you all know what I mean because I'm taking an established word and I'm tweaking it a little bit to add another understanding to it. It's not an illegitimate use of language. It's an important use of language. It has to be used with care, but it is very legitimate, especially when you have sort of a community that is working on something and that mutual working together will develop new language. For example, I've taken some of John's ideas such as the Agent Arena relationship, and I've used that with respect to my God number one and God number two and talked about the agentic God and the arenic God. And what happens when you do the kind of work that we're doing in this little corner of the internet, you will tend to derive new terms and these will be in-house terms. And those are important for the community, sort of has shortcuts with each other. There will be difficult for those outside the community. And yes, there will be social dynamics where some people when they use Christianese, I just had it in the church and my sanctuary a few minutes ago. What Christians do in a social situation when they use these words that are sort of insider words is they reinforce bonds with each other. They reinforce community with each other, which is an important function of those words within the community. It's important in terms of keeping the bonds together. I've watched Democrats do this with each other. I've watched Republicans do this with each other. I see Christians do this with each other. This is a normal and in fact healthy form of using a language and in fact growing a language. Yeah, so maybe just on the first point, because I don't want to talk about too much all at once, I suppose, would be so recently, I don't know how recently it was recorded, but recently released was your interview with Lex Friedman, right? And when you introduced relevance realization with him and in many other places and people who kind of follow your work, like Paul Van der Kley, repeat this as well. People will mention like there's a problem of combinatorial explosion, for example, right? And I guess I kind of take issue with this when so I understand if someone talks about combinatorial explosion in terms of analyzing algorithmic asymptotic complexity or something, right? But I've not actually seen a particular algorithm or problem being introduced that is n factorial and big O n factorial, right? And I don't even know what. Now, this is an area that Nathan has some competence in, I assume, because again, his degree is in computer science and programming. And so he has a degree of math competency. And so now he's using within the sphere of mathematics to try to say, OK, you're talking about this combinatorial explosiveness. I'm not sure this works in my little math coven. And I'll let Bethel deal with that aspect of it if she wants to. And is here in this case. So the idea of there being something that is combinatorially explosive is that you've got this expert dysfunction that's growing, you know, is that n factorial rate. And I don't even know what and is in that case. And I think that there's almost like a metaphor being made to something using language that sounds sort of mathematical and computational. And maybe maybe I'm wrong. And this is just because I've not engaged with the academic literature on the subject and just engage with like the popular stuff. But it seems like a lot of people are using this word to make it sound like they're saying something scientific. But actually, all they're saying is like there's a lot. OK, sound like they're saying scientific. It's not. I don't think you should blame the churches of the world for this bias that we have towards science and truth. A lot of people want to make things sound scientific. And we see this all over the society. And that's because what has developed in our society is this whole idea about science. Follow the science. They tell us with respect to how many sorts of things. And often real scientists will stop and say there's nothing scientific about all this sciencey language out there in the world. And so Nathan's critique is that, oh, we're using this to sound sciency. I'm not really using this to sound sciency at all. Sounding sciency is not my bag. A lot of ways of looking at something. But the actual use of combinatorial explosion there is like mathematically incorrect because there isn't something that's, you know, they might mean maybe there's like a very large number or an infinite number of different ways you could look at something. But there isn't actually something that grows and factorial. Right. And I guess I just take it. I have have a problem with that, because I'm like, why is that very precise, specific piece of mathematical terminology being used? You know, if it if it. So he's the guardian of mathy sounding stuff. Isn't doing that. So maybe maybe it is in the technical literature and you can address that. Yeah. So the term was imported into psychology by Holyoke when he was explaining the work that was taken up by Simon Newell and Simon when he was doing a problem solving and he was giving a standard example, which you may have seen me do about, you know, a search space. And this is how Newell and Simon analyzed problem solving and which you have your initial state, your goal state, and you have all the various options opening up. And, you know, he gave the example of a chess game and where you can calculate the number of alternative pathways you have to seek as, you know, F to the D where F is the number of average moves on any turn and D is the number of turns. And it's 30 to the power of 60, which is larger than the number of atomic particles in the universe. And that's when he he he used the term combinatorially explosive for that. That's how it was used within the problem solving literature, because the idea is any attempt to solve that with finite processing like we have is going to doom you to failure. You can't do any kind of exhaustive search. So the question becomes, how do you select the pathways because you don't have a bird's eye view? How do you zero in on them without checking to see if they're going to lead to your goal state or not? And so this brought up the whole notion of bounded rationality by people like Simon and Newell. And so the notion of the combinatorially explosive space is exactly that notion. I never ever said it was infinite. When people do that, I try to correct them and say sort of indefinitely large things like that. But that's the problem I'm pointing to. And this is still one of the central problems in AGI. Do it how to avoid and you can't do an algorithmic search. AGI is artificial general intelligence. Because most algorithmic searches are going to commit you to a combinatorially explosive search. You're just going to be searching forever and you can't do an arbitrary search. So the issue is how do you get intelligent behavior that's between the arbitrary and the algorithmic? That's what I'm pointing to with relevance realization. And I've used it and Jonathan has used it and Jordan Peterson has used it. And John is right, because this is one thing that is not necessarily obvious to us. And this, in fact, was a lot of what Jordan worked on in his first talk with Sam Harris in Vancouver. That, in fact, we have all of these filters in us that are pre-conscious, that we're not aware of them at all. But we're constantly sorting out the world because the world has too many things and many different kinds of things for us to manage. And that's what we often talk about in terms of combinatorial explosive. When I walk in my office, even my little messy office has too many things for me to focus on. And so when I walk in my office, I focus on things that are salient to me. And I've been talking about communal or communal relevance realization. Because part of what happens, let's say the whole problem of politics right now, that there are way too many political facts for me to ever learn or discover to have time for in my life. I'm not saying there are infinite political facts, but John said it perfectly. There are an indeterminate number of political facts and that number is too much for me to wade through. And so what we do as a collective with collective relevance realization is we deal with the fact that we follow other guides through it. And in fact, as children, this is exactly part of what we learned. We learned from our parents what to pay attention to. Part of the struggle of autism, it seems, is that people are struggling to reduce the world in a way that everyone else is doing the reduction. I've had a fair number, a fair amount of experience with schizophrenics in my work and schizophrenia too seems to be a problem in some way of communal selection. And, you know, to sort of just dismiss all of this as gibberish. OK, you can do that. But it isn't gibberish to me. And I think it's in fact not only observable, but demonstrative and demonstrable to do, which is exactly, I think, what John has been doing. And this again, in terms of the three of us doing different things in terms of our tiny little community relating to one another, John has brought in a realm of really helpful language, information, knowledge. I didn't know all of this stuff and I watched Awaking from the Meaning Crisis and you sit and you think about it. And at first it's sort of hard to understand, but after some time you begin to realize, my goodness, he's right. And it doesn't even stop where he is. And then once you sort of see the concept and see the reality of it, you begin to recognize this all over the place. I recognize it in terms of how Christians read the Bible. I recognize it in terms of the history of interpretation. You see this dynamic, this pattern, and you begin to recognize that there's a tremendous amount of pre-filtering that goes on that somehow we build a new world. That somehow we build into ourselves and then we practice as relevance realization. We do this as individuals and we do it as communities. We do it as a body politic. We do it as a whole number of things. And this again is, I think, part of the reason why a number of us are tremendously excited about John's work and about the fact that he has taken this work that probably would be in scientific journals. And now he has brought it out into broader spaces where a reformed minister and where an Orthodox icon carver can now benefit from this, see relationships in this work with our own areas of work, and then be able to compare notes. And I think that's part of the reason all of us see this as what an amazing gift. But it's not something that's immediately apparent. And it takes effort. It takes time and it takes work to watch 50 hours of awakening from the meaning crisis and listen to the conversations and begin to understand that, okay, you might not like combinatorial explosiveness because it sounds too mathy. You could call it overwhelming complexity. You can have all sorts of different names for it. The difficulty is once you have a group of people that is sort of working together, working on something, they need a common language. And there will be an in-group, out-group aspect to that language. But they need that language in order to actually make progress together. And John is the one who has furnished some of that language. Now, does a reformed minister or an icon carver sometimes use this language in ways that wouldn't be used in the cognitive science academy? I'm sure it happens all the time. But that's the risk that you take when you decide to talk to people outside your discipline. Now, I'm hoping that that's what people are pointing to when they use the phrase, because if that's what they're pointing to, they're pointing to something real and it's central to the question of the nature of intelligence. I guess maybe to make the question more specific, I understand how that applies in modeling an algorithm for playing chess. But I don't understand the bridge between the chess case and the case of my perception. So what the individual bits are mapping to. I mean, what is the algorithm in the case of? You've picked out people to talk to from this little corner of the Internet. Why aren't you seeking out Elon Musk? Why aren't you annoyed by? Well, actually, I was watching him on Twitter and he's annoyed by something else and he was going after that. Where's the filter? You can't engage everything. Some things are more salient than others. This this dynamic that John points out, in fact, runs rough through everything that we do, because as John and Jordan and Jonathan have all noted, to live is to select. And the question is, why are we making the selections we're making? Why are we talking to this person and not that person? Why are we interested in this thing and not that thing? It's in fact, pre-conscious for us. But once you begin to understand this dynamic, you see it all over the place. The idea is anything you're doing. This is, I guess, the main claim you want me to get to. Anything you're doing, any even perceptual act is an act of problem solving. You are trying to you're in some way like even in an initial state and you're trying to look at an object. There's a goal state about trying to look at that object. And there's many different alternative pathways you can engage in. And you could count the number of things you could do in order to move around reorientation. You could open one eye, close another eye. And so I guess what you're asking is, how do you designate the operators? Well, I mean, that's sort of a question you do when you're reflecting on any problem formulation. That's part of the problem. Right. And this is another issue. It's not the same issue as the combinatorial explosion. Many of our problems are ill-defined and we precisely don't know how to how to individuate or designate or select or activate the right operators. What is the right way to look at this object? I mean, what does that mean? What are the operations I should bring in? I can focus my attention. Is this a coaster? Is this a lens cap? I can widen it. I can move closer. I can move farther away. And so, again, it when you try to put that in to a search space, and this is one of the problems, you know, in AI vision and AI categorization, like seeing this as a remote is a terrifically hard problem. It's a very, very hard problem. And we're just. And we say, well, it's not hard for me. That's because you grew up watching people use it as a remote or it was introduced to you like me a little bit later in life when I was always going up to the TV to work the knob. And now suddenly someone sitting back there going like this. It's like, oh, well, that's special. Now getting some machines that are getting closer to being able to see this as something and see it in the right way to use it in the right way. And they they're facing this issue that I'm I'm pointing to. They get into these really huge search spaces, multidimensionality and how to how to reach which it should be compressed, the reach which it should be left uncompressed. These are real issues. And so I see them in the vision research. I see them in the categorization research. So I see the problem that that meta problem is essentially the same. I see that it also in problems around communication about how the conveyances expand much faster than any of the explicit statements, et cetera, et cetera. Now I go over that those converging arguments in awakening from the meeting crisis. And I also was in the paper I published with Tim Lovecraft and Blake Richards in 2012. So John's always got his footnotes. So I guess I'll leave that point just to because there are more points I want to move on to given the time. And I guess another term that's been used and introduced kind of recently are aggregars. And I don't know I don't know how the extent to which you're kind of like advocacy for these things goes. But you want to say if you do kind of advocate for these things or now it's helpful to note that this term came up through rebel wisdom. And it's a term that John and Jonathan had, I think, a really excellent conversation on. And what's interesting is one might say, well, why would this be salient to you? We're not encroaching on any mathy space here or any philosophical space. Now we're dealing really with an enlightenment issue. Or if it's just an idea. So that's problematic for me. Because first of all, I misunderstood the term that was being used. I misheard it in one conversation. I put that in the notes because I do. I published three papers recently that Dan Schiappi talking about the NASA scientists moving the rovers around on Mars. And the basic argument there is there is no one person, there's no one thing that's moving the rover. There's a complex dynamical system. And the equipment that is actually responsible for navigating the rover. And this is very similar to Hutchins famous book Cognition of the Wild, where he made the argument that no one person navigates the ship. It's an entire system of people and the equipment that does the navigation. There's a lot more work going on around this notion. You know, Clark and Chalmers and other people, Gallagher, and the other people. And like I said, the work that I published with Dan arguing that there is a collective intelligence in this kind of distributed cognition. We explicitly argued in the most recent paper we published again in the journal Phenomenology and Cognitive Science that it's and other people are arguing for this, too. But for a notion of we agency that there's something we can do as a group to help us navigate the world. That is more than the sum of all of our individual action. Now, here's another pin to stick in this conversation, because this whole concept of we agency is really going to be vital when Nathan gets to what I think is his central anxiety, which will come quite a bit later. So again, the we agency just remember this spot right here when we get because it's he Nathan's central anxiety, which is sort of the political project anxiety presumes we agency to do the work that they imagine should be done. But he's skeptical about that we agency in sort of the small post enlightened small enlightenment, scientific frame. Paul, of course, has produced sort of some recent mathematical proofs that that is, in fact, the case. So I'm committed to the idea that there is collective intelligence within distributed cognition and that there is a kind of we agency attached to that or that's not the right word. Interwoven with that. But I have consistently resisted attributing subjective consciousness or self awareness to this we agency. And this is another way that John is such an asset in this little conversation, the precision that he is speaking with and using with respect to these issues is so helpful. And it also shows some of the differences to delineate between John Jonathan and myself here. In fact, at times said that, you know, it's in the literature, it's called zombie agency for that reason. And so to the degree to which we're talking about that, I'm, I'm in agreement with people like Jonathan Pagio and Paul Van der Gley. Now, Paul and I differ because Paul thinks it's still an open question whether or not I do think it's an open question. John is it and and John John pays attention and he's got this all really that's that's why it's a little scary to talk to John because sometimes you're talking to him and it's like he knows he knows my argument better than I do. So John's really good at this stuff. These I don't want to call them agregores whether or not these and and in fact, agregores is a term that's used a lot in the history of the world. And and in fact, agregores is a term we sort of got stuck with because it's the term that sort of got brought to us from rebel wisdom. And it's another good example of this isn't the right term. I would probably rather use spirit. Jonathan Pagio might say angel, but that's again, we're kind of stuck with the language that we've got on the table. Distributed cognitive systems are conscious. Now I've said and other people have argued this, you know, famously Chalmers and Clark that the reason why these collectivities don't have consciousness isn't one in principle because you can't make it one in principle or then you wouldn't be able to explain how neurons could give rise to consciousness. It's it's it's but it's one of serious practicalities. I talk about, you know, speed, complexity, density, degree of recursion, etc. That don't exist. And in terms of practicality, this is where if you go to my conversation with John after our two presentations, I'm I look at it as a pastor much more in terms of can we recognize consciousness out there? And John, as a cognitive scientist, is paying a lot more attention to the definition of consciousness. And you can hear that come through in our conversation together. In these entities, these hyper agents that clearly exist in agents that are uncontroversially conscious like you or I or, you know, elephants and chimps. And so I think it is very plausible that we can talk about the intelligent agency of these things, but not attribute to them self-awareness or self-consciousness. Now, when I was just a minute, I'll let you respond, Nathan. It's a long answer because I'm trying to make a nuanced distinction. When I was talking to Jonathan to this and I've talked to him recently about it, there was a place in the dialogue where he actually was very open to the conclusion that maybe they don't have self-awareness. They don't have a sense of self and that they are. They're not centers of subjectivity in any sort of standard notion. And now also watch what John is doing with his language. I mean, even in this time, he's he's differentiating and he's using these terms. And those are really helpful differentiations for someone like me who has not through thought through all of these aspects of consciousness. Now, someone might worry that, well, Paul and John are having conversations and they're unsupervised. And I'd say, well, by what authority ought we to be supervised? Is this really the way we want to conduct ourselves out in the world? That there ought to be a government department of conversational supervision with respect to, well, I both John and I, in fact, live under authorities. There I am supervised in some ways by my church and by my doctrinal tradition. And that's something I keep in the back of my mind. And I can talk about some of these things with a little bit more liberty than John can because John similarly is supervised by his peers and by the academy to which he also has submitted and is dependent. So there's a lot going on with this. But part of the beauty of what's developed in this little corner of the Internet is that we can do this cross discipline. And I have the the structures of accountability to which I am accountable are very different from the ones that John is accountable to. And what this actually does is creates a unique space between us where and again, I think his dia logos idea is really helpful because where I can grow in ways that I'm not impinged on because those aren't my structures of accountability. And this allows me to do some synthesis. And hopefully the same is true for John. And so I thought that's where we had sort of come to and have people in the past perhaps thought of these are related to these collective this collective intelligence within distributed cognition using, you know, mythological terms like gods and angels. I mean, that's a Durkheimian thesis. That's a sort of a well established thesis within anthropology, sociology. I don't think that's an implausible idea. And insofar as Jonathan is talking that people might relate to these things in this mythological fashion. I also find that a plausible premise. That's where the agreement is. Beyond that, I don't agree. And so that's why I'm hesitant to use a certain term. But to be fair to me, I have said all of this in public in these dialogues. Yeah, so that I mean, there's a few avenues that I would like to go down with this. Maybe I can put them on the table and whatever sticks around and sticks around for you. So what one question is just in terms of the theory itself, right? Because I can't I can't necessarily say this for yourself, but certainly in terms of Jonathan and Paul. I mean, they talk about these things. This idea, firstly, in very unclear terms. So they're not they're not being precise, according to me, in clarifying what they're actually committing themselves to philosophically. So whether they're saying I don't know that our primary interest is philosophy and I mean, technical philosophy. So there's one point that that there's a kind of like grounding relation or a relation of fundamentality that as as a pastor, I have to back it up a little bit because I have this thought, too, as a pastor, I deal with this all the time when I sit down with people in church. People talk and they say things. And in the back of my mind, because I'm trained in terms of theological language and the Bible within my tradition and all of these things, there's this little critic in the back of my mind. Shouldn't use that text that way. Shouldn't use that term that way. Shouldn't do this that way. One of the things you learn in time as a pastor is to sort of turn that little voice down a little bit. Because if in the context of this church, I'm always correcting people. Now, this is something that's come up quite often on my channel because I'll have a randos conversation and people will note that. Well, this person said this and this and this and this and you didn't challenge them. This has sort of become a public game because you hear it with you hear it with journalists and interviews that somehow it's not only the job of the journalist to get the ideas of the person out in as clear a way as possible so the person can present themselves in a way that all of us can sort of understand them and their ideas better. It's somehow also the job of the journalist to police the ethics of the ideas that the person is putting out there. I say no. And part of that in the church is that I'm rather sensitive to when and where and how correction whether it's biblical theological or ethical happens in the church space because one of the things that you learn very quickly is that if you're always the editor if you're always the arbiter if you're always the authority what that does is it impedes people from actually doing the kinds of processing that remember the first pin. What Nathan talks about is a little community of deconversion how he finds that so helpful and how I'm not begrudging them their little community instead of being oh I want to be a religious authority and I want to storm through the wall storm through the door of some little deconversion community and then start weighing in. No, I don't want to do that. Why? Because they're human beings, and they have certain rights, and those rights should be respected, and part of those rights or association, and their mind and their thoughts. And so actually, when I'm working, even in the church where the stakes are not conversion or deconversion or any of these things. I'm very patient. I'm very gentle. And I try to let people work on their ideas out there. Could I run in and say that's not reformed. That's not biblical. That's contrary to our tradition, I could, but you know what I don't allow them to do then. I don't allow them to actually begin to get a handle about the language. And so instead what I'll do is I'll try to ask a question that will be productive. And I'll say it this way, and I'll say, Have you thought about this? And what that allows is instead of sort of being the overbearing supervising taskmaster looking to go in and make everything right. Now again, this is something that you learn over years of pastoring because usually when you come out of seminary, that's what people are doing. I was fortunate enough to have a father who was wise and I learned from him a lot of these tricks. I didn't pay it. I didn't think I'd write it down when he do things. I just absorbed it. I just mapped it. But I learned from him very quickly that it's not only an issue whether or not people are correct. It's also an issue in terms of their agency and their desire and their willingness and their community. And so you can run in and sort of chop people down and make sure everything is correct real quick. But what you're going to do is you're going to sacrifice community and agency and growth. And you're also going to sort of give people an idea that we can't talk unless the pastor is here because the pastor is going to tell us all the special words to say and all the secret things to do. No, I don't want that. I want you to grow into Christ. And what that means is I'm going to be gentle and selective in terms of what I address. And you might say, well, pastor, where do you how can you justify that from the Bible? And I do it this way. Say, OK, let's presuppose all of what Christianity has to say about Jesus, that he's the son of God, that he's perfect, that he's all of these things. If you adopt that spirit that I just described of always having to supervise and be on top of everything, is that what Jesus looked like? Can you imagine how busy he would be if every time he saw something wrong? And again, given the delta between our sinfulness and his sinlessness, everything he would see about him would have to be wrong. So what does he practice? You have combinatorial explosiveness of sin all around him. So what does he practice? Wisdom, relevance, realization. I'm going to talk about this and I'm going to talk about this and I'm going to talk about this. I've only got three years of public ministry, but yet his words continue to be interesting and relevant to horizontally cultures around the world and vertically all through time. That's what wisdom is. It's a place where there's something that's more fundamental than other things, that is the aggregate or the distributed collective entity or whatever. Because it sounds like they want to get that, but then sometimes they retreat from that because they want it because, well, to me at least, it seems like they're scared of making that claim or something. Maybe we're a little bit afraid of all the secular reductive materialists around who are going to pull out the Enlightenment Club and beat us with it. And then I think if they do make that claim, then I've never really seen an attempt to actually engage in theory comparison between a theory that postulates, okay, because Johnson likes to say bottom up and top. First of all, I don't even know what he means by theory comparison. Now, I'm sure theory comparison has some meaning perhaps in philosophy or mathematics or programming or something, but it's not a term of art within theology. Bottom up and top down, right? And it's like, okay, well, let's postulate fundamental entities at the top and at the bottom and just compare that to like a reductive naturalist theory or something in terms of, you know, so can both fit the data? I mean, I think both. See, and now what you see coming into is this, okay, but this is all, you know, we want to talk to William Lane Craig about this. And I'd say, go talk to William Lane Craig. See, what he's sort of setting up is all of the atheist Christian debates about some of these technical philosophical things. And again, I'm not going to be a conversational fuss budget and say, oh, you can't talk about that. Go ahead. YouTube bandwidth is free and near limitless. I'm just not that interested in it. I'm much more interested in learning from John and learning from Jonathan and learning from Jordan and trying to figure out how we can talk about these things. There are types of theories that can both fit the data. What type of entities are being postulated? How many different kinds and things like that? And I think that that's where the actual discussion is to be had in theory choice, right, is in actually fleshing out those. And I just. And I'm happy if people want to go around and have their discussion in theory choice. You don't have to invite me. I don't really see that happening. I just see this kind of like loose talk, right, about how there are these things that's given. And therefore, anyone who's a materialist is just some dogmatic weirdo who thinks the world's made up. Well, now we're a little defensive. And billiard balls hitting each other, I think. And that's that's sort of what I hear and get very triggered by. So, yeah, I think that's reasonable, too. There have been multiple points where I pushed back against that. I don't think I mean, even calling it materialism is kind of a misnomer. I think physicalism is a better term for a lot of important reasons, but we can put that aside. I get your point. And it was recorded, so it will show up in public. So I'm not I'm not doing a palming darkness thing. Like at one point, I directly asked both Paul and Jonathan at the conference in Thunder Bay, could these entities exist independently of human beings? Right. Because you can't have it both ways. My answer to that is a very clear no, they can't. And if what you mean by age and I said that and what you mean by angel or demon is they pre-exist or they can exist independently of human agency, then then I'm not agreeing with that. Right. But did you receive a clear answer? Right. My answer is yes, they can. And again, that's why I say and I'm with Lewis on this that we are sort of amphibious creatures. We are both spiritual in a way that my dog is not. And so we participate with other non-human spirits that are out in existence. And I think this is basic Christianity. And to to to not to be surprised that I would say such things again is is sort of like rationality rules getting a little bit surprised when Jonathan said to him quite clearly. I think Jesus walked out of the tomb. I did. I think I think from Jonathan, I got a clear answer. I'm not so sure I got a clear answer from Paul. That's why I gave it. And I don't I don't want to I don't want to criticize people in absentia because I want to also acknowledge I want to put on the table that Paul and Jonathan are also trying to do other things than theory building in these discussions that are just as valuable to them as the project of theory building. And I do respect that. I'm engaged in community building and other things and I know what that's like. And that's an important responsibility. I got a clear answer from Jonathan. Now, I'm hesitant because Jonathan answers. Jonathan's answer was really interesting. And it was not taped because it was after my conversation with John that Jonathan sort of hit that. And there were like new ideas to me. And it's like I've I want to I want to hear more about this from Jonathan. And I want to go through and find where Jonathan talked about that because some of those ideas were really interesting. My memory like yours is is biased. And I'm sure it's engaging in reconstruction right now. It's been a couple of weeks and I've been to one conference in between. But what I remember is that he basically said, no, they can't, which I thought was a really gutsy answer on his part. I don't think that was quite John's answer or Jonathan's answer. I think Jonathan's answer basically asserted that this all runs through the son of man, which I thought was really an interesting answer. And he was trying to come up with and he was presenting an argument. He was trying to come up with this idea. And and and the answer had to do with sort of the in sort of a Colossians one. See, now I'm doing my in-house thing because when I'm referring to Colossians one, probably John and Nathan are, you know, and Jonathan, John says, I'm not a chapter verse guy, but Colossians one is a pretty important passage. And there's a way in which in Colossians one, Paul says all things were made through him, both visible and invisible, that I think Jonathan made an argument that there can be nothing at all is mediated by humanity. But it's I don't think it's in the same way that John and Nathan are saying in a more emergent sense that this stuff comes from us, because I think Jonathan would say it comes down to us by not only the logos, but the pre incarnate Christ as foundational to the universe that we participate in. That was my understanding of something like not particular human beings, but something like humanity in general. He was invoking the medieval concept from Eastern Orthodoxy, sort of Anthropos, right, as somehow the entity that was responsible for the creation of these. And so I need to know more about that. And he has promised that he and I will talk more about that. We were supposed to do a conversation about we ended up talking about something else. So what I can say to you is he answered no. He realizes the problem for a sort of standard Christian metaphysics. He's trying to introduce something from the tradition that he thinks can serve as an intermediary or bridging. And so in that sense, I see him moving in response to the question. I need more from what he means by this. I've only seen one talk and I have asked him to talk to me about it. And so that's as much as I can say. I got I don't know if you'd consider it, Nathan, a clear answer, but I it was a responsible attempt to become clearer and more definitive, recognize the problem of the commitment to certain claims and trying to respond to them. And I thought that was a good move on his part. Yeah, I mean, I think you sort of obviously treating him very, very fairly in how you kind of analysis analyzing his response and stuff. I think this this sort of ties into what another one of my questions with with respect to a gringoire's. So, I mean, I got a clip, but I don't think it's worth playing. I think you'll you'll trust my word for it. But again, you know, I could I could be slightly wrong. I will work for it. Again, a gringoire's is not a term that any of the three of us would would prefer. But what we're talking about are non human distributed agents or and or spiritual entities that are not dependent or reliant on human beings. I think you're an honest person, Nathan. I'm not I'm not getting any. We try to be well as as do I. So so please continue. So so it's just where in a conversation with Jonathan, where he basically says something to the effect of, you know, like, I'm really happy with your work, John, because it provides us with the scientific language with which to describe these things that the Medieval's were talking about. And so on or something like that. Yes. Yes. And then I think from my point of view, there's something sort of troubling and worrying about that, because I think I think Jonathan does have a lot of like harmful and false supernatural beliefs where he will attribute. Okay, this, I think we're coming to the anxiety that Nathan really has. Demon possession to basically people who he disagrees with politically or perhaps like ethically or morally and things like that. And there's a similar. This is specifically with. Because now I would assume that Nathan's larger worldview agenda, given the materialism that he self described with is in fact to banish all such things as superstition. And I think what he's basically coming to is the rather common atheist complaint about Jordan Peterson and now the three of us that somehow and I guess John Vervecky because he's now John is not an atheist. He's a non theist and he'll have and he's a physicalist that John you're giving aid and comfort to these people who are the problem. And that would be the religious. Now, again, we're sort of triggering the whole atheist Christian YouTube space that was so hot and heavy about a decade ago, but has in fact been diminishing and you know you can even you'll hear that from someone like Justin Briarley, who in some ways built a career on this kind of debate. And again, none of the three of us came up with Egregores. Egregores is a term that has come from a different place. But again, it's sort of the language that we were given by just the way it came into us. Should just be viewed as sort of superstitious beliefs that should be rejected from my point of view. Should, should, should, should, should. Okay, we all get to have shoulds, but we should own them. Should. But it would also be maybe that there's a sense of, well, yeah, we're having like a really deep conversation that marries together theology and cognitive science and stuff like that. And this is something that happens with Peterson as well. But the problem is, I think, with some of these ideas that were okay. Now we've provided some of these people with a scientific vocabulary, but where the rubber hits the road with these ideas. We've provided some of these people like Paul and Jonathan, we've given them science. Now they're going to go out and, you know, every fifth grader out there has learned to use the science word to justify whatever they want. This isn't, this isn't new to us. But again, we're back to you're giving aid and comfort to the kind of superstitious people that should be put away and shouldn't be given a platform. The other side of having the interesting conversation at the intersection of subjects is often like ideas like Christian nationalism, you know, like the being anti climate change, people making the decision to like vote for Donald Trump again in the US maybe or, you know, not to make positive. Is he worried about who I'm going to vote for? Because I'm the only one that gets to vote in American elections. None of the rest of y'all do. Not you all the audience, but John doesn't, Jonathan doesn't, Jordan doesn't, Nathan doesn't. They're, they're helping Republicans. This is what we're going to worry about. I haven't seen any of the three of us. And again, this is a way in which we're sort of distinct from Jordan. None of the three of us have seen this at all as our primary emphasis. But here's the anxiety. And this is where really you get the worldview. And this is what I hear. I hear critics on one side of me. I hear critics on another side of me that, oh, Paul is deviating from the party line. And the real agenda is again, now remember that one pin I said about earlier on, sort of the agency in terms of a distributed agency. That is exactly what this is about. It's about distributed agency. If we can somehow shut up all of the people, don't, don't let those people get together in whatever rallies or whatever conversations or we're going to have to close the pubs. We're going to have to close the churches. We're going to have to, you know, go to East Germany and have us all listening and make sure that nobody's having an unsupervised conversation, lest the dreaded political enemy wins. And I guess the question to you to finally get around to it, because I realize I kind of rambling at that point, is just to say, do you worry that sometimes some of the people you're talking to and some of the ideas that you're talking about, maybe you're not being cautious enough about how they're being deployed by other people? Which obviously it's. And to me, I find this to be exactly the opposite argument, but the same. It's one of these like opposite things of Christians who say these estuary groups. How do we know that there's no heresy going on in them? I'm sure there is. You're going to close down the pubs because there's plenty of heresy going on in them. It was funny in California when they first started trying to close the churches. Well, somehow the strip joints, they had to stay open because they were providing a necessary service, but the churches, no, they should close. Babylon B had a heyday with that one. But again, it's sort of this, this anxious, you know, we have to, we don't, don't encourage those religious people. They might believe in, they might believe in old ideas. And it's our project to make sure those ideas all go away because those ideas were the bad ideas that have hurt us. And now. You can't control what they're going to do with them, but maybe there's a responsibility there for you to be aware of how they're being used. And then if they're being used in these harmful ways to really provide some pushback, you know, to. Harmful ways. We're using Jod's language in harmful ways. Well, that's because I said, as I saw in a comment that someone recently had left a comment and said, well, John, John's John by his language has helped me be a better Christian. Well, I guess that's Nathan's point that John's language is being used in a harmful way. To make sure that doesn't happen. And I think that's a good question and it's a fair question. And I do reflect on it and I do talk to the people that I trust to give me good advice about it. I tend to treat this on a case by case basis. So, for example, Jordan Peterson is a problematic for me. I do not and I publicly said this many times and to him, I do not agree with his political positions and I do not think that people should take whatever impact they have from his insights about myth or mythology to in any way authorize conclusions he's drawing about the political situation in Canada. Now, now part of this gets into the question of, well, how do we engage people that have ideas, maybe it be they political or maybe they have ethical behaviors that that we disagree with. We deal with this all the time in church. Let me just mention John Howard Yoder. John Howard Yoder was an Anabaptist scholar that wrote a very famous book in the 1970s, The Politics of Jesus. And it was a very important book. And I don't think actually, frankly, Nathan would be too upset by the kinds of politics that John Howard Yoder was writing about in that book. But then John Howard Yoder began to be disclosed that John Howard Yoder had some, at least as far as Christians go, inappropriate relationship with women. And how do you square that? Well, this is what we deal with with people all the time. And by the nature that we all seem to be looking for perfect people says something about, I think, how we deal with ideals. And so, again, you don't have to agree with Nathan's politics. You don't have to agree with John's politics. You don't have to agree with my politics. You don't have to agree with Jonathan's politics. And as I said earlier, John's politics and Jonathan's politics and my politics, first of all, we're, you know, we're the three of us are divided at least by a border. And even roughly speaking, if you sort of charted us on a map, you would find politically ways that John and I agree and disagree with Jonathan, ways that Jonathan and I agree and disagree with John. You're going to find that all over the place. And then here's the question. Well, should Jordan Peterson talk politics? And the question of that is, it depends on what he wants to be and do. And I've talked about that plenty on my channel. But it's Jordan is free to talk politics. Jordan is free to have any kind of politics he wants. Part of what it means to live in Western political democracy is you get to have political ideas and you get to talk about them. And if you got a big YouTube channel, you get to promote them. It's just the way it is. You get to have theological and religious ideas and you get to talk about them. And whether you have a small YouTube channel or a big two YouTube channel, you get to talk about them. Guess what? You get to talk about them at home. You get to talk about them in the pub. You get to talk about them in the church. You get to talk about them with your friends. Get to talk about them with your mom and your dad. You get to talk about them anywhere you want to. And what we don't want is East Germany where, you know, everything is bugged and somehow there's sort of a supervisor with all of this. And we also get to have the kinds of associations and modulate our associations in the way that we want to have them. This is what it means to live in a free and open society. And I'm thankful for it. And so, again, some people don't like it that I talk to Jonathan Pigeot. Some people don't like it that I talk to John Vervecky. I have different reasons. Some people don't like it that I do videos on Jordan Peterson. Some people don't like it that I do videos on Jesus. That's the way it goes. And you might not like it and you have a right to not like it. But if that's the complaint, I don't know where you're going to go. And I've been clear on this. You shouldn't do that. I often talk about the two Jordans. And to me, it's analogous on the left with Chomsky. Chomsky gets a lot of credence for some of his political philosophy from his authority as a linguist. And he himself admits there's no clear connection between those two discourses. But that bleed happens there. So it's not just on the right. It also happens on the left. And so I'm very careful around that. Paul and Jonathan, I take them to be and I haven't seen some of the things you're alluding to about Jonathan. So I'll just have to respond from what I've. Jonathan is a deeply conservative guy. He joined the Orthodox Church. I mean, it's it amazes me that people are surprised by by the kinds of ideas that Jonathan would have. But then Jonathan isn't sort of a the stuff gets so nuanced. And again, this isn't the focus of my channel, but. Seen and interacted for them. I feel that there that there is an effort and there's going to be mistakes and there's going to be some sloppiness. But I feel like it's the effort parallel in the in the Middle Ages to somebody like Aquinas or Augustine at the end of antiquity, trying to take the philosophical tradition and the religious traditions and marry them together. And that's a that's a weird process. It's not it's not straight deduction. It's not straight. It's not straight. You know, it's not straight induction. It has some abductive elements in it, too. But there's also the creation of new terms, new concepts. That's why I often use the term that Kerry used for talking about Augustine in his book, the slatton term inventio. It's doing both of these at the same time. And I see. And just to be just to be clear, both Jonathan and Paul were talking about this at the Thunder Bay Conference, that they feel that there's something big happening. And they were even proposing the idea that Christianity may be going through a transformation as radical as that of around the time of Augustine or Aquinas. I think it's probably a little bit easier for me to say that as a Protestant than for Jonathan as orthodox. But no, I agree with that. I think Christianity is it's so difficult because part of the genius of Christianity is there is a genius in Christianity within its fragmentation and the continual existence and in some ways vitality of the orthodox church is in fact an element of that, as is true in the Roman Catholic Church, as is true in certain little pockets and elements of the Protestant Church, that certain things are preserved even past the zeitgeist, the spirit of the age and go into the future. And so there's not only sort of a written record of past belief, but there are still manifestations of living communities that express the the the relationship between the present and the past in their communities. Always idiosyncratically, always with different nuances. But that I think is part of the genius of the church and part of the genius of Christianity and what makes Christianity such a vital religion. Now, I remember one author talking about the fact that at the towards the end of World War One, a lot of people wondered if Islam itself would collapse. And then, of course, there was resurgent Islamism. There is in fact sort of a resurgent Hinduism going on today. And there's, of course, a form of Buddhism that is in the West that I think is distinct probably from Buddhism in the East. And so this is a normal function of religion. But I do believe that I wouldn't be engaged with Jonathan and John and paying attention to Jordan and how many other people that I pay attention to if I didn't believe that it was vitally important for Christians to be conversed with. The other conversations going on in the world today. That's what we're doing now. If you're a secular materialist who has a particular political stance that you have sort of stereotyped the church into somehow this regressive this regressive element that is mean to women and gays. And I don't know what other people you think the church is mean towards and this church should be abolished. Well, you get to have that political posture. Maybe you do. Maybe you don't. I don't know. I don't want us. I don't want a straw man, Nathan, in this. But what I hear coming from him, his chief, his chief complaint, I think, is this political anxiety. And again, I find this mirrored on other sides, sometimes by people in the church also forced at me that, you know, Paul isn't conservative enough. Paul isn't outspoken enough on issues about gays or abortion or how many other issues that are salient to different people in the church. This is natural when you're living in sort of a battleground in a battlefield like this. And part of what I think the church actually prepares you for is to live in a culture war because to one degree or another, culture wars are always alive and well in the church. That was certainly true of the first century in which Paul was working and writing. And it is certainly true today. And I think a good reading of church history shows it has been true all the way through. What I'm not going to do is start to get anxious about people's ability to do what I think we all have to do and need to do, which is think and speak and use language and talk and dialogue and dialogos. Because I think we're living in ages in an age that is is full of change. Now, I don't know if I'm going to be able to get through this whole thing in the time that I have, but I think I've covered most of the issues that I have in terms of I know Nathan was very frustrated that I'm not engaging with his criticism. And so part of the purpose of this video is to engage with his criticism. Now, I did so in a previous video where you're not doing it right. And the political anxiety. And again, these are, I think, his two main objections. And I think I have explained the siloing of disciplines. I understand the inside outside and I went quite a bit of that earlier in this video. And so that was dealt with it. But this other thing is, in fact, sort of the main broad criticism that sort of is put against people who won't stay in their lane. So, Paul, you're a Christian pastor. You shouldn't talk to a non theist. Paul, you're reformed pastor. You shouldn't talk to an icon carver. This kind of argument that somehow I'm giving aid and comfort to iconography and cognitive science, I am simply not going to abide with. I'm not going to do it because I don't see politics as the primary. Concern politics is now religion is always my concern is much more religious. But even then, I'm not going to be a conversational fuss budget and worry that people are talking in an unsupervised way. Not going to do it. I don't do it in my church. I'm not going to do it with estuary. Now, atheist might I can understand atheist anxiety about it in a way better than I can understand Christian anxiety about it because atheist anxiety about it means that everything is just stuck down here at this level. And the future is simply a function of the conversation and the politics and the sociology and all of that. I'm a Christian. I think the future is a function of the providence of God and the power of the Holy Spirit to do the work that he intends to do. So I'm not anxious. Now, if I were an atheist, maybe I'd be more anxious. And I think this gets into the idea that if I were an atheist, I would probably have an increasing measure. My politics be my religion. But part of the reason I think having a vivid religious life can not always because there's plenty of Christians who seem to have their politics as their religion. I will grant you that. But part of this is my religion is primary. I one of the first videos on this channel, I said, and I've said a lot here, so I don't hold anyone, you know, to account to have heard everything I've said. One of the things that I said right away is I'm a religious believer in a political skeptic. I don't put my eggs in the in the political bag. I'm a religious person. And you might not like that about me. And you might decide not to listen to any of my videos because I am a religious person. But I thank God for people like John Vervecky, who, on one hand, is tremendously knowledgeable about my religion and other religions. And he takes it seriously as as a function of of of human reality. And it astounds me the enormous blind side of how many journalistic enterprises and academic enterprises that don't take religion seriously when it's so obviously such a huge and fundamental aspect of human life in the world continually. So I think that's probably enough on this. I, you know, if Nathan wants to talk, I'd be happy to talk with him. But this this anxiety about the religious people are the ones who are not believing in climate change and the ones who are being mean to certain classes of people. There's some degree of truth to that. But the way to address it is to say, well, we're not going to we have to get rid of religion. You know, that new atheist card has been tried and it's going nowhere. And in fact, it's going to continue to go nowhere. And it's certainly in terms of a global perspective, not going anywhere, given the fact that Asia and Africa are increasingly coming under the sway of the major world religions. And what we see in places where major world religions have sort of receded is, in fact, a lot of other chaos where, you know, it used to be that before covid, the anti-vaxxers weren't for the most part religious. They were soccer moms and rather atheist aspects of of of some affluent places like in Marin County, California. So I think, again, look at the word, the work of Clay Rutledge. And who is himself an atheist who has basically made the point that the new atheist posture with respect to, oh, if we can only shut down all of this superstition, then people will be. It just doesn't hold any water. And for that reason, a lot of the air has gone out of this sort of facile atheist Christian debates and the way that it was because many people have come to recognize that. Well, part of it was certainly the the breakdown of the Church of Atheism with Atheism Plus versus some of the stakeholders of atheism, such as Richard Dawkins and and and Sam Harris. And the fact that what we see in the world is that religious type behavior is not simply a function of what in secularity has been tagged as religious belief. It's much more a function of how human beings operate. So, yeah, I think I think that'll do for this. We'll we'll see where this goes. But, you know, I know Nathan wanted to be heard. And so by doing it this way, I've certainly heard him. And I think I've listened to his critiques. I think John was exactly the right person to answer his critiques far more better than I am, because I think in a lot of ways his I mean, even though he's anxious about the religious beliefs of Jonathan and myself, you're just maybe just going to have to write us off as religious kooks. Now, maybe you do that. Maybe you don't. It's fine either way. I will continue to be the person that I am and I'll continue probably to annoy both Christians and non-Christians with a bunch of the things I do. So and I have other Christians and non-Christians who enjoy the things I do. So I'm not defensive about it. But I think I think these have been the critiques. And that's my answer to them.