https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A9qikTmWf8c

 There we go. Hi, this is Paul. And Zoom just stumbled, but now seems to have recovered. Today we have an anticipated meeting. I'm going to make a little opening statement before we jump into this. I don't think we'll have any problem. Both of these men are very able talkers, and so we won't have any trouble filling up our time. Part of how this arose is I watched Jordan's conversation with Jonathan Paget. And it was also during the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis series that I was doing sporadic commentaries on some of the episodes. And the Luther episode really caught my attention. And I also thought that there needed to be a lot more definition in terms of—I thought I heard a lot of Calvinism and Lutheranism. And so I thought—once I heard Jordan talk to Jonathan, I really enjoyed Jordan's conversation with Jonathan Paget. And so then I contacted Jordan and John Brevecky and said, you know, you guys should talk. But that was late in the spring, and both John and I had very chaotic summers. And so it really didn't come about. And then Jordan contacted me a couple of months ago and said, you know, this never happened. Why don't you and I talk? And so then we did that conversation, which is on my channel. And then we've had some videos going back and forth. And so to actually have some dialogos, I thought, you know, it would be great if we would—if the three of us would talk together, and both John and Jordan agreed. Nice to do it on a neutral channel. I don't see a big risk of conflict here. I've watched all of the videos passing back and forth. And while there certainly can be an interesting conversation had about who was Martin Luther and, let's say, the search for the historical Luther. And there are also really big questions about how individual leaders participate in vast historical movements. And we can certainly talk about the fact that a lot of what was swirling around Luther, you know, was stuff that was happening far more broadly. And so you have always this question with historical debates, to what degree is the man responsible or the movement responsible? And that's a question that is seldom ever answered, I think. And I've had very similar things in my past with Richard Muller taught. He led the PhD program at Calvin Seminary. I wasn't in the PhD program, but Nathan—oh, I can't remember his name—went to the PhD program at Calvin Seminary and then went orthodox. I've had a couple of conversations with him. But he went to Westminster and wrote a rather famous paper at this point, was Calvin a Calvinist. Because part of what happens with a lot of these movements, Luther wouldn't like it, that there's an offshoot of the church named Lutheranism. Calvin wouldn't like it. There's a tradition named Calvinism, but usually these movements are named by their enemies and the name stick. And so we're sort of stuck with those titles. So having listened to both of these men, I've listened to more of John works than Jordan's work. But I also recommend a video that Jordan made recently with Gavin Ortland—does that get his name right?—on Protestantism. And I made a little video on Big P versus Little P Protestantism because what I appreciate about both of these men and what I think they actually have in common is a desire to wrestle significantly with modernity and what that has done in the church, what that has done far beyond the church. Both of these men are deeply interested in recovering resources from the past that in many ways have sort of been pushed to the side in the haste of modernity. And I think also what perhaps I've heard both Gavin and Jordan express in various videos their frustration in sort of watching the Jordan Peterson phenomenon and then watching the development with John and Jonathan Peugeot and feeling, where are the Protestants in this conversation? Now I always say, well, we've got at least one of them here because I am most decidedly a Protestant. But I think their point is that a lot of this does focus around issues that brought Protestantism, both Big P and Little P, into the fore. And I think there is within many Protestants a desire to address many of these same issues that Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot, and John Vervecky are addressing. We, I think, sometimes have a little bit more difficulty because we are a little bit bound into internal conflicts within both Big P and Little P Protestantism on these matters. So my position has always been sort of between John Vervecky's nontheism and Jonathan Peugeot's orthodoxy. I've sort of been in the middle saying, yeah, I don't think the Protestant Reformation was really avoidable. And I think actually a lot of the scholarship written by Roman Catholics and some Protestants on that period in time notes that what we call the Protestant Reformation, usually focusing on Luther, is really a whole wave coming through of many different reformations, including the Counter-Reformation. So I wanted to say that if some of you are anticipating a YouTube drive, you know, big battle between these two, was Luther a good guy, yes or no, I don't think that's going to happen. And so I wanted to set the table. And I think these two are now going to really have a very fruitful and, in my opinion, much more interesting conversation, not just on debating Luther, but on, okay, how can we wrestle with what's really happened over the last 500 years? And really with an eye towards how do we move forward together? So there's my opening statement. So I'll leave it to either of you to offer an opening statement, and then we'll see where we want to start. I will make an opening statement. I'll just make a couple of qualifying things. I do not want to get involved in sort of inter-denominational conflict. I'm not competent, and I'm not desirous of that. So I won't be, I sort of, I will refuse to get involved that way. I am happy to talk about Christianity and Protestantism, but I don't, you know, I don't, I don't have the competence to do that, nor do I have the desire. The other thing is, I've already admitted in my video that, you know, that in some ways I may have villainized Luther unfairly, and I've tried to take responsibility for that and offer both an apology and an amends, and the ways in which I've tried to correct that. And so I'm not, I'm also not interested in either villainizing him or, I don't know what, raising him on a pedestal or something like that. I'm much more interested in the questions you brought up, and the stuff that I'm interested in is, like for example, Jordan, in your book, The Truth and Good and the Beautiful, you have an analysis that is remarkably similar, I think in important ways. There's differences. I'm not saying it's identical, but yeah, no, I think they are very, very similar, and I've noticed that listening to some of your lectures that I have. It seems like you certainly have some overlapping areas of interest and and overlapping criticisms of modernity as well. Yeah, and so I'm really interested in trying to draw them out, and I'm interested in, and you make some very powerful claims, and I'm not denying them, but you know, Luther's connection to his preference for Plato over Aristotle, and of course, that's consonant with the shift that's also happening in the Scientific Revolution. Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler are prioritizing Plato over Aristotle, and that's why math, as Heidegger argues, becomes the quintessential feature of modern science and why it's completely absent from Aristotelian science. So there's part of this overall general move, and so I'm really interested in talking to you about that, and maybe an opening question is, what do you, and I agree with Paul, I want to really welcome the Protestants to this discussion. You've convinced me that you have something important to say. Well, I appreciate that. Right. I want to start by, what do you think the possible relationship is to the, I'll call it the Platonic, Neoplatonic, because I want to do the whole art, that whole tradition. What is the proper relation? Is it recoverable? And then, you know, and I'm talking to other people, like from the different traditions, Eastern Orthodox tradition, about Christianity's relationship to Neoplatonism. Bishop likes to talk about the transfiguration of Neoplatonism within Christianity, which is, and so those are the things I really, and I'm really talking in depth with him about, I want to understand that better, and when, you know, and feel free to, you know, indicate why you think, or how you think, why and how you think Protestantism can say something new or relevant or something that may have been backgrounded that should be foregrounded, etc. Is that a fair enough opening gesture? Yeah, yeah, no, I think that sounds good. So, for the record, my dissertation was written on the topic of the philosophy of Luther and then the next century of Lutherans, and what I'm trying to do, what I was trying to do in my dissertation, which is now published as the first of a series of books, is trying to counter a narrative that you often find in, that really develops in some post-Contean thinkers in the late 19th century, in the way that they interpret Luther and then Protestantism as a whole. So, this goes beyond just the figure of Luther, which essentially says that the Reformation in and of itself was a rejection of classical philosophy, and even a rejection of metaphysics altogether. So, my argument has been that that's just not the case, and my argument is not just from Luther. I'm not primarily really a Luther scholar. I love Luther, but my interest is really more so in the next generations, largely the 17th century, among Protestants, and that would include, as Paul mentioned, Richard Muller, who's a scholar at Calvin, who's done all this work on the Reformed tradition, is both the Lutheran and Reformed traditions were very much indebted to the Greek philosophical traditions. Now, they differ on certain points, and obviously some figures lean more toward Plato, more toward Aristotle, and in other ways, but generally, when you're talking about like a classical realist philosophy of the ancient Greeks, there was a pretty high evaluation of those thinkers, and there was also a pretty heavy utilization of someone like a Thomas Aquinas among those thinkers. So, when I see a lot of people who are kind of encountering the crisis that we're facing today, which obviously we're all in recognition, that's why this conversation is happening, is because we're at a moment of crisis, culturally in many ways, and I see a lot of the Christians moving into the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox traditions, and I have some of the same sympathies that they do, but I want to say that the broader Christian tradition, beyond just those movements, also have a lot of the same concerns in terms of tradition. We obviously have a somewhat different view of tradition. What I would say maybe is the uniqueness about Protestantism, and this comes from a, the phrase that I often use, it comes from a guy named Charles Krauth, he's a 19th century American Lutheran theologian, and he uses, he has a book called The Conservative Reformation, and in that book, he distinguishes between different approaches to change in the church, and I think that you can take this principle much more broadly than just the church, but theologically, he speaks about kind of a traditionalism, which he identifies with Rome, which tends to say, because it's older, it's probably better, and then you have a kind of radicalism, which he identifies with some of the more radical wing of the Reformation, which says that which is new is better, kind of throw out the past, remove tradition, and what he defends is what he calls the conservative Reformation, which is an approach that says that we retain the past, we retain our traditions, we see ourselves as in union with the church as it has been, but we are also open to change to some degree, but that change happens, I think, slowly, carefully, and we don't just kind of throw it out and go back to the text of scripture as a source that is totally isolated from the rest of the history and traditions that developed around it, or throwing out interpretive communities altogether. We're just saying the interpretive community is fallible, not infallible, which is kind of where the difference would be. So I would see that as, in some ways, parallel to, say, the development of conservatism and, say, politics with someone like Edmund Burke, who would say that there is, just as Westerners are people in general, we all have traditions, we are not born as isolated individuals, but we're born into communities, we're born into communities that have views of morality and truth and ritual and all of those kinds of things, and there is a process of change. This doesn't mean we have to be stuck in the past, but you don't do this by kind of overthrowing the past. So my argument there would be, I think, that the approach that you find, especially within the Lutheran Reformers, of both conserving but also being open to reform is, in my view, something that speaks beyond even just the church into some of these broader cultural conversations where we're saying, what is our relationship to the past, specifically the classical sources? So is the idea then that Protestantism is proposing some kind of reciprocal, reconstructive relationship between the tradition and what's going on? Like, you learn from the past, but you're willing to critique the past as well? I'm trying to get clear about what does that mean in sort of philosophical practice. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, so that's what I would say. I think that there obviously have to be some kind of primary commitments that kind of underlie our belief systems. So what I'm not saying is everything is open to kind of throwing it out or changing. So to me, the kind of underlying principles would be really a classical realism, classical metaphysics. So some of the the foundations in Plato, but also in Aristotle, and we could talk about the relationship between Plato and Aristotle. I'd like to. Yeah, yeah, we should. But I think when we're talking about a classical realism, especially as opposed to like a more nominalist approach. Yes, yes, I agree with that. I mean, that tends to be my, I tend to see modernity going off the rails first there. I do too. I argue that. I argue that with Gotham and with a little bit more with Scottis. It's not Scottis. It's not so much the nominalism. It's the unifocosity of being a flat, a flattened ontology that I think was very problematic. I think I agree with you totally on that. And then you also see Descartes as a pivotal figure. Absolutely, yes. The way I do too. So I'm really interested in it. So I'll say something, and it's not meant to be brusque. It might be a little bit stark. I attended many different Protestant churches, some of them Lutheran, conservative and liberal, and attended them for long periods. And it's hard for me to see this in what I saw in those churches. I don't see the Platonism. I don't see the Neoplatonism. And this isn't even an argument. I'm making a statement and I'm trying to provoke you. Where it's easy for me to see it when I walk into an Eastern Orthodox church. It's literally on the walls. They're using these Greek terms. They invoke the noose as an important part of their ideas about salvation. It's dripping in this stuff in a powerful way. And I see that. I never heard this at all in any of these churches I attended and belonged to. And so I'm not denying what you're saying. I'm asking you, how do you respond to that? One easy thing I could say is, well, the reason why people go to the Eastern Orthodox rather than to a Protestant church is because it's not just talked about propositionally in theology. It's exemplified non-propositionally in the art, in the symbolism, et cetera. Yeah, and it should be. And I think you're absolutely right. I reject the idea that, and no offense, Paul, with your Calvinist background, but Oh, it's going to be like this. Yeah. Now we're just going to pile on you for Calvinist. No, coming from a Calvinist background, I very much, which is why in some ways I really, I align with a lot of the people who have converted to say Eastern Orthodoxy. And that I had a lot of similar concerns. And from a more Calvinistic background, to the Presbyterian church that I was involved in, the theology was very much propositional. But I think that the focus of the service was very much on a sermon, which was really a theological lecture in a lot of ways. And I enjoy a good theological lecture, but it really just engaged the mind and it didn't really engage the body in the same kind of way. And I think some of it is I was lucky enough to have my first Lutheran church experience be in a very highly liturgical congregation that was, I mean, very similar in a lot of ways to what you'd experience at a Roman Catholic mass, just without the merit in prayers and some of the other things, but the wearing of vestments and you kneel and you stand and your body is engaged. So I would also say that in your experience, unfortunately, that's the experience a lot of people have. Yeah. Okay. Thank you for that. So I think you're right. And I know my project is a bit controversial even among Lutherans. I certainly have some who vehemently disagree with my interpretation of Luther and Lutheranism. So I'll just be blunt about that. Well, that makes me want to even more talk to you then. So, okay. Yeah, I tend to think that the last about 100 years of Lutheran theology has really devolved philosophically. And what led to the writing of my dissertation, when I came into Lutheranism, I was a college student and I was just reading theology books all the time. And I would get these like old Lutheran books out of the library and reformed books. And I was trying to decide like where I wanted to end up theologically. And I did go visit the local Eastern Orthodox Church. And so as I was reading, I was really reading a lot of 17th century through late 19th century sources. And I fell in love with the theology and way that these people approached their faith. But as I started it, and that's what convinced me of Lutheranism. As I started attending a Lutheran church, it was a wonderful congregation, but I started reading some more contemporary works. And I realized that the theology and practices that I was reading there were very different from what I had encountered and what had really brought my interest within the Lutheran tradition. Particularly, it was the notion of a union with Christ. And I'm talking about a participatory ontological union. Okay, very interesting. Just to drop briefly, where's the bifurcation point? Like where does it go? Where does it go from what you said there's a pivot point at which it moves away and loses touch. Where's that happening and why did it happen? Yeah, I tend to see the real key figure is Albert Ritchell there. And Ritchell, 19th century, probably the second most important figure in Protestant liberalism after Schleiermacher. And Ritchell was very much a Kantian. And Ritchell engaged in a Luther study. And he wrote these two volumes on the Doctrine of Justification. But essentially, he read Luther in a very Kantian context. And particularly, and this work has been, I'm not the one who discovered this, it's some Finnish scholars that have started writing on this, that they discovered when Ritchell started talking, reading texts where Luther talks about union with Christ. So he says, for example, in his Galatians commentary, that Christ is present in faith. There's this ontological union that the believer has with Christ. He started to see that union as a union of moral wills. My moral will is aligned with Jesus's external moral will. So any participatory metaphysic is gone in that. Of course, of his Kantian framework, it has to be gone. Exactly. So then Ritchell becomes really the founding figure for what is called the Luther Renaissance in the beginning of the 20th century. And the Luther Renaissance, Carl Hull was a major figure there and some others. But that ended up really being probably the definitive group of scholars in terms of influencing Luther scholarship throughout the 20th century. Okay, so there's the short of it. Right. So it's a Kantian turn. Yes. So what does that mean then that most of the churches of today are influenced by that, I want to call it sort of post-Kantian Lutheranism as opposed to the Lutheranism that you're talking about? Am I understanding you correctly? I think it depends. I think it has had a significant impact that post-Kantian kind of Lutheranism. I have seen in recent years a strong turn away from that. So I think that things are starting to shift in the other direction. So I'm not going to say it's the entirety of the Lutheran tradition, but very significant neo-Kantian figures really impacted, they're really the most significant Lutheran theologians of the last century. So the impact has not been small, I'll say. But it hasn't been entire. It's not like every Lutheran seminary or pastor or professor is essentially neo-Kantian, but honestly a large portion of them are at least influenced by it to some extent. So fill me in on the history too then. So other than Bohem, I'm not familiar with any great Protestant mystics, which is another reason why I find a disconnection from the Platonic, neo-Platonic tradition, because the Eastern Orthodox tradition, the Catholic tradition, and they produce a lot of very important mystics. And I don't think it's an exaggeration to say that the neo-Platonism forms a kind of theoretical grammar for them by which they interpret and understand their mystical experiences and try to wed them to their Christian allegiance. So I acknowledge Bohem as a clear counter example, but he seems like the exception to the rule that there aren't great Protestant mystics that make a serious impact on the theology and the practice of Lutheranism. Now, in my end, is that an unfair judgment or is it part of this history that you're talking about? It's an open question. I want to hear what you have to say. Yeah, sure. So I'd say it's somewhat accurate and somewhat not. Okay, so I think to explain that, I would say the Lutheran tradition has always had, this goes back to some of Luther's debates with the Anabaptists, right? Luther was encountering a lot of these figures who were insisting that God was giving them these kind of mystical visions or was telling them that they could set themselves up as a kind of prophets. And so Luther was very cautious and the early Lutherans were of internal experiences in terms of them being some kind of supreme authority. And so the emphasis always was on the external word of God, the external calling, external things rather than the internal. Now, what that doesn't mean though is that the internal experiences don't exist or that they're unimportant. It's just that they have to be relegated to kind of the proper context, I think, within Lutheranism. So, I mean, I could point you to a number of figures who, well, there's a book that was written in the beginning of the 20th century by a guy named Junius Remensteiner called The Lutheran Manual, and he's discussing the differences of Calvinist piety and Lutheran piety. And he defines Lutheran piety as a mystical piety, which is in opposition to the Reformed, which is very interesting. And in more recent years, Lutherans are like any term that's mysticism is we want to kind of move away from that. But I don't think historically that's the case. So I would say that's part of the shift as well. So someone like Johann Gerhard, who's the Lutheran theologian that I- You mentioned him in your book. You mentioned him in your book. Yeah, yes. Yeah. So he has a number of what would be considered kind of more mystical writings, and he even is reliant to some degree on some of those medieval mystics that influence Luther. And I know you mentioned some of these in your talk, the Rhineland mystics, Taler, being a really significant name, Bernard of Clairvaux being another really significant figure. But I would point to someone like Johann Arndt, who his book, True Christianity, was the it was like at the time the best selling Christian book other than the Bible. And this was, at least it was throughout the 17th century and even into the 18th century, where Johann Arndt's True Christianity actually became a textbook at Russian Orthodox seminaries. That's fascinating. Which is such a weird connection. Yeah. But it was very much mystical. So I would say that's even to the point that the Orthodox are reading Arndt. So I would say that the Lutheran tradition, I think, is mystical, but it's more cautiously mystical. It's more cautious in its not wanting to make internal experience the kind of criterion of truth. That's very interesting. So does that do you think that affords Protestantism as you understand it with the resources? I'm very opposed to, I'm very convinced, perhaps I should put it, by new way scholarship on Platonism, that Platonism is ultimately about the non-propositional, it's about transformation, that talking about just the theory of the form, Plato doesn't have a theory of the forms. He doesn't even actually, he talks about the forms, but to call it a theory is, I think, a misnomer and a misleading misnomer in a powerful way. And this is a lot of stuff I'm exploring in the new series after Socrates. And that means that there's an inherent connection and there's a deep connection between the non-propositional mystical transformation. And so do you think that Protestantism has the resources to talk deeply? I mean, I was brought up and you've been critical of that, but I didn't make this stuff up. It was an education I got about Protestantism was rejecting the Greek philosophy and defending the Hebraic tradition from how it was infected and degenerated by the Greek tradition. I mean, I was taught that in university kind of stuff, right? And so it sounds like you're saying, and this is really interesting, do you think that Protestants want to hear this? You're a controversial figure and I'm putting you in a spot. And if you want to beg off from that, I'm totally open to that. But do you think that Lutherans want to hear that that, I would put it this way. I think I would make an argument, I want to hear what you think about it. I would make an argument that responding to the meeting crisis, awakening from the meeting crisis requires this deep new re-reading of the, and re-appropriation, I even call it adaptation of the whole Platonic, neo-Platonic tradition, if we're going to come up with a viable alternative that can nevertheless have what I would consider scientific respectability. I'm not, like you, I'm not a positivist. I don't think that science is the sole generator of knowledge. Naturalism should talk about what's presupposed by science, not what just is derivable from it, etc. And so do you think you think Protestants want to hear this message? And I mean, that's a tricky question to ask. I hope you're getting that I'm asking it respectfully. I'm asking it in friendship. I'm not trying to corner you for a philosophical jiu-jitsu move or anything like that. I want it like, because my concern has been that I see, and you know, and I have huge exceptions to the rule. Here is one with us in this room of people who want, from the Protestant tradition, to enter into deep discussion with the proposal I'm making, and they have, and I listen to their criticisms. Sure. But that has not been my experience, again, of Protestants in general. And I'm worried that I formed an inappropriate stereotype, and that's why I'm opening, I'm asking you the question, maybe I'm asking both of you. Do Protestants really want to hear this? Do they really want to hear it? And I don't mean just hear it in la la la, in a hallmarked hard fashion, but like, hear it in a way in which, oh wow, I might be needing to practice my Christianity differently if I'm really going to give the world a viable response to the meeting crisis. It's a challenging question, I admit it, but I want to ask you. I'd like to interject a couple of thoughts into this answer that I think Jordan can probably be helpful with, and this will also touch on Luther, actually. Because, you know, if you remember in Thunder Bay, Jordan, we had a conference myself, Jonathan Peugeot and John Ravakian, Thunder Bay, um, Ontario, where in person we're going to have another conference in May in, um, in Southern California. Much nicer locale. I'm glad the Canadians said that. The people treated us wonderfully in Thunder Bay. Thunder Bay was amazing. I love traveling up north, I just don't know if I want to live there. Part of, I think, what we're wrestling with with your question, John, one of the things I want to say about churches, churches are the very messy application of a ton, and I think part of the story of what has been happening with the church over the, you know, really since the 19th century, is there are many, many other forces which are not necessarily coming from theological traditions that are impacting the church. I mean, we've had this enormous disruption via technology, social movements, and everything, and these have, I think, across the board, probably impacted churches to a far greater degree than theological traditions, which has brought about the fact that you can find churches across the traditional spectrum that look very much alike because they are all in many ways responding to social and technical and market forces rather than necessarily theological trajectories. That's one important thing when you look at churches and labels and churches and practice. Just that comment. Second comment with respect to this is I think when you look at the very long arc of the church, which is, I think, what both of you want to look at, in a way looking at obviously the American church, in a way looking at obviously the emergence of Christianity from Judaism, the split from Judaism that Christianity makes, because Christianity and Judaism really are sort of a splitting from each other because of Jesus Christ, and we have to talk about why in the Protestant Reformation monasticism was sort of put to the side, and I think in many ways part of what you see in Protestantism is popular piety replacing a lot of the functions of monasticism in a different realm. For example, this is where you get into the definition of Protestantism. Most of us would accept that Pentecostals are, I'll call them small p Protestants. Very few of them are probably big p Protestants, but that would probably be the ones with advanced theological degrees, temperaments that lend them towards bookishness, et cetera, et cetera. Piatism, I think, has been popularist mysticism in some ways for the church. If you go to a Pentecostal service all around the world right now, Pentecostalism is by far the fastest growing branch of Christianity in places like Latin America, Africa, and Asia. There is definitely a mystical quality to the liturgy that has emerged in these worship traditions. Now, there's plenty to discuss with respect to deployment and endurance and all of those things, but when we're asking questions about mysticism within the Protestant realm, I don't think we should ignore the role that Piatism has played in that process. I think that's important, but towards something Jordan said earlier, Kant's big influence is Piatism. It's a profound influence on him. I see it coming, ramifying that way. I see it, Jordan, I think you said something earlier about union of wills, union of moral wills, that vision coming out. That's where I see it cashing out. I guess what you're saying, Paul, is there's a pre-Kantian Piatism and there's something like that happening in Pentecostalism or is that stretching what you're saying too far? I don't know that it's necessarily pre-Kantian, but when I look at your project to engage the meaning crisis, a deep part of the meaning crisis, I haven't had a chance to do any video work on your talk with Jordan recently, but really interesting, some really interesting segments. By the way, I'm infested with Jordan's right now. There's Jordan's in Jordan Hall. Jordan Cooper right here, and then I'm going to be talking to Jordan Wood this Saturday. I hope I don't mix up my Jordan's. Just trying to confuse you here. A big piece of the meaning crisis is, I think, to wed heaven and earth. I know, John, you've been very clear about two worlds mythologies. Pentecostals very much practice the wedding of heaven and earth liturgically, but not with iconography, not with traditional monastic practice, but usually with music. They obviously have developed their own liturgies. One of my uncles was Pentecostalist, so I got to go to some of the services, which as coming from a fundamentalist, I guess Calvinist, given the theological distinctions you guys are making, church was terrifying for me. Now, looking back on it, you know, a lot of the stuff I'm talking about, about what happens in the logos and the we space and that emergent spirit, and then how it gives you a sense of being not only intimate with each other and with yourself, but to something like what I would call the logos, the intelligibility of reality. I see that there's something, well, at least it seems to me retrospectively, I want to be careful here, that there's a lot of there's a lot of ecstasis at least going on in Pentecostal services, which I think is part of mysticism, but I want to be really careful and I want to be really careful before, and then I want to shut up so that Jordan can answer. I don't want to just, I'm trying to keep the two things together, that were together in Neoplatonism, the deep philosophical development and the mystical transformation, and they are not just coincidentally together, I would argue they are essentially interpenetrating, and then my question comes from that. And that would be missing in a lot of most Pentecostalism. Yes, yeah. Yeah, I'm not, and I don't want to, you know, insult the Pentecostal traditions by any means. Yeah, and I haven't spent a significant amount of time at Pentecostal services, but at least in my experience, that I don't know that the focus is so much on actual lasting transformation as it is on kind of a momentary ecstasy. I mean, that's at least in my experience, so for what that's worth. Now I forget what the original question is. I think it's an important piece of this transition. It is, and that's a nice name for that deep interweaving of philosophy and mysticism, and also theology, but I'm talking about this part right now. And my question was, given that we've got a little bit clearer about that, do you think Protestants are really open, and I don't mean in a polite, tolerant way, I mean in a responsible and responsive way to hearing that. I mean, if you take that seriously, it should have impact on your practice, on your ritual, on your understanding, on some of the conceptual vocabulary you want to adopt, etc. Right? That's the question I'm asking. Yeah, okay, yeah, yeah, sure. I think if you, okay, for example, I went to the Evangelical Theological Society this fall. I was presenting, it was the first time they ever had a session of just Lutherans presenting there, and I mean, listening to a lot of the talks, and these are people from various Christian churches and traditions of all different kinds. I mean, you had talks on participation, there were talks on, you know, classical theism, doctrines of divine simplicity. There is a growing interest in a lot of classical philosophical sources among Protestants right now. So there's been a huge shift in the last 10 years that's really accelerated in the last five years. So within the academy, and this is going from Lutheran to Presbyterian to Baptist, I mean churches from very different traditions that are really trying to recapture a lot of this, because, and this is largely kind of younger theologians, because we've seen all the problems that you're seeing, right? We've seen all of the reasons why people are going to, say, Orthodoxy or to Rome, and we're recognizing that those are real issues. So I actually think there's going to be a major shift that's already begun really significantly toward reevaluating a lot of those classical traditions. Wow, that's really, thank you for that answer. That's a very significant answer. So I mean, I'm hearing you say, and if I get it wrong, please say, I'm hearing you say there's been, you know, a recognition of the meaning crisis and inadequacy that needs to be significantly addressed if the Lutheran church or maybe the broader Protestant church is going to be able to offer, you know, a significant voice in this. Am I hearing you right? Yes, yes, that's exactly right. So I wouldn't, I mean, I'm sure that there are, and in fact I know that there are plenty of other Protestants that are paying attention to your project because when I, you know, had mentioned it in my Discord server, a number of people are like, oh, I've listened to all of his talks. So there are Protestants paying attention and there are the Protestants that are very interested in classical Protestantism. So there is this growing movement that's, you know, maybe you're just not seeing, but it is there, and I anticipate it growing pretty significantly. That, first of all, that's important to know. Yeah. Like I'm really happy to be talking to you because if you're a representative of this, I think that's powerful. So do you think that, I just want to press a little bit more on this question. Do you think that will translate, I'll use this word, I hope it's the right word, do you think that will translate into liturgy? Like will it bring about liturgical transformation? Do you foresee that? Yes, absolutely. It's always tied to liturgical transformation. It has to be. Because you, I mean, you don't get interested in the classical traditions and just argue propositionally. I just don't know that you can stay in the classical traditions and do that. Yeah, yeah, yeah, you can't. That's right. I think that's deeply right. So I mean, this is fascinating to me and I mean, I want to now make a distinction. I don't know if I, there's something like a distinction between classical and modern and now you're harkening back to the classical but you're also trying to respond to post-modernity. I don't want to call you post-modern Lutherans because that would have exactly the wrong connotation. Yeah, yeah, don't say that. We're all post-modern. No, don't really get me in trouble there. No, but you see what I'm trying to come up with, a way of positioning you. You're obviously not just nostalgic. I hear you saying that there are resources within what you've called a couple times classical Lutheranism, classical Protestantism, that can be like accepted, re-appropriated. I like the word you use the word inventio, discovered and also made. Sure, yeah. Which will translate into ritual and practice in a real transformative way. Yeah, I mean, there are some people that have tried to come up with terms. I know that the Baptist theologian, Craig Carter talks about Christian Platonism. I mean, it's a pretty simple way to talk about it. I've got an entire book entitled that Christian Platonism and really pivotal figures like Gerson and others are in there. I've been very interested. I've often said explicitly and I'll say it publicly again, although I have a profound allegiance or loyalty to Socrates, I actually prefer Christian Neoplatonism over pagan Neoplatonism because of the development of agape and other important ideas about the dialogical. I think Nicholas of Cusa represents the culmination of the Socratic arguments around learned ignorance. It becomes learned ignorance. How are people pronouncing it now? I was brought up to pronounce it erugina, but I'm hearing people say erugina. What is the pronunciation? Oh, erugina is what I've always said. I've been hearing people now do this other thing because they do the same thing with Wittgenstein. Every generation switches between the V and the W pronunciation. I don't know. It's a way of showing allegiance or something. I say it with a V for whatever that's worth. I don't know. In erugina, I see the culmination of this proposal of that ontology is fundamentally dialectical in the Platonic sense, not the Hegelian sense. It's equally top down and bottom up, interpenetrating completely through and through. I find all of that very interesting and promising. I'm hearing you saying that there might be a place within this movement you're talking about for reconsidering those figures, even though they're classically understood to belong to the Catholic tradition or something like that. Yeah. Which figures in particular are you thinking about? Well, I'm thinking ... See, the figures that are coming out right now is really important, are erugina and Nicholas of Cusa. I make the argument in After Socrates because I think they represent the culmination of these two proposals that are given birth in the Socratic Platonic tradition that reality is fundamentally dialectical, dialogical. That comes to fruition. The division of nature is just that argument through and through. Then Nicholas of Cusa of learned ignorance as really, really fundamental to the project of wisdom. People are making significant arguments about how we need to go back and recover them. Erugina, of course, was declared semi-heretical. It's unclear what happened to him. Then Nicholas of Cusa survived those threats, but he was always backgrounded. I was just reading Whitehead with Dan Schiappi, The Function of Reason, and he comes to this little point, and it's a throwaway line. He says, that you had towards the end of scholasticism, after praising scholasticism as really making science possible, he says, then you have this dogmatic rigidity, but he says, except for Nicholas of Cusa, and if we had followed him, modernity would have went another way. Then he goes back to his argument. That's interesting. Other people are taking this up in a fundamental way. I noticed that you have, you make the case that Luther, you have a very positive read on Aquinas in some ways too. Yes, I do. There's a lot of these figures that belong to the Catholic tradition, or Dionysus and Maximus, that I never heard about when I was in the Lutheran world. Are these new theologians that you're talking about, are they going back and reconsidering the value of these thinkers and what they might help to say about how we can reconnect to, I'll use your term, Christian Platonism? Yeah, I think there has been, you know, Nicholas of Cusa, I haven't spent a lot of time in myself, and I could say he's not, and maybe I should, he's not a figure that I've delved into too much, and I haven't seen much from more classically minded Protestants on his work. I think Aquinas is probably the major name that people are trying to explore. I would say Maximus to some extent as well. There are two great integrators, right? There are two really powerful integrators. Yeah, very much so. I think Dionysius is going to be less so influential, and some of the reason for that, Luther had a very, well, Luther had a negative valuation of Thomas too, but Luther said of Dionysius that he Platonizes more than he Christianizes, and I think the reason why he hasn't had as much of an impact as some other more, you know, neoplatonic theologians is that in many ways his theology was seen as kind of Christless, in his work, so for that reason he just hasn't had as big of an impact. Aquinas has been so significant to the Lutheran tradition that there was a theologian of the 17th century that wrote two volume work arguing that Thomas Aquinas was actually a Lutheran, and he didn't belong to the Roman Catholic. Let me write that down. Yeah, yeah. Historically, his argument probably was not correct, but what that does demonstrate is there was this desire for continuity with a lot of these thinkers, and just because Luther had a negative evaluation of Aquinas doesn't mean that everybody else within the tradition did. Sure, sure. I'm not holding you to that. Oh, yeah, sure. I'm asking questions. I mean, I'm in agreement with this sort of the law of the new scholarship that's emerging around Aquinas, and that it's much more proper to see him as a Neoplatonist using Aristotle than an Aristotelian, and I think that argument, I think the pagan analog to Aquinas is not Aristotle, it's Plotinus. I think that's the closer analog, and I'm not the only person making that argument. Sebastian Morello is making that. I think Clark is making that argument. A lot of people are making that, and this has been really interesting too, because of the possible connections it opens up between Eastern Orthodoxy and Catholicism. Yeah, that is interesting, and I've read a bit of scholarship kind of debating that point from both sides on Aquinas, and to be honest, I'm a little bit undecided myself on the question. Okay, well, I mean, that's something. Yeah, well, you know, the fact that he cites Dionysus more than Aristotle, just numerically, right? That is very interesting. Yeah, things like that. There's just sort of even sort of objective measures that you just have to account for. So, yeah, I'm not going to try and make that argument here, but I'm just interested. For me, I'm interested, and this came out in my talk with Jordan Peterson, and also with the talk I gave at Ralston about the convergence between 4e cognitive science and Neoplatonism. I'm interested in this, I don't know what to call it, but this upsurge of Neoplatonism and how it's showing up in many areas, in many Christian denominations, and also other religions, and I'm deeply intrigued by this, and I wonder if you've noted that or reflected upon that at all. Yeah, yeah, I mean, absolutely. I've seen a significant, I'll just, I mean, even not just from like scholarship, I, part of what I do is I'm involved in chaplaincy work at Cornell University with students, and I'll just say working with students there, there is a hunger for classical sources. There is just a hunger for, I mean, they're seeing kind of the meaninglessness around them, and they know that they need something else, which is what's drawing people toward, you know, the work of Peterson or others, but it also has drawn them towards, I think, re-evaluating a lot of classical sources, and there's a desire for, largely, what I see is a desire for some kind of connectedness to the past. Yeah, I think there's a connectedness to the past, I think that's definitely it, and then that brings up issues around tradition again. What do we mean by connectedness to the past when, right, and then there's this, I think there's something else, and this is, this has also been part of the, like, I guess I'll want to call it, maybe this is a little bit hyperbolic, but the revolution in ancient philosophy studies that Hadeu brought about with, like, really understanding ancient philosophy as a way of life, as a set of practices, and that the transformation of people's character and the cultivation of wisdom was much more important than the theoretical discourse. The theoretical discourse was always in the service of that. Is he want to, and I hope you take this as a compliment, it's not meant to be insulting, if it sums off, I apologize ahead of time. One of the things I think Christianity, and also I would say Sufism and Kabbalah, but one of the things the religious versions of neo-Platonism can do is to help provide, I've certainly turned to them for that, help provide a way to maybe not reconstruct because the evidence is too thin, but maybe, you know, reverse engineer the neo-Platonic practices. What did they mean? What were people doing? And we can see how can we turn Platonism into a way of life, a lived philosophy. Now, I'm happy if many people want to make it Christian Platonism, like you said, but I'm not restricted that way. And so, like what do you think about that proposal? I'm getting a little bit personal here, but I'm always about like, I'm doing this reverse engineering and it's a big project after Socrates, but, and I make this clear right from the very first episode, I'm not, you know, Christian and neo-Platonism and Christian Platonism are helping me a lot. And I just told you a few minutes ago how they're helping me do this. Like, and is that a project that strikes you as something you'd like to be in dialogue with, or do you view me as an incipient heretic that's about to besmirch something precious? Because my concern is I'm in a difficult problem and I'm not asking any of you to step away from your doctrines. I'm not asking that, but I want to be responsible to this, but I'm not a Christian, and I want to also be responsible to to Sufistic neo-Platonism and Jewish neo-Platonism, and even the possibilities like expressed in the Kyoto school of deep discussion between Buddhism and Zen and neo-Platonism, like those things, they hold great promise for me. And so, what do you, do you want to be in dialogue with that project, or do you think that project is ultimately irresponsible? Sorry, I'll just end with a question Mark. Yeah, no, it's a good question, and I have a lot of thoughts and I'm trying to think of how to best answer it. I mean, obviously, I'm a Christian, I'm a Christian theologian, I'm a pastor, I'm a president of a seminary, I train pastors, so that's my main concern, right? So, my work is so my work is even for the church, and obviously, my concern first and foremost as a Christian is the proclamation of Christ, and it always will be. So, just to lay my cards on the table, certainly, that's where I'm coming from. I will say though that I think we have to, we can distinguish, and I know you kind of, you critique Luther's two realms distinction that he has, but I actually think in terms of some of these conversations, the two realm distinction can be pretty helpful because it does lay out some groundwork where there can be collaboration despite some significant disagreements, right? So, in terms of the kingdom of God, the kingdom, what we call the kingdom of the right, popular Lutheran parlance, that is the church, obviously, I'm not going to have you come and preach at my church. Us Lutherans are so restrictive that Paul couldn't come preach at my church either, so sorry. John, we had a, they had communion in Thunder Bay, and John didn't understand exactly, I saw that, I thought, oh my, this is going to be melee, we've got Orthodox Catholics. Yeah, I know, how do you do that? Yeah, we're restrictive like the Orthodox and Catholics are, but anyway, but the point is we also have this other, this understanding that there is this other realm, which people call sometimes the common kingdom. In other words, there is, and we would say this is still ruled by God, and God is the one working in and through it, but, and I don't like using the term secular because I think that has kind of connotations that I don't like because I don't tend to think that there is a non-sacred or realm that God is not involved in or something, which kind of could sometimes be the implication. Yeah, I think the identification of the secular with the absence of the sacred is a fundamental mistake. Yes, absolutely, but if we're talking about broader societal issues, things outside of, in other words, the function and purpose of the church, I don't, I think it's important to be in dialogue about these issues. So do I have interest? Yeah, I just think it is a, it's just important to keep the things distinct, right, so to understand where I'm coming from, I understand where you're coming from, which is not a Christian perspective, but there absolutely, 100 percent, should be dialogue, and I think there could be a bit of cooperation on certain issues for sure. Well, that's exactly the question I'm leading towards, is, I mean, given what you've said and a lot, I mean, could there be significant and important collaboration about responding to the meeting crisis? Do you think that's possible, such that it could be, you know, it could be a message relevant to non-Christians and to nuns, N-O-N-E-S, because they're suffering, and I happen to think that if you, and I'm not saying you're saying this, I'm not saying you're saying this, but if there is, well, first of all, you have to become a Lutheran, and then we can help you with the meeting crisis. I think that's putting the cart before the horse in a really bad way, and, you know, maybe it's putting Descartes before the horse, but anyways, I think, right, it's really, I don't think that message is going to work or help, and so I, and Paul, I think will vouch for me on this, I mean, my primary, I say to people I want to build a bridge, and if what I do helps people return to their faith or their religion and find meaning in it, I'm happy, but I'm also open to people like me who feel they need to leave their faith, and I want that bridge to work for them, too, and so, again, I'm not trying to destroy anybody's faith, but I think there is, we have to recognize that the nuns are not going to simply, oh yes, right, I think there's other things that have to happen, and so- Yeah, I guess in terms of, like, kind of how I relate to that, I would say, you know, you're reading my book, so I think that that particular book was meant for a broader audience, so I'm not just- That's why I read it, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, so I guess maybe I'll ask you, what do you think about it? I mean, what do you think, do you think I'm- I mean, I'm in agreement, I mean, I have detailed criticisms, like, I think the stuff on Plato without talking about the lived, you know, practices around Socrates and Socratic dialogue or the dialogical form, but that's, those are scholastic criticisms. I think the overarching, I mean, I said it at the beginning, there's so much similarity between your diagnosis and mine that, like, it's, yeah, I think what you're doing is valuable, I think it's important, and you description your diagnosis. Now, I'm concerned, like I said, about, and this is where you will disagree with me, but I'm concerned with the possibility of creating liturgical ritual, eschesis and Hado's sense for people that might not want to belong to a church, a temple, a synagogue, or a mosque, and yet nevertheless can give them viable ways of reconnecting to the non-propositional connectedness to the love of the true, the good and the beautiful, that a way that can be deeply transformative, and I would say that I have some pretty good scientific evidence that that is a real project, we can make that difference in people's life, we can move them away from despair, we can move them away from meaninglessness, we can move them away from all the deleterious facts of not having meaning in life or not being able to deal with massive self-deception within themselves or between them and other people. I think I have good reason and evidence to say that that is doable and it is being done, and I want to afford that project more and more. That's how I would answer you. Sure, I mean, obviously you're coming from a scientific perspective and I'm not. I don't pretend to be an expert in sciences and never will because I'll make myself look like an idiot. I'm sorry, I'm not trying to argue from authority. I'm just trying to say... Oh, no, no, no. I'm just saying that's my deficiency. I just can't speak to those issues and I try to be very conscious of what I know and what I don't, and I try very hard to... Because once you get a kind of platform, it's always easy to speak on whatever and think you're an authority, so I'm always trying to caution myself not to speak on certain things if I really don't know. But I guess the question that I have, I'm curious of your thoughts on this. I'm curious what you think about in terms of something like outside of say religious ritual or the church, what do you think about the role of say something like high culture in bringing some kind of interconnectedness to the world? I get directly involved in that project. For example, I was talking with Candida this morning and this is the project I've been involved in. Give me a minute or two to describe it because I got to give you some of the context. So she approached me and they had this idea. They wanted to do something with the wasteland and they wanted to bring in dance. I mean, Elliot's poem, great poem, The Wasteland. Sorry, The Wasteland. There's a lot of free space in Canada, so I didn't know what you were talking about. Yeah, sorry. That was stupid on my part. So anyways, and then she approached me because of all the work on the meeting crisis and then we did all this stuff and they basically put together, it's hard to describe, a performance where there's images, there's music being played, there's dance, but the dance, some of them are on ropes and so that there's a vertical dimension and this has had a huge success. They've made it onto the top 10 of these performances that might be brought into theatres in North America. I hope they do because then I could go in New York and I wrote, I was not only involved in the creative production, I wrote sort of an essay for the brochure about what's going on in The Wasteland and its relevancy to the meeting crisis and it's been a huge success and then she said something really, really important. She said, you know, one of the most important responses is both people who knew the poem got something out of the performance and people who didn't know the poem got something deeply out of the performance and I've always said, I mean, not always, but in the last three years I've been saying, like this has got to go into art, right? Art before argument. There has to be significant art before argument and so I've been involved in that project and really trying and the fact that there was this broad spectrum and I was thinking of you Paul with your scalability issue and she was also saying age-wise, old people to young adults, right? And so you were in my head, Paul, right? And it's like the fact that that's proof of concept, this is doable and it can get a powerful response and be taken up. Yes, very much and so I've agreed to get involved in the second project. We're going to try and do that with another great poem and again imagine that that could be something, you know, that gets taken up and people broad spectrum like are responsive to it. Yes, the answer is yes and yes indeed I'm trying to do that and get involved with it in a significant manner. Yeah, I mean that's fantastic. This is stuff that I'm very fast about and interested in is I think a lot of meaning and purpose and even ritual because when I think about liturgy, obviously first I think of the church because that's what I'm largely doing but I also think about just cultural liturgies and I think that I have an interest, you may notice I like wear ties all the time, but there's a purpose for that. I've gotten really interested in clothing, in manners, in ritual, in general. Literal investment, yeah. Yes, yeah, yeah, so I have a lot of thoughts on those issues but I think that we can do a lot of things just externally in appreciating the arts and in what we read but also in how we treat others. When you get rid of rules which are, you know, like manners, you're getting rid of something of yourself, you're pushing yourself inward, right? You're pushing yourself toward this kind of inner, you know, authenticity supposedly and I think recapturing ritual to me is a lot broader than just the church. Oh, totally. I mean, I was just in Miami and I'm recording a course for the Peterson Academy. It's on, the title is intelligence, rationality, wisdom and spirituality and there's a whole bunch of new work I've been doing. It started with my talk in Cambridge last February about ritual and ritual knowing and how it's non-reducible to metaphor or drama. It has a specific noetic and I really want to play on noesis here. It has a specific noetic quality that's irreducible and irreplaceable and how powerful but how much it actually is therefore integral to the aspirational dimension of rationality. This is the work coming out of L.A. Paul and Agnes Kellard that one of the things, one of the constitutive features of being rational is to aspire to be more rational or more wise than you are and yet this aspirational relation isn't captured by inferential rationality and that you need these, that you need the serious play, the imaginal and there's experimental work to show this in order to afford this what Kellard calls proleptic rationality, this aspirational. So there's actually deep interpenetrations between this broader notion of rationality and wisdom and ritual in a profound way. I totally agree with you on that. I think that's important to say. The way all the, I mean it starts with I think you know an important way with Kant with you know the three critiques making all, making the true, the good and the beautiful, this is Habermas right, making them autonomous and autonomy being the absolute value over the true and the good and the beautiful, that's a strange proposal. We should really think about that but you know the idea that you know rational and ritual are deeply you know deeply or you know even antagonistic towards each other and yet the argument and you see it in the neoplatonic tradition how deeply interpenetrating they are and interaffording and you're nodding so I get a sense that you agree with this argument. Yes very much so. Yes. Just watching this conversation unfold you know maybe I'll just have to do a commentary on a video I'm in but you know just want to point out a few things here. We have, one of the part of the meaning crisis I think in terms especially at scale, part of the meaning crisis is the lack of a cohesive, coherent culture that has art, public liturgy, I mean we're barring James K. Smith's language on some of this stuff, public liturgy and so then you know and John your concern about okay so you've got various Christian and you know there's various Jews and various Muslims too and various other religions. Significant pluralism. Yes very significant pluralism and you know this of course we've got globalization. One of the things you know we've hardly talked about Luther which is absolutely fine but one of the things that I never realized until I read Erie's book Reformations that Luther was part of that first generation that comes up with the Columbian exchange to use Charles Mann's term for you know what happens with Columbus and because the beginning of globalization with Columbus. Sure. You know part of my, part of the challenge especially working with this stuff from inside the church, inside a let's say a conservative church because at least in the United States and arguably within the British realm you basically have Protestantism was sort of the opposing container to let's say Catholicism or Orthodoxy or the Caliphate and this is and so that's deeply integral into the development of the Anglo-West and you know this conversation now with respect to the meaning crisis one of the things that we've noticed is that a lot of the concerns that have been dealt with not just in terms of the academic interest in Jordan Peterson and John Vervecky but some of the culture war stuff is sort of concentrated in the Protestant Anglo world and so you know part of my interest in this little corner in these conversations is we're recognizing the need for a coherent cohesive culture where the public arts because there wasn't public art necessarily in a Catholic or in an Orthodox and you know and then even in the classical period I mean these are deeply tied to religions and deeply tied to all of the stuff that even secularity can identify as religion so you know part of this is I think part of this desire to recapture and look back is the desire for once again within in both big P and small p Protestantism to understand and perhaps achieve something of what was achieved in the more ancient versions of Christianity you know Constantinople, Rome that had a degree of integration that we currently do not have partly because of globalization but also significantly because of the fracturing of the institutional church within Protestantism and so you know this I think is a piece of you know it's not good enough that we just can sort of play nice in the sandbox next to each other and that what we offer the world are a menu of choices you know to address your meaning crisis but that that will certainly be where we're at right now because the Calvinist pastor will be a Calvinist pastor and the Lutherans will be Lutherans and the Catholics and the Orthodox etc etc but the the deeper project is to you know really get at the roots here of can we have a cohesive culture with philosophy and art and public ritual that afford you know all of your you know self-transcendence you know all of the all of the language that you've put on this John to impact the meaning crisis and and this obviously isn't unique just to the Anglo world because you know the the Catholic world and and the Orthodox world and the Islamic world and all of the other worlds have also been deeply disrupted and penetrated by the same forces that in many ways have come out of our world to them yes and so I you know superpowers yes and so I I think that that as we think about not just the the philosophical conversations and even sort of the applied practical congress conversations that can be distributed to individuals suffering from this I mean a big part for me of this conversation is an attempt to grasp all you know where we have come and how we have gotten here and and I think for that reason conversations about institutions such as the church monastical traditions and of course the university which in some ways again is is d is right there in that mix you need all three I mean I've made this argument independently the church and the monastery and the university they you know knowledge and wisdom and then the the the living of a real life in the real world kind of thing and you need though you need them and they've been fractured and and I think that's a deep part of the meaning crisis I do want to say something about that though I've been very influenced by Thomas Plant's argument about that neoplatonism was basically the philosophical spiritual analog to the Silk Road so you have the Silk Road that binds the east and the west together and then what you find is neoplatonism because of this enormous capacity historically vetted capacity to enter into reciprocal reconstruction with Christianity with Judaism with Islam we have some indications with Vedanta probably also with Buddhism right and and there might be some there might have been some conversations between Zen and Neoplaton like but to give like I've talked about this before you know this courtyard of theologos right and and the the something like the philosophical Silk Road that bound the world together didn't mean that everybody was in agreement it didn't mean that you know that everybody was coming becoming a Muslim or everybody was becoming a Hindu or whatever but they were able to enter into these kind of deep transformative and and deeply beyond respect respect is important but respect is just looking at the thing they were able to enter into these reciprocally opening mutually transformative discussions and real dialogos such that the Silk Road worked like it worked it actually worked and I'm not saying it was a perfect that I'm not proposing you utopia but I'm saying we have an example of something that was able to stitch a pluralistic world together and I'm not saying we can return to it neither nostalgia nor utopia but I'm saying it's a powerful lesson we have to try and learn from that is like that's my argument I would argue that in many ways secularism has been the Silk Road in modernity it has but the problem with secularism it's big problems with it yeah yeah well the thing is see unlike Neoplatonism that can enter into a mutually vivifying reciprocal reconstruction secularism is a progressive loss of the oxygen if I if you can if I can put it that way of like basically Christianity I mean I I mean you've been making this argument Paul I never disagreed with this argument right I think it's what I call a derivation argument I mean you know and I think the you know Tom Holland's been making similar arguments and I know he angers a lot of atheists around this but but but but and I take those arguments seriously I think they're important arguments and I think there's a difference there I think there is a therefore a deep difference between secularism and Neoplatonism in terms of the historical record but I think I think that that you know noting how these noting how pluralism has been managed and in fact yes yes in some ways overcome I mean if you go back I mean it was Voltaire that noted that at a time when you still had the caliphate and you know the the orthodox leadership and the Roman Catholic leadership warring Voltaire noted that on the docks in the low countries the Muslim and the Jew and the Christian and the Protestant could all at least do business together and and this was an argument but again I mean I think what we've what where we're really at now is we're seeing we've we've run secularism out we've we've we've sort of played that game out all the way to the end and we realize this is insufficient and I think it's for that reason that I think Neoplatonism as hey wait a minute but how what what past solutions have shown promise before and I think in that way your Silk Road argument works and I think you know the Roman Catholics are sort of saying you know our system work the orthodox are saying our system work we're seeking a cohesive system and I think John your work in particular because unlike you know I'm a pastor Jordan's an academic pastor I mean you're a scientist too and Jordan Peterson is a scientist and that has to be integrated into the conversation as well yeah that's why we can't go back to we can't go back to pre-scientific Neoplatonism but I would point out both at the end of the Renaissance and the beginning of the scientific revolution and we've talked about this Neoplatonism plays a significant role it also plays a significant read John Spencer's book the eternal law it plays a big significant role in the reciprocal reconstruction with science at the beginning of the Einsteinian revolution so Neoplatonism also has a tremendous capacity to enter into a reciprocal reconstruction with science that also recommends it to me in a powerful way yeah I think we just there needs to be some kind of conception of a common good for any society to function and I think this is the problem with secularism and I'm not like obviously we have to deal with religious pluralism you know I see these guys who are arguing for you know Christian nationalism and we're going to have this like state that's run by whatever you know whatever church tradition that person is a part of but it just obviously it's not realistically where we're at at this point so there has to be something that moving forward is beyond secularism with no common ground whatsoever which is I think what's tearing us apart at the moment and you know having a say denominational particularity running running the state I mean that's just not realistic so there has to be some kind of unifying common good in some sense for a society to function and common ritual common something which is I think what we're looking for and I'm not contending that that that has to be you know Lutheranism right I'm not I'm not contending that we need to have an all-Lutheran state or something but no no I didn't need to have I didn't hear you argue for theocracy I didn't hear that but I like the way you put it in fact I mean using the title of your own book I would I would broaden it we we need we need we need a common good we need a common beautiful we need a common true I mean we need we need a way in which people can explore and develop and be challenged in their love for the true the good and the beautiful rather than just telling them to do it within their own private subjectivity I think that has been a deeply failed project I mean because the and I I think you agree with me from what I've read of the book trying to encompass the true the good and the beautiful within subjectivity is just doomed to fail from it's almost oxymoronic and I think one of the things that COVID showed is when people are thrown back on just to the resources of their subjectivity it is grotesquely inadequate for meeting the needs for religio for connectedness for the cultivation of wisdom etc totally and and and so you know the question then is I mean you have both the immediate application triage and treatment in terms of the meaning crisis we want to frame it in let's say therapeutic or medical terms but but also it's got to and you know it's got to scale up into the academy I mean we talk about church monastery university academy but you know there's also government and and and you know that you know Jordan Peterson has been obviously much more harping on government issues and the rest of us sort of say so I'll vote I'll talk in my living room but I'm not going to talk on the internet about that it's not it's not just practical I have philosophical disagreements with conceiving of the political arena as the place in which the meaning crisis could be properly addressed I think it right I think it has been totally captured I think ideological capture is a specific political instantiation of propositional tyranny and I do I think that for that very reason now I vote too and I but I but you know I voted for a prime minister who promised electoral reform and they didn't deliver it because I think we need electoral reform I was in the Czech Republic and they're really proposing it in a way that could make a difference like if you replace first past the post with you know the d21 proposal first past the post rewards popularism it rewards polarization these alternatives and they've been modeled and in in small-scale demonstrations they've been demonstrated to they punish popularism they punish polarization they make people look at more than one candidate and learn about the other candidates in a deep way I mean there are things we can do so I'm willing to talk meta-political at that level but in the political realm I think the political realm I think it's broken beyond repair right why this swings back now into Protestantism is because these mechanisms what you just talked about John yep this is this is Protestant ecclesiology the fight that we're having in the Christian Reformed Church it's about votes um you know this world that we are wrestling with this meaning crisis in is fundamentally a Protestant world yes small p and I think that's why um I think Jordan's argument is right and Gavin who's another youtuber in Protestant land and I've seen them sort of itching to get in on this but but I think that is why you know to have the Catholics around in many ways the Catholics have been outperforming Protestants in North America and I think that's partly because they actually have a root and a tradition of a much more and I think it's just down there in the DNA even if it's not up there in the consciousness that there's certain practice as do Jews and often Muslims Protestants although have been working on this stuff for a very long time but so much of all of this Protestantism in our systems we're simply not self-aware of it because it's just simply too close and so I think it's healthy then to say oh yeah there's there's basically and and I would also argue that Catholicism as practice in America very Protestant way and looking at people like Christian reform ministers who have now gone into orthodoxy that church that orthodox church that develops in the Anglo Protestant West will it be in some strange ways very different from the church the immigrants tried to bring over and we're going to watch that play out in their institutions so I think you are I think you already see that in the OCA it's a very Protestant orthodox church yes that's just inevitable culturally you're going to bring your kind of prior commitments and culture how you've been formed into into your new group whatever that might be and so as we have these conversations yeah I think in many ways even the format of these conversations is deeply Protestant and it's it's going to be sort of inescapable in similar ways that it's deeply postmodern in some ways I I'm not denying any of that in fact I make similar arguments I I'm trying though to re foreground the Socratic Platonic practices around dialogue and contemplation such that we can bring those back because they are deeply rooted in our historical at least philosophical DNA and if we can reexapt them then I think we can we can inform and transform that conversation in powerful ways that's that's what I'm proposing and what I like about what Jordan's project is is he's in a way saying hey you know what Protestants have actually been working on these things with an eye to the classical period for a very long time and part of the difficulty and John is as you noticed in in some of your journey through Protestant churches the application of this has not been terribly well connected with the the intelligentsia of the Protestant churches there is definitely a trickle down that still happens in Protestantism but you do not have in Protestantism a similar situation that maybe like you had with Joseph Ratzinger where you had a real you know a very intelligent ackett someone or or Pope John Paul I don't know much as much about Pope Francis Ratzinger is a philosopher through and through that's right but they put the philosopher at the head of the church usually right now especially in the Americas you have someone who's sort of like more of an entrepreneur at the head of the column and so I mean this is all of what's what's happening on the ground and and I think part of the excitement of what we're seeing now via YouTube is that in some ways people who are who are in sitting in the pew church pews going to church now who basically they have their local pastor they will never read a theology book now suddenly whole new ideas are being opened up to them yeah well it's a remarkable thing I want I want I want to acknowledge uh you know Jordan's point about you know he said in the last 10 even five years this has really taken off and there's something happening um and I I'm not claiming any authority or doorman or being anything like that but yeah Jordan you should be part of this conversation that's that's apparently obvious to me what you're talking about uh what you're bringing to bear here I think it's relevant and important and so I mean one of the functions about this is you know to I guess to to say welcome um and I think you should be in these conversations I think you have uh you you have both deep connectedness and important differences that would make real dialogos possible in these conversations in this little corner of the internet I think that you've convinced me of that um both I appreciate that yeah and what you've been saying here I think that I think that's I think that case has been well made to my mind at least well thank you anything else anybody wants to say I don't know it's been a great conversation I've really enjoyed this thanks for taking the time to do this both of you oh I wanted to do it I mean and and um like I said before I mean I get a lot and you and you'll see it more as you get involved to it like I right I get a lot of criticisms that are just insults and ridicule and and all that oh I I get plenty of it I understand yeah so I can imagine I can imagine yeah you have a particular religious stance so that makes you more liable to these I can see that um but you know you didn't do that you came in you said what you appreciated about my work there was respect and then you made arguments um and then you took my you took my responses seriously your your brief comment was like I was was nice and I don't mean that in the trivial polite sense it was yeah yeah sure it was respectful um and so you know and then I wanted to I wanted to have this conversation because I wanted to I wanted to ask you allowed me you were very gracious you allowed me to ask a lot of questions and some of them were challenging and difficult and you know sort of put you made you put your neck out a bit and you have I appreciated you meeting them and responding to them and so that's why I you know that's why I just said what I said thank you beautiful well maybe that's the place to land the plane and I'll I'll end the recording great