https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mv1m54m06Us

 Okay, now we're ready. Ready for Freddy. Ready for Freddy. Are you steady? Are you rolling in a Chevy? Are you getting ready? I set the mic straight to the top. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. You heard it now. I do it all right. I do it all right. I do it all right. I do it all right. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. That's my old name. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. that's a good point. That's a great point. That's a great point. Alright, gonna bring Joseph in Joseph. You know, you're muted. You have thoughts on this too. I'm gonna refill my glass while you guys talk but go ahead Joseph. Yeah, no, I I'm just hopping in here because I went a little was going a little crazy in the comments section. Uh a few days ago when you posted the Orthodox Meta Modern. Oh yeah, that video, that video. Yeah, that video took off like that because there was a lot to take apart there especially because I have a really you guys are doing all this thinky talky stuff and I have a really I guess a real world example here. Basically, to cut to the chase, you have a scalability problem where there's there's a guy in my parish. I won't get into two of them but um he's in he's in contact with uh because of how Orthodoxy presents itself. You know, you're traveling very long distance to get to church so he lives very far away from me and he has a local uh Pentecostal Protestant uh leading figure who is in a very Protestant way approaching Orthodoxy. Well, this is the true confession of faith and I you know when when when you are approaching Orthodoxy from I think that Protestant perspective of oh this is the fuller uh mere Christianity uh the the true expression of the right teachings um there's there's some barriers to entry because it's it's assuming oh I'm just putting on a new I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm finding the balance or the synergy or the uh synthesis of this dialectic between Protestant and Catholic for the last 500 years. Finding it in an Orthodoxy finding this balance thing and that's not at all what is happening when you are converting to Orthodoxy. You're you're basically all of a sudden you're you're taking on all these Catholic Byzantine Christendom and you're you're you're entering into a completely un unforeseen foreign world. All of a sudden you're gotta figure out how do I chant two hours of an ortho service on a Saturday morning. Okay. No one no Protestant thinking about orthodoxy is thinking about that and very few Orthodox even have an idea of how the ortho service itself is organized. So there's there's all this misconception of what is orthodoxy. You know it's it's not this this in in many ways and I'm Orthodox so this sounds really bad but if you're really trying to figure out well how do I make sense the last 500 years of Western developments and you know deal with this modernity thing. Orthodoxy hasn't even figured out what the printing presses is. Okay. We don't we haven't even integrated that yet. Okay. So anyways I'm going kind of on a tangent now. I probably need Grim Grizz to crack the whip and get this conversation back on track but that's just no I thought I thought no I think that's right and part of you know the the title I used which I just put in the scroll in the crawl because listening to that live stream and you know for example listening to Sam go after this and just watching orthodoxy in America now there's there's been some orthodox priests that weigh in in the comments section and but but you have the part of the difficulties you have the no true Scotsman dynamic and just about everything. Yeah. Where okay well what is true orthodoxy? Well oh wait wait wait wait wait can I pause you real quick Paul? Yes. And and get it gets even worse. You don't even realize how bad it is Paul because in orthodoxy we have like four bishops of four canonical maybe five canonical bishops of Chicago okay and then there's the true orthodox old calendar side of things which are saying you guys are ecumenists breaking cannons where and in some ways they're they're right and in some ways they're wrong you know so it's like orthodoxy is the most disorganized place in the planet right now we're literally waging a holy war against ourselves you know so you're spot on the money that's all I'm trying to say yeah and and and it's completely understandable I mean and and part of what's interesting especially in this moment in America where there's this America is now having this conversation about Christian nationalism and this now comes up in the UK I mean it's all over the West because what is the relationship between the ecclesiastical structures and the ecclesiastical norms and then the public civil pluralistic norms and I mean and so or whoops Christian's got a YouTube. I'm muted. That's such a rookie. You got the YouTube window open. It's not a it's you Christian. So so you know and I've heard orthodox people talk about the fact that well you know here in America in let's say in the old world you would have the the whatever the nomenclature is the bishop or the Metropolitan you would have the hierarchy this is the Orthodox Church in such and such a place and here in America okay so which brand of orthodoxy yep and so how on earth are you organized and structured and but you're exactly right I I almost included I I you know you I'll go of course serves me up and these guys that had that had Gavin Ortland and Father Stephen D Young on you know to to debate things on their little channel that that was kind of a big oh yeah yeah they had this other orthodox student it was like former Protestant pastor becomes orthodox and he I they have a clip of oh my god I know he is so Protestant yeah I know I know I know yeah they don't even have any clue what they're getting themselves into and you saw that there's a historical presidents of of just how crazy this stuff gets because there is this you know the the Antiochian Orthodox Church I'm not in Antioch so sorry if I'm making funny of Antioch too much but Antioch there there's this famous thing this evangelical Orthodox movement that you know all these Protestants came to the Orthodox Church and they went first to the ecumenical Patriarchate in in Istanbul and they didn't want to deal with them they're like you can become Orthodox we're not going to put you in any clerical status at all and then they they they came in and you know it's been six I guess it depends how you determine successful but you know a lot of these Protestant ministers were made Orthodox clerics and like two years in they're like what the hell did I get myself into you know they they realized just how how totalizing Orthodox practice praxis and ethos is and that you know in the Protestant perspective it's I'm approaching dogma I'm just thinking about my dogmatic confession of faith and it's like praxis and ethos completely inseparable that's like saying I'm going to dissect your body and take your your soul and your mind your you know all this yeah so yeah I believe it Christian get your sound worked out check one two good good yeah I mean I think that some of it's this interesting postmodernism that we're all just taking like well this is right for me and then I'm going in and and so the other piece that I was thinking about was actually probably that I think video games have played a part you know in like these medieval ideas well if I'm going to go to church I want to go to church like the one I played in Skyrim or something like yeah that just kind of came to my mind which I'm not dogging that at all I'm just thinking like what is my my salient landscape well that you know that was the guy thought was really cool when I was 53 was this not the evangelical church you know that that actually was important to me and I also think that it's possible that again doing this like well I like these ideas I like these ideas but so much of what I think I understand about orthodoxy is that it's also I mean Russian Greek like it's tied to actual culture and in your life and you're going into all this nested culture that don't like I think Joseph was saying like this ethos and praxis is like you're going into something that isn't just ideas because but Christian that's why ortho bros like it is because it's it's the communist line of you know true communism's never been tried true Christendom's never been tried except for in Russia or Greece except when it did work the Jews ruined it or something that's literally what nine that's a very large swath of what ortho bro thinking boils down to is we can bring about true Christendom if you just listen to us and have you know Russian investments so there is like a lot of nationalistic ideas tied to some of it I guess I'm not really pointing at that part of it but that makes sense one thing I wanted to not to dominate the conversation at all but the other kind of point I want to bring up is putting you know traditions aside like I know from my experience that conversionism works because my dad was born again his brother is still alive again his brother stayed Catholic and the bigger question is like you know because people want to go to these traditions because they have this long history but the real question is how well are they passing down the faith you know and so I mean as far as I can tell like you can convert into a denomination that claims to have like apostolic succession but PVK is the only one I know who's the third generation of faithful minister you know so Gavin Ortlund's coming on Monday so oh yeah he does have quite a history too but you know so either I mean which is not to say because I know there are certain examples but we either need to wait and see what the children of this generation of converts how they respond to their parents switching traditions or find these the cradle the cradle Orthodox and the cradle Catholics that are that are really passing on the tradition successfully. Jeremy. Yeah I came in I wanted to add into the what you were pointing out with Protestantism affecting orthodoxy an interesting tension that's there is that when the Greeks came and immigrated they tried to really embrace their Americana and the American culture and so if you go into like a Greek church that was built in the 70s or in the 60s there's very few icons generally and they have pews in there and people sit for much of the service and stand at certain parts where and then and they also have a church organ in there and they're playing the some of these hymns you know the the hymns on the organ which is all American introductions to orthodoxy now that's kind of created attention in the American Orthodox scene because like at my parish which is Antiochian there's no there's benches around the sides for people who need to be able to sit but most people are standing for the whole service and there's no there's no so there's no pews there's no organ and there's a lot of icons although not as much as some churches like you know where every square inch is covered by icons we're kind of in the middle between the Greeks and the you know say the Romanians but but it it kind of speaks back to that non-canonical situation we have in America where we have all these competing patriarchates basically you know all stepping over each other and there's really no there's no American flavor of orthodoxy yet because it just hasn't been here long enough that's going to take it takes like two or three hundred years to cultivate a an orthodox vintage of wine for a particular culture I think yeah but the cream sorry Jeremy crazy thing is in America you have an orthodox Christian experience from Poland to Portugal that's already present in a crazy mosaic right like I live in a town dominated by Bavarian Czech immigrants as well as some Norwegian Lutherans and there's there's already you know even though it's you know kind of watered down I don't know if that's the right word it's not as flamboyantly extravagant there still is a very definitive cultural milieu there and I think there's there's some imaginations that we can just take this Slavic Byzantine put it in a blender pour it out and all this is American orthodoxy I'm I'm highly skeptical that especially because all these converts including myself we're we are not living next to our churches which is that's crazy that's insanity but I think it's even more insane to basically say oh we're just all going to move next to a monastery it's going to be Munster Waco 2.0 you know like that is not that's not the solution here so anyways St. Joseph the Hesychast says you can be a saint anywhere I believe it but it's hard to believe you know so and then well said Munster Waco 2.0 that's wow wow and you're seeing it you're seeing you're seeing certain people call for stuff like that so all right Chad the alcoholic but yeah but it's gonna be it's gonna be more like the ortho grandma who lives up in the California Mountains who has the spa and the Etsy store where they sell the icons and she's an ex-hippie slash Catholic slash big church big box church so that's what the app welcome to the metamodern ortho bro I mean it's let's tell you the other thing like do you guys like ever go around and like when you introduce yourselves to people at the grocery store or new people you say hi I'm Chad and I'm a Caucasian nice to meet you you know like it's ridiculous this I'm kind of it's kind of getting old every time I hear I hear everybody having to put like this disclaimer I'm an orthodox or I'm a Catholic or I'm a I'm a I'm a it's like dude it is this idea this identity with our tradition that we're in is that is that a modern concept in and of itself and like it's it's crazy like I'm I love I love the I love the orthodox the orthodox service that I went to it was it was really beautiful so I don't have a problem with any of that but but I I'm kind of with Sam on this one it was kind of annoying is like it's like bro we get it you're an orthodox or it's like bro we get it you're a vegan or bro we get it you really like what what what are those those those things that people use but days people who own the days they're just like this like that you have to have to tell you dude because it's amazing it's like I don't want to bidet I don't want to hear about your bidet like I get it we all wipe our asses or maybe you don't but you know so anyway it's okay to be excited about something new and important in your life though yeah okay what I hear you saying is like why can't you just be normal yeah and the problem is that like normal is like 1980s Americana and that's been like colonized by bad actors that want to that don't have your best interests at heart and there's like this giant discontent with the default normal of being American and so people are reaching for subcultural identities that are thicker that they're hoping to give them a more functional escape from what they seem see to be a sinking ship yeah and so like orthodoxy maybe there's some sort of version of orthodoxy that we can piece together that you know gives us a vision of what it looks like to escape from the sinking ship the other question I put that together with this is the I never heard this before I came to the corner but since when I came to the corner one of the things I heard all the time was young restless and reformed but I think now that's something that is extinct but where did they go it's not it is not extinct by no means but it is but your point Chad about I mean it's a big piece of Protestant ization and modernization of religion where religion becomes an affectation it becomes your veganism or it becomes your bidet or it becomes your love for sleep token but you know and what Joseph is saying is that well but you know it's supposed to it there's an integral community that you know that the entire lifestyle is wrapped around this view of the world and part of what happened with modernity and pluralism is all that got cracked open and in many ways what formed especially in America and then from America went out into the rest of the world was this multicultural modernity is it urban monoculture but it's this it's underneath a very implicit way of being together upon which you can put your affectation and now even your gender identity is an affectation so I mean this is really what we're struggling with in terms of the entire definition of religion so I mean what we're talking about is very much the conversation you're not going to get normalcy though you're not going to you're not just going to get the ortho bro who can't just stop saying hey I'm you know I am I'm part of the Russian Orthodox Church outside of Russian I don't even know that the Rokor was uncanonical eight years or you know 18 years ago and I would have you know there's there's just a complete disassociation with how things got to this moment and what it even means but the biggest barrier to entry I'll be brief here is is going to be that that normalcy element of I always I'll show you what's not normal there was a guy at my parish who just passed away patriarch of the parish and I wasn't at his funeral I didn't even know when his funeral was because I live an hour and 30 minutes away from my church and this is a man I've known for years and that's not normal to not be a part of a funeral service and not being able to do it and these guys who are converting I do not see them integrating into that locality like you you would at the Lutheran Church down the road from me I see people integrating all the time but maybe my church is just healthier he's got the real Orthodox Church sorry probably have one of the healthiest Orthodox Church in the Midwest I think I think a lot of like the problematization of American Orthodox he just doesn't ring true to me like I think it's pretty good I don't know like so I went to college in Winston-Salem and Winston-Salem is the site of a Moravian community that is somewhat still active it was basically a Christian kibbutz that they founded in the 18th century so you had these Protestants from Europe they come over to America they buy a bunch of land they live together they sell to the they sell products the outside world but they kind of have like a Christian communism going on internally and maybe this is a Protestant instinct but they wanted to make like their own culture and and I think there's an attempt to try to do that in a distributed way in the age of the internet and then this age of modernity and like does it work is a question I don't think I'm as closely related to the question of the Orthodox as closely related to my fellow Orthodox as the Moravians were to each other in that little you know kibbutz that they had but like when I do meet another Orthodox like there we have the same way of talking like we share some things in common that there is a thicker culture than than like any two random Americans would have like I spend more time praying the Psalms than I do watching Disney or watching sports and so I'm I'm weird for an American right and when I meet other people who do that then we have something in common we have a common language in a common culture and I think there's an impulse to want to thicken that as like an arc away from the sinking ship of American culture but where this project goes I don't know but I think it's gone somewhere good and it can go somewhere better and it's not bad it's like fun to be in I'm having a blast I don't know I have a lot of friends I don't know I go anywhere in America and I have like bros anywhere I go and I and I like their values and it's all right all right David I yeah I'm wondering about what are the aspects that we're finding compelling that we're not actually verbalizing there's like one of my favorite bits of trigonometry is when they say what what's the one thing that we're not talking about that we should be right and there's seems to be an element of right now about the Orthodox Church that I'll I'll admit but I'm kind of thinking about what happens after it because I see within all of this stuff the issue of the converts issue of the converts is everywhere because the most like the most Protestant part about the Orthodox movement right now is that people are converting you don't you you don't convert to be Orthodox right like when I think I grew up very Catholic and when I think of growing up Catholic it's not something you convert to and all the people I knew who took Catholicism very seriously were all converts none of like they none of them were homegrown we could not produce our own it had to be imported so it's it's like if you can think of an American an American food that now they grow better in Europe and we're not growing our own we're shipping it in right like that that's part of the thing to think about and Jacob I'm wondering your thoughts on this is that you were talking about the American Orthodox Church there's no American Orthodox Church there's the Russian Orthodox in America there's the Greek Orthodox in America but part of part of its appeal is that there that it is an older thing not an American thing business business casual priests and Norman Rockwell style icons that's that's what we need to have an is that possible all right Jacob David asked you a question you got a response to that I was like typing something in the chat and I'm like a little under the weather caught caught unaware the teacher caught him unaware all right Joseph I don't know if anybody else has an answer Christian yeah I was just gonna say that I think that there's cultural pendulums too it's not just that there is I think there is maybe some element of the uniqueness of our time related specifically to like technology so but at the same time when David was talking about converts versus cradle anything that a lot of the seriousness comes in from the convert it's because in all these spaces there's anemia in all of them there's and I mean there's there's anemia to the personal whenever it's all corporate there's anemia to when it's every so individualized to having these like a corporate identity and so people that have inhabited these spaces are finding elements of anemia when you're making that conversion at least on that now that might be different if you're coming from a type of atheism but you're also not just coming from a type of atheism you're also not just coming in neutral you have you've landscaped all sorts of things in American culture that are tied to certain parts of Christianity that still exist and and and so I think that there's there's multiple aspects that and if you are converting then you and you're you're taking it seriously then you're coming at it you your first your first look at it generally is going to be something like propositional because you're going to go research like a good American you know how how this thing works and then you're going to go maybe experience it and so I think that there's pieces of all that stuff kind of like plays well research and pioneer out into the wild like that other big piece all right you're gonna have jacobs are joseph jacob and then we gotta give paul renee i just i just have to destroy jacob with facts and logic real quick okay so the orthodox church just like any ancient institution just like the benny jessar it they think in you know centuries out okay we're not james organized yeah jacob saying i'm having a great time in orthodoxy have you been orthodox for a decade no i've been okay do you have kids do you have kids no i'm getting married okay so so let's let's think let's think i'm not i'm not trying to put you down by saying that but it's it's thinking okay scalability you know what is it going to be like 30 years from now and i i i've just seen for personally you know that out of boy probably half of the converts that we've seen at my parish about half of them are i've just disappeared gone and it's not oh um oh the right amount we should have had more catechism we should have had them understand the facts of orthodoxy a bit more boom boom boom that wouldn't have done it either there's something deeper than here and the the i'll finish with this i think there's a danger and the oca the orthodox church of are in america not of america they they they fall into this temptation that i think is is assuming a lot of the ortho bros and people that are ortho curious or whatever is it's basically give me saint isaac the syrians ascetical homilies and i can become saint isaac the syrian and it's like you can't just have this the service books of the church you can't just have the theology books of the church and replicate orthodoxy it takes a lived it's like a martial arts it's passed down it's it's a lived it's embodied and if you are just getting the facts right getting the right books watching the right youtube videos and you're not protestant yeah yeah you're protestant you need to show up to those funerals you need to cry with people you need to you know be get in bloody struggle with other people and the infrastructure is not there and the longevity i've yet to see it i mean i'm doing it like i've been okay that's great that's great you funerals i've prayed the the song vigils like the night before the funeral for people um i've kissed corpses on the forehead you know at their funeral i've uh like i don't understand like now have that have that experience 15 years from now and you know i just don't understand like this tone of alarm that seems to underline this like you know 20 years ago there was two or three monasteries in the u.s. and now there's like 50 or 60 okay that was that okay sorry that is an unfair comparison because you're looking at basically monasticism in America in the orthodox landscape is predominantly as the result of elder afro and that that that was that was an explosive um it's it's not it's not it this is beyond the scope of this conversation but that is not a model for what's coming in the future or what is going to be uh i i can't are you okay okay gotta give paul rene a shot okay paul uh so i was i was listening to your video on my walk this morning jonathan peggio the protestant but um the bit the bit with icons like is this is this actually what paul and peter look like i've got a friend in california who's a ethiopian deacon and i've been to an ethiopian service and i'm familiar with coptic icons and i mean the the truth in icons is is an embodiment of the the people that are participating in the worship service and i didn't i didn't convert to orthodoxy because uh propositions um i i followed peterson i it's it's harder for me to engage with peterson these days i'm not going to dig too much into that but when peggio came on the scene i started following him at the time i was going to a fog band rock machine church and i was doing it for real i was i was jumping up and down during the air quotes worship stuff i was volunteering i was getting involved in all that and it just kind of it wasn't working and when it was clear it wasn't working all i did was seems like orthodoxy is working out for peggio google search orthodox church go to vespers and that was that was pretty much it there wasn't a whole lot of thought it was just i'm god is pushing me to be a christian the protestantism stuff i've experienced doesn't seem to work peggio seems to be on the path i'm just gonna live it and if anything i'm i'm so lazy i like i try to study stuff i don't i don't really study the bible that much i don't my prayer life is garbage um but i'm you know i'm i'm trying to to live this out i talked to my priest um i'm i'm married now and i have to deal with that aspect congratulations of thanks of martyrdom and it's it it is an embodied thing and like i think about i'm i am i am anti-okian um and the middle eastern immigrants who came into the country in the 19th century and settled and didn't have priests and um saint rafael of brooklyn had to go around doing baptisms and everything on the trains to different communities they sowed the seeds of of what we're starting to see now and this is going to take centuries and yeah you'll have catechumens come and some of them won't stay i think i think the big issue is is we need to actually lean into orthodoxy you know we talk about godparents as being sponsors now because we we don't want to impose this familial relationship between the people that are seeing over you entering the church wait wait wait let me get this straight in your orthodox church you've moved the language from godparents to sponsors well like if if if if a baby's born we call them god godparents yeah but we're we're reluctant about doing that for yeah but it's a but but again that's a that's a very a a language and so again i mean i let me be clear i celebrate the coming the revival the flourishing the growth of the orthodox in america for exactly your story paul i celebrate that and i have absolutely no insecurities about the fact that you left a smoke machine protestant church for an orthodox church and you're being pastored and counseled and led and unfolded i i i celebrate all of that but i also want to have a real conversation about church in america well i this there's no there's no trying to dump on the orthodox no that's not my goal and just i just want to finish that out i think yeah you know my my godfather was a deacon when i was baptized and as a priest now and i say godfather and godmother and i think we cataclysm ideas is not going to keep people in the church building relationships is going to be in the church i keep people in the church i if anything i'm i'm in a worse position now than i was two years in my my faith is worse i missed a bunch of sundays i get into fight with my wife and the whole week is ruined and but you know my my head priest and my godfather and my godmother will just not will not tolerate it you know me staying away too long and i think that's that's the key and that's what we need to lean into amen amen 100% agree okay i wanted to kind of tie into way long ago when david said what are we not talking about about orthodoxy and one thing that came to mind when he said that that came from jordan hall and karen wong talking this week was jordan hall talking about like the need to have thought-stopping technologies in your life where you can quiet down your left brain to actually begin to experience the world and he mentioned zen and i was familiar with zen and i i was in daoism i did daoist meditation for years but when i got it to orth but it it didn't work like my left brain was as bad as ever and and it was the whole i have to read every book in the world about orthodoxy to learn about orthodoxy and then but the beautiful thing is and what i thought of when jordan talked about that was divine liturgy divine liturgy is that technology for in orthodoxy where you go in and when i first started attending church my left brain was constantly going what is that why is he doing that what does that mean whereas what are those clothes why is he dressed differently than him what is it what you know what is that why are they saying that what are they doing what and your left brain there's no answers no one's standing there you know you can't just like ask somebody next to you but you always there to explain it to you yeah no one's there to get jonathan wasn't there right so i couldn't talk to them and and after a time your left brain just gets tired you can't there's no answers and there's it just gives up and all of a sudden you start settling in and you start settling in and then the beauty starts opening up and that to me is what that's what drew me to orthodoxy when that started happening in my left brain started shutting down and i actually started and it's not like i stopped thinking i mean i'm not saying that but i'm saying it just quieted down to where i could be in my skin and be in my body and be there and all of a sudden the beauty started opening up so jeremy's right on the money here but the the ugly truth that i i think a lot of you know roast into glasses orthodox converts are unhappy to realize is that that is facilitated in a liturgically competent space and there's a lot of liturgically incompetent parishes and priests out there and in order to get somebody who is good at liturgics and not in just a superficial way but in a way that it it resonates with the whole person you're basically looking at oh you're going to have to pick up your family and spend five years in boston pick up your family spend five years in new york etc and and that happens not very frequently right like the liturgical beauty that is present in orthodoxy in america has been is a gift of people sacrificing their time in their life in their blood and to the extent that we have it and it's not everywhere that you say there's liturgically incompetent churches and a lot of the majority of majority of orthodox churches i i've been to a lot and the majority are liturgically incompetent maybe i'm a snob here i'll show you many good ones sure but like in a lot of times even the liturgically incompetent ones those are the early stages of someone trying to make that sacrifice to open a mission church or something where they don't have a chanter and someone needs to care someone needs to love it someone needs to say the singing here sucks i'm going to go now we have an online school to learn how to do byzantine chant or you can if you know western notation there's plenty of resources for that on the anyokian churches website like someone needs to care enough to make it happen church doesn't happen on its own it happens through it with with your blood give your blood yep i think though also that the the yeast hasn't fully been needed through the dough and this is like people have these conversations about immigration like how many immigrants into the country and it's still the same country how many protestants into the orthodox church right where if the passionate people are all converts and the way of thinking it like you have not you don't have these you may have orthodox parents but you don't have orthodox grandparents right so there's these different elements that have not fully worked their way through and i think one of the things that was happening is like look you have these christian apologists and they won't shut up about learning jehovah's witnesses and when jehovah's witnesses come across this stuff there's big issues like islam is having a real problem where um 200 years ago protestants weren't reading the quran and now they are and they had eats and these apologists are just now beginning to understand orthodox theology and so this protestantism that we see as this deconstructing thing that's breaking everything down it has not come for orthodoxy yet and it's just starting now they are just learning learn the arguments to come for you guys and while that's happening your churches are going to be full with people who think like protestants not like orthodox the end the antidote to this is not better arguments the antidote is holiness and love that's always that's always this the safeguard of the church is it not paul it is it is it always is because like i think rises or falls on holiness and love i'd like to be church i'd like to bring it thought i'd like to put in this thought that i live in a town that's 100 and 90 percent of the people that i live in that's orthodox and i think that's the people that i live in a town that's 100 and almost you know it's 150 years old and there's never been an orthodox church in my town there's never been an right so and probably won't be yeah exactly and so but the ideals that are being put forth on there's two different ones one we were just talking about like excellence quality beauty okay that's that's kind of this universal transcendent that a lot of churches are trying to get right at different scales and different levels that do yield actual different response to something beautiful so there's that but the other side of it is this whole idea of trust that this ideal the ideal being put forth about an orthodox community this you know this this platonic vision of an orthodox community is is the ideal that i mean that's that's the 100 years ago 150 years ago in my town that had maybe at that point maybe had four churches that everyone was in walking distance of it's the same and that the trust built in a small in a town of 10,000 like that's what that's what i feel like is is this vision of and it's it's a seeking of trust and and with because institutional trust is almost gone and even figuring out how to trust your fellow man when we're all isolated and so there is this beautiful idea but i'm saying that that's that's not there you know i guess the idea of like what an orthodox life looked like in in greece or in russia or something like that in a local very hyper local community that that also existed in the way that small communities did in the way that small communities would gather around the the one church building in the one school building and all that kind of stuff like i mean we're just so like we're light years away from that and there was so much trust was trust was in an extremely higher level of higher reach than we are right now i think i think there's a lot of anxiety going around because what we're doing doesn't look like what happened in the past and i just think why would you expect it to ever look like the same over time like technology has had a huge impact of it i go to sometimes i go to the i go to like three different orthodox churches so i'm part of the problem but you know the serbian church i go to sometimes is it's in the middle of this sort of town that's economically left behind nowadays but when it was founded all the all the little row houses around it were filled with serbia they built the church in the middle of their community and now all the parishioners live elsewhere they don't live in that little community around the church anymore but they'll drive like 30 45 minutes an hour or 10 minutes to get there the priest lives next door but the parishioners still i mean they try to love each other do things together but the impact of the automobile college education like this serbian church was founded in like 1908 1910 and you know in the intervening years you had like the college revolution and the automobile revolution and people got rich and their kids went off elsewhere they bought bigger houses outside of this little dumpy part of town where the church was and i don't know i mean there's something lost in the old ways but we got to do church going forward and if we really believe that god is part of what we're doing like he can he can deal with people commuting to church instead of walking there like yes something something great was lost by not living in walking distance okay but yeah i'm sorry you say we do something about it here's the thing about orthodoxy you don't do anything in orthodoxy without the without the episcopacy and you can't just a protestant can go out and start a church with just him his family and a bible and and make something out of it in orthodoxy you have to get an approval from a bishop who is basically overseeing the entire like a patriarchy okay and the the the converts there's i don't think there's a bigger there's a lot of disagreement and disorganization in orthodoxy but the biggest is certainly between the converts and the hierarchs they do not see they are not in line or see eye to eye in 99 percent of the things and i don't know how that's going to be overcome i guess we're just going to wait 40 years until they are all replaced i don't think i disagree i don't see oh my goodness you're sorry you're clueless jacob you're clueless maybe your local church you can i mean you know can you ever really speak to more than your local church i mean i know my ship yeah your leadership is all non monastics there's not a single tonchard anyways um but okay so this is getting you can say things about the i want to give some space to some other people okay yeah all right comments from the peanut gallery andrew's not going to make any comments because he just likes seeing his face on live stream so i'll tolerate that while we have space cassidy does like to troll though will you he does like to troll so maybe we'll have to keep him muted so cassidy cassidy we cassidy well what do you have to say cassidy well i actually just have a question for you paul can you can you explain to me more what you mean by metamodern because i just don't think i understand it oh hi i um yeah that's the word that's of course of course um brendan is is sort of using and paul and lightner is using it they're trying to get a word beyond modernity that isn't post modernity because post modernity is a thing and so it's beyond both modernity and post modernity because post modernity is about the the unthingiest thing you can think of it's just basically solvent and so then the idea of how because because modernity modernity made real contributions in many ways and we don't want to lose those contributions post modernity hasn't made much of a contribution beyond skepticism so then the question is can we actually understand the limitations of modernity while actually living in the blessings of tradition which means that in many ways i think part of the reason that orthodoxy has had such a moment now is it is offering to the world the riches of tradition and so many of those values that many people who have been sort of awash in post modernity come in and just breathe a sigh of relief i love what paul renee was saying here because i've heard so many others say it too that they they came into an orthodox church and you know what they were pastor there was a community they were catechized i mean it was because of orthodoxy's determination to keep its past they've actually managed to maintain and preserve many many really wonderful and good things and so i think for that reason um orthodoxy has been a really viable option a meta modern option but the issue is that we continue and many of the things that have arisen in this conversation the challenges of church in america that the catholics have had to face over the last hundred years that protestants have been facing since the puritan times all of those issues well the orthodox they gotta face them too now and and we're all in that so that's that's sort of what i mean by meta modernity there paul i wonder about this idea meta modern i think is a is a good term um just because it came from like film criticism and stuff like that yeah even when you were talking about it like thomas flight was getting into how these things could work and i think a way of thinking about it is fully integrated right so you can think of skepticism and era of skepticism is and modernism as a grade six boy right a grade six boy just making fun of things everything's a joke but he's immature you can't okay you do this and now you whatever you get a high school girlfriend and all of a sudden you can't just be joking about things you actually have to present your feelings and then all of a sudden all these jokes all these ways that you learn that you're cooler than everything else it's just left you miserable so how do you actually integrate that aspect back in so that it's it's again meaningful um for myself i wrote a a play and the play was um have you ever seen waiting for gado did you ever have to read waiting for gado yeah so i i wrote this this piece that's a meta piece that incorporates all those elements but it actually states that god does exist so the the ridiculousness instead of oh everything's ridiculous and isn't this preposterous and we all just were falling at some point you go oh and it rises you back up so if you like as an example 50 years ago the comparison between the flood story and the epic of the gilgamesh and the bible illustrated to people that the bible was bullshit that none of it was real because we can find these connections so therefore it's not real whereas now the meta modern turn is now we're going to compare these texts and make the the noah story more meaningful yes now we compare them and go yeah but the bible's different and those differences mean this and all the ways that it's the same it means this and instead of the great sixth boy bringing up his arguments which are legitimate but just leave him with a like a kingdom of crap instead it's like it becomes more and more clear and you get from all of that doubting you actually at the end get a faith which is stronger and can't it's now beyond these things it's right last the the the cynicism that postmodernism creates that nothing that because everything's relative nothing matters collapse boom cynical about everything okay well and your your example of Gilgamesh story in the Genesis story is great because I actually think that the bigger problem my conversation with Brennan Graham Vincey he was talking about source criticism I think culturally it had more to do with like evolution and creation like that whole problem within modernism but then it's like well nothing matters and you get past that to your point about that is you look at these things and you know yeah these stories might represent the same thing but my god this Noah story has had so much more impact on the world that I think that it fits it should be placed at a higher place on on a hierarchy of meaning and value and so you you're taking like you're taking these things are out there in front of you and you can then put them more appropriately into a place that has meaning I think that's part of it Cassidy that also by the way was the comment I was bringing up before about the Orthodox Church and what I'm wondering about the yeast fully working its way through and everything is that we are there's certain things that have been time-capsuled and because they're time-capsuled we say look at how durable this thing is but it's like look look the Dead Sea Scrolls were preserved because they weren't exposed to the rest of of the atmosphere the rest of weather and if you actually got them together then the Dead Sea Scrolls just fall apart right and so is there aspects of Islam that just haven't been exposed to the modern world because they're going through a crisis now that they are being exposed and I I wonder if if orthodoxy has also been closed away from it but but Cassidy does that make sense of the notion of metamodernism of like yeah partially I'm I'm sure there's a lot I'm not understanding I think it's a concept you probably can't get in a 30-second explanation but it's helping it's there are things that you're saying that are are setting I don't think I see the full picture the word is too new yeah it is the word is too new the concept hasn't sort of taken root yet but these are all sort of the things that we are dealing with and and I think again in that way orthodoxy now in the pluralistic west is you know really fits that bill and the difficulty and so then you see you see some who are basically saying orthodoxy is everything well they're the convert and God bless you I I love that you have found orthodoxy and I want you to go to I want you to go to liturgy all the time I want you to do confession I want I want you to I want you because part of the problem is as as Joseph said here you know a colleague of mine who is doing sort of liturgical Christian Reformed Church really kind of Anglican you know he says my problem with the orthodoxy wave is everyone who has left my church because they said I'm gonna go to the real thing I'm gonna go to the Orthodox Church none of them are actually going in other words there's a there's a sense of the promise of finally we can we can undo part of the problem of modernity by getting by getting before it but you're not in you're not in medieval Russia you know you all of those I know shocking though it may be and so and I think and so that's why I think that I celebrate the contribution that orthodoxy is bringing to the conversation and I celebrate the fact that many people are seeking Christ through it I think that's gonna be that's gonna be a hugely positive thing for the church in America for the church in the West and for Christianity in the West and for Christians and so I celebrate it but at the same time I also know the complexity of doing church in America and the Orthodox will not escape those complexities well orthodoxy has not escaped modernism at all at all in you know I mean the obvious example is Soviet Russia you know the the effect of communism on on the faith and where it lived was huge and in the States cradle orthodox aren't having a whole lot of kids and having this for a while churches had been shrinking and if you don't have three or four or five kids you're gonna be more reluctant to say hey Johnny go be a priest you're gonna want him to be a doctor or lawyer so so even pre convert wave we've been affected by modernity not in terms of like maybe postmodern arguments coming at us or or whatever and and as far as Protestantism Protestants coming to church being a big deal I don't I don't I don't particularly see that as an issue either I think we have to we actually have to live our faith and have children and encourage them to serve and to make we have to make the proper sacrifices and if we don't we've got a priest crisis in the American Orthodox churches and if we don't have priests we're not gonna have bishops and then we're not gonna have any priests and you're gonna have no one to do your funeral and no one to marry your kids or your grandkids and and that's the real crisis not some and then you'll have what the Anglican Church has I went to Synod for the Anglican Church one time and it was just full of a lot of autistic people who really liked the pageantry and they were formerly Protestants who are all there really liking their purple robes really enjoying their liturgy but had not figured it out for themselves like it there was no communal aspect it was like it attracted a very specific personality type and that's the only person who wanted to be a priest but I think the community the community aspect is even I mean that's that's the impulse it seems like Paul Paul or negative your point that like I think that is the big that is the big meaning crisis is and it has to do with trust and it has to do with believing like it more than just I think also a very big Protestant problem is so much is the idea that I'm intellectually assenting to orthodoxy I'm intellectually assenting to this thing or whatever and it's not just orthodoxy it could be anything like that like what he just kind of talked about Anglicanism what David just said about Anglicanism it's kind of like oh I'm gonna I want to I want to identify as this thing but we're talking about the challenge of living in small communities together and there have been you know the mega church model trying to do this with the idea of small groups in probably an evangelism for the last 20 30 years I think that the problem that exists in something like that and I had a conversation with the McGill about this yesterday was he was saying he was a part of a mega church and he said actually I think the church would have been healthier if it split into three churches it was 1,500 people and it was like because you can't pastor or be a priest to 1,500 people you can't and they and these people need we all need we all need a pastor we all need a priest in our lives regardless of the church and and that is what that is that is part of this crisis because we the idea is just reach reach reach reach become become identify identify we've out that's all mental in a certain way we've out we've outpaced trying to live and we've hit it on here in some ways live a life of community of vulnerability intimacy and trust like deep trust and and a lot of those things have been broken by these celebrities and and pastors that have betrayed their congregations and all sorts of things just like that and and we're looking for we're looking for that I think I'm going to go to a small church Maxwell you haven't said anything Chad came in again but Maxwell I want to give you a chance to say a little something while the guy guys great to be the all so I'm breathing I just picked this book up the mind of the maker by Dorothy Sayers oh yeah yeah good book I haven't yeah I haven't I don't know too much about her but I'm going through the first chapter and the first chapter is called the laws of nature and opinion and she has this line she says the universal moral law or natural law of humanity is discoverable like any other law of nature by experience cannot be promulgated can only be ascertained because it's a question not of opinion but a fact when is ascertained a moral code can be drawn up to direct human behavior and prevent men as far as far as possible from doing violence to their own nature and I think that is what we've been experiencing is kind of a violence of our own nature and we're like okay things are not working we need to find out we need to ascertain what the real truth is through our experience and we're going back like Jordan Peterson is a great example look look at the experience of the past this is what we can ascertain and I think and and so this is I think this is is relevant to the conversation because then like that's what orthodoxy is kind of providing for all church life people going back into church is because we're experiencing this truth this this is something that is part of our own nature that's good for us and yeah I think that's that's really what I want to add to the conversation is that it's going to it's going to take experience and and maybe and patience and maybe like you're saying Paul like the church survives through love and that's not I mean I'm not a I'm not an experienced Christian or anything but like that doesn't have a denomination or anything like that like following Jesus is is like I'm a big Gerard a Brene Gerard guy I really like what he has to say about anthropology and and Christianity and he said me in a group we read Brene Gerard a lot reading his last book battling to the end which has a lot of apocalyptic themes yeah and so he says in there one of the chapters he says what saves is the understanding that there's only one good distance the imitation of Christ in order to avoid the imitation of men this perspective is the only thing that could have enabled humanity to avoid the worst that to imitate Christ by keeping the other at the right distance so like the right distance what what is that like yeah yeah is to escape through the medic whirlpool no longer imitate in order to no longer be imitated so like we're not going to do the tit-for-tat violence and I was actually reading I'm reading the Bible with my mom which is really wonderful because she's not a she hasn't been in religion at all but it's been really great so we're in Samuel 2 or second Samuel 2 and so I don't really get what's going on Abner and Job are chasing each other and maybe the other way around but Abner calls out to Job must this sword devour forever don't you realize this will end in bitterness how long before you order your men to stop pursuing their fellow Israelites Job answered as surely as God live or Joe Ab as soon as surely as God lives if you had not spoken if you had not spoken the men would have continued pursuing them all more until morning and so Joe blew the trumpet and they stopped they stopped fighting each other yeah and that's like that's remarkable that's like some kind of like you know you know Jesus portrayal in the Old Testament I think but I yeah and I guess the last thing I said I'm sorry I have all these things I want to say but I see like John Verveckis project of like the philosophy stuff I think it's like to to to experience and to ascertain truth like we can't just get stuck in our you know three by five card of allowable opinion of things and that's why like we can ascertain truth and I think we're seeing that with everyone going to church and stuff and trusting Jesus more than themselves but at the same time we need to have philosophy in the background as like you know that that that that that this kind of you know but the Socrates of it all like like I know that I I don't know and so there's something more there's something you know what there there might be another question to be asked or something like that yeah and so yeah that's thank you Maxwell thanks thanks for coming on the stream appreciate it yeah la famiglia a voice very wise commenter whose face we don't see enough of what what say you well the GL is a is pronounced like a oh why it's Italian so but anyway Yankees though I'm gonna butcher it yeah that's what you do in New Jersey right okay so so Madam modern casting my my my take on that you know the way I see it is that you know with with my own eyes I'm not you know the way I see it is that you know with with modernism part of what we did is we tried to put everything inside of a little box right a materialist box right and the only thing that's really true is the stuff that fits inside this box that we can reach out and touch and measure and things like that right and postmodernism came along and you know basically you know took a took a sledgehammer to all of it and and basically left us with nothing solid at all right you know I you know I think modernism tried to over capture right the the phenomenon of existence right and and tried to you know put it you know make everything mechanistic in a way you know even even our theology and how we think of God is in many cases very mechanistic in that modern framing but then you know and then postmodernism you know basically said oh well it's all the same right you know and I think what metamodern is you know the the term aside right I think where we're headed is to try and figure out well what can we actually say is solid and I think people are looking for something solid not just from a you know how does the word world work but but but how do we make sense of it and how do we live in it and how do we how do we actually talk about an art you know instead of just an is you know if that's helpful at all but I wanted to add one thing about the metamodern thing real quick I'm glad it came back because I was hoping I wasn't going to be the guy who took it back but but it was really helpful to me there was a there's a movie review of Barbie and he makes the case that Barbie is the quintessential metamodern movie and the whole point was that it uses modernism it also uses postmodernism it uses the end jokes it uses the self-reference it uses breaking the fourth wall but it's and it's ultimately nihilistic however they're trying to find hope in relationship they're trying to not be cynical about relationships so let's find meaning in relationships and I think that's the metamodern move and it kind of ties into this whole discussion we've been having about community and how how you keep a church together is through sacrifice and community and you know reading the Psalms for the the old guy that you didn't know very well reading the Psalms through the night for him and then you know venerating his body at the funeral right like that's it's being part of it's it's going and putting in flowers in the flowerbed at church you know to get ready for pascal right I think you see it in stories because in stories you see the assumed background the assumed beliefs of people and like this this may seem completely random my wife really likes Dr. Quinn medicine woman which was like a show from the early mid-90s yep and watching that show is so interesting because they're telling a story that's supposed to take place like 200 years ago or whatever or I guess just a little bit over a hundred years ago but it is it is the most 90s thing ever yep yeah it is it is femme it's like one of the best examinations of feminism at that time because they're just telling a story with their values but you could very clearly see where 90s feminism is because of the way they want to tell stories yeah and it's this it's this underlying thing that's there and so if you watch a Marvel movie now the Marvel movies will be dramatic moments that will be undercut by comedy Deadpool speaking to the camera is to undercut your investment but what meta modern pieces are doing is we're going to tell those jokes but then we are going to like in a Coen Brothers movie there's humor but the it doesn't matter that there's humor it's still terrifying it's like the ready player one right I mean that's a meta like a meta modern film it like it gathers in all of these huge cultural artifacts and and then tries to tell us the reason why I like the ready player one example is because that the characters actually placing themselves under under scrutiny to grow and stuff so like that to me is what the matter like I don't really like the meta modern Christianity frame the Christianity I would throw that out because I don't think it I think it's that's too specific of a term to unify us but I would say like a step below that should be meta modern identity identity or something because identity means like something like sameness it isn't re-enchantment like re-enchantment so the reason why I think I met a modern identity is a stronger and better frame is because the in the postmodern I'm critiquing everything else and breaking that apart like like we said but I my understanding of the meta modern idea is I get I could seek where I'm at where where am I standing and then I and all right that's where the frame changes I'm gonna I got it Nate's Nate's been sitting patiently for a while we're gonna give Nate a crack and Gris is complaining because I'm not making good on the title and the thumbnail here so I know that the ortho conversation is not made I'll step back at some point I might clear the deck and we'll talk about we'll talk about Nate something going on with your sound go up I put the test a quarter into the hat at some point myself are you not it is you there's somebody there's somebody running a weed whacker nope nope I just anyway so say your piece back or Nate yeah sorry about that I had I thought I thought I had the background noise filter on enough in order to not catch it because but there is there's a carpenter working on our cabinets so yeah that's here and I got on first of all I wanted to say before I before I poke at you I wanted to say I've seen you on the streams lately I think you've had an incredibly intelligent insightful things to say but the reason I got on and took my decided to take my lunch early is I you know basically you just decided to call all North American Anglicans autistic weirdos based off of one off of one experience at Senate and I didn't think that was very fair and give me a second I'm gonna go ahead and say I'm not I'm not a fan of the Senate and I didn't think that was very fair and given the fact that I share my channel with a whole bunch of Orthodox and that I've been very nice to the Orthodox I didn't really think that that was a call for so that's pretty much it that's why I'm here I hope I yeah you it comes from someone who is on the spectrum we'll just say that because remember how did I if you are at a party and everyone there is a weirdo like I'm I am not saying I am separate from I am I'm not stuck in traffic I am traffic right when you're in traffic you are traffic right yeah well now that I know that you identify as being on the spectrum yourself I don't have I have not nearly as much problem with it and it's like I have a lot of people that I know that I know that I know that I have not really as much problem with it and it's like I have my life is such that I I am not on the spectrum but I am destined to be my destiny is to be surrounded by people who are including my son and my brother-in-law so well and that's the the autism is the search for purity in my perspective like I think that there's something occurring where the understanding of rules and where the edges and borders are the importance of understanding this mindset that there's a reason why it is naturally part of the human population yeah a very low tolerance for ambiguity which is one of the ways you could if you listen to me for anyone's time you can figure out very quickly that I am definitely not autistic because I have a very high tolerance for ambiguity yeah yeah right okay I'll get out of here Jacob you wanted to throw in a quarter on something I did I don't know if it's you know that profound or anything but the idea this idea of trust kind of stood out to me and I think that's what maybe this metamodern conversation is about it's like what can we trust when you know extreme skepticism is applied to everything and my thought was that you know if your parents love you then there's nothing anyone can say to you that's going to deconstruct that for you like like you know someone really smart way smarter than me can make incontrovertible arguments to me that my parents really don't love me and my response to them is like you sound real smart but my parents love me and I think that what we're looking for that survives postmodernism and maybe creates metamodernism and hate that we have to use so many syllables to describe this is just these experiences of trust and that come from shared sacrifice and really getting to know each other like sports teams also like really trust each other families sports teams you know small groups of people that have a shared sacrifice and I said before love but that's what I got true okay mark can you hear me okay yep okay yeah well metamodern modernism I'm guessing won't be dead until we stop referring to it as long as you're saying you're post modern you're metamodern you're neo-modern who knows what's going to come up next modern modern will be the dominant worldview or modernity yeah so that vocal distance point about Jesus coming back into the conversation that is he's setting the term yeah yeah exactly exactly yeah it's setting that it's kind of setting that their terms of the dialogue but with that said what you talk about Paul about going to church and going to go to a small church I think I think then somebody else in the comments piped in and said well small churches have their problems too it's all true wherever you go it's all problems and where young people particularly have young adults really have a problem with small churches is finding peers yes because they're all on the hunt for friendship and love yes and small churches on a great place to find that which then makes me think ends well yeah I'll start going to small churches there'll be plenty of them there well yeah right which brings us back to the problem of modernity and materiality which which draws them away from the church because there's all this tasty stuff right in modernity just we're swimming in sensuality and it that's the whole away from church and small church is not very not very sexy which brings me to mission why are we doing this why are and at 60 I'm finally beginning to see why why do I want to help my little church grow and build and be strong enough and the mission is you know it's Luke 17 one obstacles temptations to sin will come woe to them who bring them about but the mission of the church is to catch all those who got caught by temptation and it's just seems like the mission of the little church is to be the place to to catch people once they wake up and say the catch all the prodigal children and and I you know so Tuesday I had my usual monthly pastor gathering with our other CRC churches in the area which are all little and so I asked them I said tell me what's going on in terms of evangelism in your church and what's happening is each church had one or two people who through some strange thing found their way there and the pastor is doing basic discipleship with that one or two persons and this you know and I heard you heard it with Paul Renee this is the work of the church and no you're right and it's it's hard to scale but that's why little churches there's so many of them and they're so important but they're they're hard they're hard places to to work so yeah yeah all right thank you yeah yeah I was I came in there when there was conversation about metamodernity and about stories yes and my experience with metamodern stories one that comes to mind is everything everywhere all at once yeah is that they try to make the connection at the very ends the the reunification and it fails miserably and they don't know how to do it yet yep and so I think that's the reason why I don't know how to do it yet yep and in the end of that movie there's a certain idea that's like oh it's all meaningless but you know what we have family and then and they all come together I'm like I don't understand how that how you can come to that conclusion that that's like a valid way to kind of put a bow on everything right and I think that's where the lot of where a lot of the work is right now is finding out what is what is the destination of metamodernity it's a lot of people are exploring right now and I'm not sure if anyone has an idea of where it's going to go I think you're dead right and the irony about America is regularly on America mass media here family is the most important thing and then what happens every Thanksgiving I don't want to go and be with those people what happens in terms of divorce I mean what happens in terms of how many randos conversations where you know it's been the explosion in the middle of their family that has driven a truck through the emotional world of the people and so it's like compensating much family is the most important thing because my family is a mess I mean it's yeah you know you don't you don't need to take much past a freshman introduction to psychology to say I think something's going on here well and it requires a certain kind of sensitivity my wife will watch shows and she'll say this like this is nihilistic and then it won't be philosophical to show at all it's like is the purpose of all of this storytelling just to unwind anything like just to create doubt to tear everything apart and Noah I think a lot of those works that are trying to be met a modern are just nihilism like because the nihilists tried to we must picture Sisyphus happy right and it's like so a lot of this quote-unquote that's why I'm wondering if what's it called if re-enchantment might be better than metamodern because the what some people are defining as metamodern is actually just nihilism trying to be happy right like you we must picture him happy and it's just like yes but we can't so now what all right I'm going to give Cassidy the last word that I'm clearing the deck because the hive mind is in an uproar that I'm not making good on the title so you want to hear about home math I get it people want to talk about home math I I am fully expecting when we get to vocal and whole math and I'm going to be sitting here by myself and one big thing and it'll be cricket so those of you who are pestering me in the comment section when we get the whole math and vocal you better show up or it's going to be fast that's what I'm speaking of people on the spectrum yeah go ahead Cassidy final word um yeah I guess I just am still kind of trying to figure out in my head the conclusion of why it's then pointing to orthodoxy and how that's being played out fully I don't know I mean I'm I'm one of the people everybody's annoyed at who went to orthodoxy and it's happy about it but I don't think super chance are like CW you're not going to change the subject with $20 it's not happening or five either so you know if you want to change the subject CW you got to show your face anyway go on Cassidy I don't think I I don't I I think that I hear some defensiveness which I completely understand because I say it I say it tongue-in-cheek I'm not upset because I get it I think and I do think online representations of orthodoxy are very different than what I've seen actually in churches and I don't think you often get the sort of bittersweet nature of what it is to convert because you are basically leaving a culture for another and in my case I didn't quite have an option I I found out through the process that I wasn't quite Protestant anymore even though I'll always sort of be a bit Protestant because it was how I grew up yeah not Protestant enough to be able to honestly sit and be in communion in the way that they would want me to and so what do you do well you got to be willing to die to it and find a new life but that doesn't that doesn't mean it doesn't come with these small little difficulties of dealing with the death of yourself and that transition into a new person it's it's more complicated than you know the the online representation of it but I keep you can only really know that living it through it very true there's the last word so if you want to I'm going to take you off the screen if you want to if you want to stay around and you want to talk about it okay here we go I know people are up Dale Dale just came in what are we going to talk about Dale or is it math whole math next okay whole math and the matchmaking breakdown so what do you have to say about whole math Dale first I'm irritated with you big right because I watched five minutes of your video and then percentage spent the next three hours listening to whole math that's kind of the point isn't it I want to I mean I get lots of chance to spew my stuff on my channel so when I have somebody out I want to I want to understand them and the best way to understand someone is to have them talk yes they talk anyway just basically two comments about the guy what he is extreme it sort of reminds me of a saying I always have about when I make games and take players suggestion always give the player what he wants not what he asked for and that he is immensely good at taking videos down and reading what the person is meaning and not what they're saying a lot of the women enter enter to do type stuff he's immensely good at that he's also obviously been burnt bad multiple times in his life because he's gun shy beyond belief he was wearing a ring someone told me that on one live stream he was there without the ring and some woman's hand came and put that ring on him so I think there's a lady behind the scenes wanting to make sure that you know she's got a lock on her man that's easily possible very possible the other thing after listening to all his stuff I forget who said it it's something about the gulag archipelago in that they knew everything in the gulag archipelago but until they read and listen to the whole book they really didn't have a picture of the whole thing that's sort of the sense I got about him when I when I went searching for a wife at the age of 48 I traveled the world trying to go find a wife new very wrote up very specific things a lot like the things he's discussing of these are instant deal killers okay for instance if they don't want kids I'm not we got five minutes of conversation see if by those type of thing he has a lot of a lot of mythology to spot red flags much easier than the normal person does so as his advice of relationships I think it's totally worthless in most in most cases well and advice of finding the right person and eliminating people I thought it was extra very good yeah and and I think when we got all the way to the end and I've had the exact same thought Dale when I got all the way to the end and he basically said I don't know anything about marriage right and I thought I think that's right and he says I've never experienced it and I learned through experience and so um I I really appreciated his honesty right there at the end he said this is what I've studied I'm giving people what I know and and so it was a very it was a very good I hope I hope you and I get to talk more people complain because there wasn't enough religious talk in it but you know here's the thing conversations are not really commercial products they are conversations and and conversations are sort of bids for relationship um someone here just said uh somebody here just said I'm looking forward to the pearl interview next I would love talking to um I would love talking to her just in terms of because she's another online persona who has I wonder to the degree that the online thing has formed her it's audience capture or what's the story with the person behind the channel and to me that's much the people are always much more interesting than the product if I think back to your interview the criticism I didn't really even consider that you didn't do much of a religious aspect to it because he gave you the quick background and I was more interested in him in that you then you tried to push what he was religious or the only thing I started thinking about is what he didn't talk much about was his previous life dating experience what yeah Jeff did he truly have with you know people yeah and and I think I mean because there's also because here's a guy who we've never seen his face right and we don't know his real name and so I knew getting into you know he was not going to be transparent with respect to personal details that I knew that coming into it so yeah you you gave him real big leeway right from the get-go you don't got to talk about anything you don't want to talk about no no and especially I try not to scare people away but that's always I mean you know there is a reality about talking with people about personal things on YouTube not everyone should be doing this in fact it might be the case that none of us should be doing it so I really do want to honor people's it's not my job to try and get the dirt out that's I think that's pastorally irresponsible so no I agree that I lean a little more toward the openness like you do simply because I been I mean you haven't heard of me but I mean I've been an internet personality since the mid-90s you know where everybody knows everything about me so it's and we're also older I mean my you're a young pup as compared to me so well you still got your hair that's true all right any anybody else out there want to talk about the whole math talk if you do jump in I enjoyed my time with him I was very happy with the conversation although I love most of my conversations I you know we can talk about vocal in a minute but I I I enjoyed my talk with him and I'm glad we had a it so this came up because someone who he's also he's obviously also deep into integral stuff and we really didn't get into integral stuff too much and I I we had we had a mutual acquaintance and that mutual acquaintance approached me and said would you like to talk to home math and I said sure that's fine if he's interested in talking if he's not interested in talking I'm not going to bang on his door because I don't want to just go out and talk to people randomly but I know that he had seen a video of people randomly if they want to randomly talk to you is what you're saying exactly but I know I had had I had treated some of his stuff in my videos before he had left a comment so and I was just curious to see where it goes so that's that's just what I do so very interesting all right if anybody else wants to talk about what we got a question in here did you notice that home math didn't laugh once during that interview he was funny but didn't laugh I didn't notice that so interesting yeah does he take it off too seriously I think he he's he's very left-brained I'll say it that way he's very left-brained and so he he likes dealing with I mean T Grogon should you know be all over his channel because it's all about facts and logic so oh Chris Howard oh you got to mute your logic there you go oh Chris Howard oh you still have to mute that that that YouTube when I get it I'll know in a minute okay good okay Chris what's Oh I was wondering if if his drawing was insightful if you got anything out of the drawing more than you know happy faces and little circles or I didn't look at that close but I'm wondering if there was some secret in there I really wondered what he was going to draw and actually the you're right the drawing because I asked him at one point if he was a doodler and then after after the conversation it's already got sir to a certain point I look back at what he drew I saw that actually if you paid attention to his drawing he was communicating through in a sense another side of his of him was communicating through the drawing that his words weren't necessarily doing and so he was it was sort of the drawing sort of opened up a second channel with him so anything in particular you saw there that I should go look for I didn't recognize that he was mapping his life on that one graph with respect to 20s and 30s and I think the drawing also so if you listen to his mouth it was his left brain but the drawing communicates more of his right brain and so I I thought actually the drawing was helpful because I think it let another piece of him communicate that wasn't necessarily the one that had the microphone interesting yeah maybe we should make people do that although I just you know smiley face this I can do so yeah yeah Jon Stewart on the Daily Show just make big circles all the time when he saw that show people like what are you writing I said can't you see he's just he's just he's just trolling news people that's all he's doing anyway Stephen Swartz what say you um my thought on my thought on home math is he's a he's kind of a voice of wisdom inside his own generation for a unique experience that his generation is is is handling that let's just say his parents wisdom or his grandparents wisdom can speak through and just try it because I'm the dating game is is I'm glad I'm orthodox because it makes it can make we don't even we're not even really supposed to date but we won't get into that but if what I'd grew up I thought my life was going to be just like my parents that I even went to the same high school as my parents that regardless of who I am or or whatever I'm going to meet somebody at school or high school and just like my parents did somehow and life will proceed but even though my parents were are in their mid 60s and and the culture wasn't quite what's still almost as chaotic as it is now there are still just a little remnants of those locality that that that still carries the day but when he it was interesting to me that he talks about dating like he might talk about marketplace value systems yeah and and that's not a healthy way to even approach the subject but that being said it has to have its do because what are you saying is true like you can't deny it and and but anyway it's just I like his videos because even if it's a not a good relationship it's not a good worldview to approach romantic interest economically it's true and and kids don't have they can't listen to their parents saying well just you know go to work and maybe you'll find somebody yeah you know good points I was hoping you might have compared Christian views of dating and marriage and how they differ from home mats this gets into the whole conversation question and I just saw I was just I was watching again Jordan Peterson had a guy on who had written a book in the 80s about consciousness and you know one of the things that Jess had said about you know three Jordan Petersons so Jordan Peterson in that conversation was like Jordan Peterson with McGill Christ it's like when Jordan Peterson brings someone on the channel who has written a book that he likes about a topic that he wants what does Jordan be for Jordan Peterson basically is like I have these thoughts reading your book I want to tell them to you and have you tell me what you think you can do that but it doesn't necessarily make for a good conversation there's if you actually want to do something like that there are better ways to set that up and so if if let's say a third party wanted me to have a conversation with whole math about compare and contrast things I see in his channel with respect to Christianity that would be a different thing but especially in a conversation I am hosting it I have to be a good host and part of being a good host is you know hearing what he thinks now as anybody's watch my channel know I hear a lot of things that I would certainly be able to debate and sometimes might want to debate and vast majority of the time I just let him go by because part of it is before you actually want to engage with someone you should understand so now Andrew are you going to say anything or is this just the the Andrew live stream I don't know what you're all talking about I kind of just like I don't want to look I don't want to look in the background so I just joined sometimes I lose the context so give me a give me a recap give me a recap how's it going with the ladies Andrew what ladies okay have you ever watched home math what have you ever watched home math on YouTube home math a couple of times what do you think I don't know it's funny there you go there we go all right anything else then whole bath otherwise we'll get to vocal oh chance what say you hello I just joined it for the first time just want to say hello and I want to talk about local so I just listen all right we're gonna switch to vocal anybody if you're if you're on the screen and you don't want to talk local why don't you go ahead and drop out and we will we will switch we will switch to vocal what's all right local distance local distance yeah he play on the social that's age Andrew go ahead oh wow sorry well hello PBK Paul nice to meet you for the first time coming in yeah so vocal his work is tremendous talking about he breaks down post maternity I'd went to his Tammy interviews after your last talk with him and he really doesn't proficient job of laying out the whole system and how it undermines truth and in the conversation about metamodernity earlier in this live stream metamodernity I made a comment that love family to me be a little agreed with in the sense that you know even the atheist have to admit that they worship truth right that transcendental thing right that that logos underneath right and you know in the chat we accuse people is even the secularists and whole math and everything having a religion of their own right it's almost like everyone has a religion right we exist on a landscape of religion right underneath you know the axioms right of our values right the things that are unprovable right the incompleteness theorem and all that right sorry to break down but this adds to vocals conversation and bringing up that Jesus being preached and so I'm just happy to be into the TLC just now to discuss and so what do you think is key about focus presentation of postmodern modernity well vocal clearly I mean his his Twitter following arose in sort of prime anti wokeness and people were looking for ideas people had an instinctive revulsion for one reason or another to this woke wave that was coming and you know even just look at that how he identified his channel before he you know added himself as Michael and so and he also is you know kind of an auto didact philosopher and you know he doesn't he's not teaching in a university he he has studied and right so he and bidding government yeah yeah yeah and and so but he's also a Pentecostal Christian which is interesting he's not sort of your Richard Dawkins atheist and so no he's been a he's been an interesting voice and he's you know and I first got to know him first time I talked to him I think we spent five hours that day online two or two and a half or so were recorded yeah I guess I'm still kind of trying to figure out and and and so yeah even and so yeah he's just also a really sweet guy and he's and he's smart and he he'll often have some with one of the things that I that I really like that he's that he's done fairly consistently is he has also critiqued the right because if you're just out there just you know trying to own the libs I get bored with that because then it's just tribal right travel back and forth but I think the point that he's made that if they're right or the conservatives actually want to make a an important presentation that is productive moving forward they're gonna have to give something more than just oh remember when things were good and so I've appreciated that aspect of what he's done and I you know he taught me a bunch of philosophy and philosophers names that I didn't know so I just always enjoy talking to him he's a he's a really sweet guy yeah he's a really smart guy he knows the material really well and he engages with James Lindsay and I've been following James Lindsay since I've been following Jordan Peterson back 2016 I kind of identify even more so with local and Peterson because I'm also Canadian right I'm from Alberta and not living there now and stuff but it's it's almost like a cultural and athletic like third Christian Orthodox you might see Peterson and Volko leading starting something like that right because the idea that's the question because brother he's Pentecostal and I've met Pentecostals and people talk about how Pentecostals are the the most able to convert into orthodoxy and rest in it I wouldn't say most able I really don't know well enough but they have such a connection to the spiritual that in the sense that you kind of notice God everywhere or in the little things right like and that touches on the axiomatic and so in the idea of metamodern because Volko was pointed out that like you're abandoning truth or cutting the branch with which you sit part of that is is like recognizing that every good and perfect gift is from the Lord right and that includes like the sun shining on us right that includes the little things and I'm part of a group of other men that we talk about and we are in recovery because of the problems of the internet and whatnot right and when we talk and we get into fellowship about where the the true goodness is in life it's kind of like we talk about the good old days right which doesn't feel like a good answer and it's like when do we just one second I'm on the phone right sorry I'll hop get off here in a second in laws are here Steve has chance to so just go ahead and land the yeah I just want to finish this point and I'll I'll be listening is recognizing the qualities of the good old days when they're in the good old days right there's like the aspect of the sacrament of the marriage is a reflection of the image and so it's like what is what is the glory that is shining in that moment right because a big part of the contention everyone has is in sectarianism is is attaching ourselves our identity to the glory of that institution or that individual right and and so I just want to point out the better modernity is recognizing that Jesus is the truth right in that underneath sense and I think local and that of moderns might say that it's kind of right at this point right right well I got about because the unlawful pulled up unexpectedly alright thanks for popping in alright Steve you can unmute I'm you know there you are Steve so what's a you well you know I'm at least 20 minutes behind that you know the ticker on the bottom was about you come into what to expect to talk about well I mean this one is working for me too I don't even know local distance but I did see you posted analysis of your discussion with him I didn't watch the whole thing but my you know I guess it was a gris like complaint like hey talk about the orthodox EV solution or like art and literalist having been a medical transcriber if you get any single word wrong gris sort of fit and yeah and I get that yeah gris is always you know really making good I don't have any little index cards here but has to make good on the thumbnail in the title he's out there carpent about PVK isn't making good on the thumbnail in the title so yeah we haven't even done Driscoll yet so which one Paul Driscoll no Mark Driscoll he got the thumbnail oh yeah monster truck on a stripper pole and oh yeah that so I don't even know who that guy is but I did see I'm one of your videos where this dude swinging around in the church and I just thought I don't I don't understand this is like the hamiltization of like the play hamiltization of the church like what the hell is going on whatever anyway so you don't know me unless you are like have an incredible memory but I have posted responses on videos of you know I've posted responses on videos of yours for years I don't have the name okay I haven't watched a lot of it I've watched a bunch and I and your I just want to first just say thank you because you make a lot of sense to me oh thank you and for me I should say and I think also it's I've come to this conclusion I just recently saw in in your like like a product is it Protestant ization of the orthodoxy through one online channel I subscribe to and was overwhelmed by a bunch of four-hour videos owning everybody who's not orthodox and you know and I I I was so overwhelmed I had to turn it off because I can't I just can't get into that because I also in the same sense I feel like I'm wanting to almost just accept postmodernism its premise and modernism is wrong and I feel like you know I kind of wanted to resist this you know like postmodernism is just nihilism blah blah blah blah but it's like well I'm at the point willing to like say the the Enlightenment had some mistakes and so I like I'm happy to let go of that and I called myself an atheist for decades don't anymore and and to accept that you know free modern or you know I also looked up the term perennialism while you were talking to try to remind myself what does this mean and I think yes I agree with that I've been saying like it's true it's always true and the stuff that we've known for thousands of years why are we trying to suddenly reject that maybe we just don't understand it and so if if met a modern or neo-modern like let's just say said I can't the guy with a cross it was the old the 60 year old man he said he was 60 now he had to cross I don't remember saying anyway he said yeah mark he said you know neo-modern but whatever the term is going to be to describe the current consensus or the consensus we're arguing over if like the last guess it's if it's Jesus and it's everything the gospel is is claiming to be true maybe that's it and and you know we just sort of a bunch of us have been on these detours you know a phrase that Christian friends of mine have been putting in my mind and they told me where it is is so help me with my unbelief and yeah I think I think that that maybe there's a societal you know like we could see the pool of water some of us are actually dipping our toes into it now some of us are watching others dip their toe into it now and then there's some dudes who just do a cannonball you know into the pool right now and it's true yeah and it's it's you know I'm I'm like I'm you know got my arms at my side halfway behind a tree watching everybody dipping their toes in is how it feels but I also know myself and I know like I'm in the water already it just I think that it means something and it's supposed to be a certain way so I would say oh no I'm not in there like I tell my Christian friends I'm barely a Christian and he just smiles and looks at me because he knows me and and I I do see this happening and that's one of the things that's really attracted me to the live streams which normally be like actually going all over the place get to the point but everything that you're doing right now and everyone in the channel or this little corner which took me forever to figure out what you're talking about I thought it was like an actual place in one of the churches somewhere anyway a little shrine yeah yeah little corner like a place like the chairs are over in this little corner and that's right I think my estuary that's where we sit and talk what's that I think it's in Minneapolis someplace I know some guy that has this massive surface computer in front of them and some people confuse them for a supervillain but anyway but it's like what's been happening the conversations I've just been watching for I don't know and I don't know how to read the timer on a live stream but um that uh I think that it's happening to me and I think it's happening to the world I do believe that I mean Sam Harris may be the last one to admit defeat but people are younger than the other ones yeah yeah I mean maybe his the eminence of his doom is far off enough that he can ignore it that kind of a thing you know another very interesting part that came up earlier in your conversation today is oh no it was a different video the porn star John Peugeot connection the Trent Horn oh yeah connection that video I just watched that just before I jumped on this stream and I woke up late and to me that I forgot what I was saying but um something about Jonathan Peugeot and porn I believe yeah but it was uh the well the point there about you know oh yeah it was in there where you're talking like this a lot of um justification solve sanctification which I don't really know what those are but that there's the eminence point of salvation I suppose and then there's the afterlife salvation and and I could just I do want to stop talking because I know I can go on for thousands of years talking and I've had a lot of coffee but I have been really repelled by the like line drawn in the sand yeah of people asking me are you saved and I'll say one last thing and to contextualize it I after reading Romans and Galatians in a Bible study I kept asking me that I I came to the conclusion that Saint Paul wrote the big book if you know what I'm talking about that you're talking about and and I felt like I just said yes because I did that nobody invoked the name of Jesus Christ when it was happening to me I called myself an atheist while I was in the hospital I called myself an atheist while I did but as in Game of Thrones what's his face Stanis Baratheon said I've said the word meaning shouldn't I get the power of your God but I know that that's not adequate and and you know it should kind of bring yeah exactly exactly and to bring back the the thing that I kind of thought I was jumping into was you know is orthodoxy the answer to the metamon seeking I don't want to like walk through a doorway and now I can say you remember back in 1986 I walked through that door I'm safe or somebody else did something and across a couple thousand years ago I'm safe so you know I'll just turn back on my only fans you know I I don't want that to be true you know even if it is what I want is what I'm hearing is I have to be holy all day long which is like I just read this book interesting which it's unpopular because it's true I think I I have to do 10 11 12 all day long and which means I have to be holy and you know they will remove all that kind of language out of out of this that fellowship which I think is a great idea because I'm telling you it was a 24 year gateway drug into Christianity for me and that's I'm a slow learner and I'm arrogant so that's the main reasons why it took 24 years it could have taken one less but anyway so God bless God bless your stepping good for you good for you and what is the topic I well we're on we're now we're now into this portion we have gone afternoon and my bladder can hold a lot but when I sit here and drink so now I am you and I are going to drop out Steve and we're going to have a special portion of the show that was not previously advertised and that is going to be all by himself the CW airing of grievances and I will be right back after I run across the church and relieve my discomfort and CW you are going to have my channel for about three minutes to air any grievance you want to talk about doi beard to seize because I to make good on that on that $20 super chat that it was $40 Paul you missed the first one where I see $20 here yeah and I see $20 here that's $40 and there's another five forty fucking $5 you got you got to watch your language during the airing of grievances so here here we go okay thank you Steve you and I are going to drop out and CW is going to air whatever grievance or discuss whatever theology or philosophy and I will be right back okay well yeah you know Paul has a history of leaving the conversation when I say the most important or unexpected things so I guess this is like a proud tradition now but since he left my comment there I guess I'll read it because God knows nobody else fucking will a CW weeks somebody out there in the hive mind apparently wanted to tell us that there were two major Protestant thinkers of the 20th century who explicitly embraced the Eastern Orthodox view of God there would be notable theologian Carl Bart and Herman doi beard who actually happens to be behind me here perhaps Christian Baxter and Roy will discuss yeah I've heard that our own Christian Baxter actually has plans to interview dr. Roy a closer who taught comparative religions at the College of New Jersey not Princeton for I believe a couple decades at least and wrote a very significant work in religious philosophy from a Christian perspective called the myth of religious neutrality the hidden role of religious belief in theories can't recommend that book enough the myth of religious neutrality but the reason that I personally am looking forward to this perspective conversation with the Christian Baxter and Roy a closer is that Roy's work really disambiguates and ties together a lot of threads that have become kind of persistent themes here in the little corner of the internet including the relevance of Eastern Orthodoxy as I said Roy himself actually was the first to introduce me to this idea that you know not that there were Protestant thinkers indeed the most important Protestant thinker of the 20th century Carl Bart and then this other kind of infinitely obscure character who has this curious Christian philosophical approach Herman Noyvitt who explicitly endorsed the Eastern Orthodox understanding of God now the flip side of this of course is that they explicitly rejected what is generally the dominant majority view in Western Christianity and that's this notion of God is the being who consists of only and all perfections anyway Paul's back now so maybe he wants to reclaim his show I don't know you're doing you're doing well we're virtually not alone here so it's nice to hear your your thoughts and ideas so so what so so you can't air grievances without the without the one who's offended you Paul so now that you're back I can say you know there used to be rules there used to be rules it used to be that you would give a super chat and then at some reasonable point of time like generally before the little thing expired it would show on the screen it's not like it has to monopolize the conversation or hijack the show or something but you know generally speaking there was an understanding that super chats which are backed by you know real real currency would would somehow feature in the program at some point all right well let's well first of all let me let me I think I can do this I think I can I think I can send out that we're gonna do membership gifting oh there we go I think I can there we go bang gift five now it's the Santa Claus it's Santa Claus portion of the show there are now you buy indulgences indulgences today membership indulgences there they are they are out there to be had so let's let's dutifully often shows wait to the end of the show to go through their super chats so you know we sort of at the we haven't really talked about Mark Driscoll and the monster truck and Matt really wanted so Matt if you want to come in and talk about Mark Driscoll anybody wants to talk about Mark Driscoll this is the awkward thing Paul because like Mark Driscoll and John the Baptist I was trying to decrease right but now you forced me to come on your fucking show here so I just I can't win I can't win with so I have to admit I feel some relief listening to someone who held up that blue and yellow book using the using language that you're using right now and you're clearly very welcome I've been terrified of how that's going to happen for me next you know several months as I I know I'm joining a church at some point I I try very difficult I try very hard to like monitor my language before it comes out but I'd like us I'm like it I'm not always the one speaking I know it's gonna pop out and luckily I guess in different kinds of church services no one gets to talk thank God well at least around here Steve you know there's always gonna be somebody more profane than you and that's right that's why we keep CW here and Morillon actually has my back because he says yeah by ignoring the super chat he got an extra $20 an extra 25 so this is this is master level grifting from poor CW yeah well I'm expecting you to organize a non-conference Paul everybody comes and rebuilds my roof because that is something that I mean you're doing that now you can you know you can pay me back well maybe I'll have to it once you get your channel monetized maybe I'll have to drop some super chats it's never gonna be monetized Paul it's never going to be monetized never I couldn't play my tears for fears music if I monetize I'd love to I'd love to do it but I just can't all right okay Mark Driscoll Mark Driscoll Matt let's say you well I just wanted to say this this will be quick but I just wanted to oh gosh you're gonna full screen me I am I gotta hide here behind the virtually not alone bubble yeah well you made what I perceived to be a a classically reformed move in that video about about Mark Driscoll which I love and I don't know if everyone is mapping it this way but my sense is that you can get along even with the Mark Driscoll tank fireworks Christians because the person did work of Christ is it is that that saving element and not our propositional understanding not even our personal understanding of what that well I believe he said it doesn't bother him not that he gets along with them just that it doesn't bother him it's like I gotta get worried about it okay that too not like he's riding the tank getting of getting along is not having it bother you the end of getting along is having it bother you so I stand by I stand by what Matt is saying you keep going Matt you keep going I'm just I'm just trying I'm trying to gas up PVK a little bit because I don't think people do enough of that and it's the reason why he can do these sort of streams that have free streams that have it kind of host apparently it on some level it appears monarchically he can kind of host like Eastern Orthodox of America of Internet America kind of figuring out its adolescence it's because he he doesn't have to figure out how it need how church needs to look he doesn't have to turn beauty into some sort sort of work we have to do to get to know God it's not a ladder to immortality or something it's like for him he's he's just operating in a very reform perspective which which I think is nice and and he's not mad at his dad so he doesn't have a shadow self that has to be railed against he's not trying to beat up his dad by beating up Protestants or evangelicals so I just love that I don't know I was laughing almost as much as he was when he was making that video so well thank you Matt thank you Matt I appreciate that and I you know I it was funny because when Richard Rowland of Universal History fame you know made that tweet about you know I don't I you know is it the Christian or the Romans and it's like yeah but there's you know it's our sensibilities here that there's some and this is where I want you in the conversation CW because you more than most people in this corner both understand reform theology and are not offended by the mainline church that's a rare thing here you are our authentic progressive liberal ish and don't run that Paul because they ignore me worse than you think I don't ignore you nobody texts me as much as you text me there's nobody getting I told the pastor after the Easter sermon because you know I'm one of these people as a camaraderie to go up and talk to the preacher and so I told them that you know a lot of times I feel like this church doesn't give a shit whether I live or die and I think that that's really true like I mean I love it it's like a beautiful thing it's like this aesthetic perfection you know like from an urbanist perspective you could not do better than this downtown mainline Presbyterian Church I sporadically attend right it occupies like an entire city block they they paid eighty million dollars to tear down an eight story office building so they could acquire its underground parking ramp like this situation here now of that eighty million dollars Paul they only had to raise twenty do you know why because they paid cash for the rest of it now this is an obscenely well-heeled church and yet what are we doing here people what are we doing like I sometimes it's not clear sometimes annoying all the judices yeah well you'd like to think that but you know they're they're welcome with open arms so so so so CW well we should get a long-distance relationship with the mainline is what I'm trying to say so my Michael your take on you came in for Driscoll and the stripper pole and and Driscoll some Mark Driscoll symbolic world right well yeah so because it was right after the podcast that's when I came on to have my first randos talk with you and you know my perspective was like why you know there's not this 15,000 person church that that exploded overnight like there was something there's something other than just the small amount of stories that they were you know the people who had grievances that made it their way onto the podcast or whatever out of 15,000 people you know but my my thought was like I don't know I guess it's it's a problem with evangelical Christianity I don't know if there's a better solution in the other one but the problem is is that there's only one job which is pastor and I don't think that's the right job for Mark Driscoll per se but I mean I think maybe it's better than because I think it in in another context you know 600 years ago he would have just been martyred heretic or you know I even get to be called martyred just burnt burnt heretic but you know there because there's like a real fun when I see people talking about why they can dismiss him because he's disqualified as a as a preacher because of X Y & Z and I just think about like the offices of the prophets you know in the Old Testament and even John the Baptist like their part like their presence of was offensive to the senses and and the the test was always to see will you dismiss the true things that they're saying because of your offense your sensibilities being offended or will you you know ponder ponder what they're saying despite the unappealing package that it comes in so so I mean I think there's definitely something of that going on all right all right Michael I wonder what you think like so I've thought somewhat recently that evangelicalism almost invented this new archetype of church leader like you could call it the eccentric genius and there's this sense in which they depend upon this weird figure to extend credibility to their entire operation and yet there's this paradox that they can't actually create this person and I wonder if that creates a lot of the tension that we see or unsustainability or instability anyway in evangelical Protestantism well I mean yeah I mean because that's what happens when every time these churches implode is like somebody was like that it shouldn't be that guy that's in charge or you know whatever that thing is that that guy has they are jealous of it or ultimately ultimately and then they like you know I always think about like you know that toy that you give to like toddlers where it's like a box that thing is different shaped holes in it and then you have like like one block is a cylinder and one's like a triangle and one's a square and every time when people talk about like how God is a god of order and stuff I always think like that must be their that seems to be their concept of like what order is and you know they're not even they're not considering the the greater complexities of what's going on beyond their own understanding. You mean like their concept of order is the charisma of the confidence man? Well I just mean like their concept of order is you know a lot of times the you know that you know I would say you know it's interesting because if you have like Schaefer or something or you know the other I'm not as familiar with DoiWird but I definitely get the gist of the thing of their they would they would hold to sola scriptura but not but you know realizing that scripture is you know like Schaefer said it's like it's true it's true things but it's not it's it's it's true truths but it's not exhaustive truths and so it just gives you a starting point whereas you know obviously the kind of problem is you get to the point of and it's the defense against the modern modern world or whatever where if it's not in the Bible it's not of God you know which which Roy Klauser who you know may talk to Christian Baxter at some point in the future he calls this fundamentalist doctrine the encyclopedic assumption yeah the idea that the biblical tradition constitutes a kind of encyclopedia of reality that you can simply consult and it is not universal history by a different term can I can I ask what one thing and I'll leave though I want to say hi to Bizani we've we've gone back and forth so many times he's a really cool guy yeah can we compare because what Mark Driscoll did that wasn't a church service right that was a conference it was a men's conference that's important can we compare that to like I'm just in my head I'm trying to compare it to the summit conference which which which CBAC's rightly pointed out I don't think publicly but I'm just gonna air it out he rightly pointed out that it in order to even have a conference you've got to build that on Protestant infrastructure like like it was just I mean top-down the symbolic world conference yeah yeah and I think that's interesting that's a really neat supportive way that I mean Orthodox might be saying that they harvested I mean that they plundered the Egyptians and more power to them but they've they've taken the tools that have been honed in and improved upon like we've really put it down to a science how to do a conference how to do a Christian conference Protestants have they and and they took that and they ran with that in an orthodox way and really Matt really Matt like wasn't Jordan Peterson's coat the sword swallow of that whole thing yep they yeah was that a was that an orthodox move or a Protestant move it seems like people were divided yeah the spirit of Jezebel right there I'll move out of the way thank you so much for let me come on thank you Matt there's a woman pacing back and forth sometimes with an orange cat I think I wasn't sure what that did you see her she was hoping to not be seen she's on the internet yeah all right so CW your point well I would take it a little bit further right you know the Protestantism and in some sense has made you know the pastor like the go-to professional Christian right and for a lot of people the faith of the pastor is their faith yep and if the pastor fails they they're lost right and that's and I've so boxed about this before like you know in text but you know I mean that's a that's a that's a very unfair thing to do to a pastor it's I mean that's it's just it's wrong you know because it's like you know I really wrestle with this because I've had complex relationships as Paul and I constantly demonstrate like with you know it's a pitiable thing because it's really an impossible position and right it's an impossible position that many put themselves in well it's really hard to get out of it I mean you just tell people in your church you you tried to lineate this with people in your church they look at you and they basically it's like it's like telling those Haitians you know I'm just I'm no my hierarchy above you that's not true and the Haitian pastors are like yeah I don't care what you say it's like in the new it's like in the new dune look at the humility of the Messiah don't spoil it don't spoil it right but see part of it too though is this thing that we've done to where we've we've decided we need to ape after the corporate world I mean Paul back when when we were going through the the fall of Mars Hill podcast this is something you talked about at length right but you know we've we've aped the corporate world and so I mean there was an article about Mark Driscoll and the fall of Mars Hill talking about the founders myth right we know that was in the podcast wasn't it yeah I mean it came up in a bunch of different places right there was one article that was talking about how it was also kind of a Seattle thing right where we don't just we don't we don't we don't we don't I think the line was something like we don't just open a coffee coffee shop we create Starbucks we don't open a grocery store we create Costco you know like and in this idea that if I can just be smart enough and and if I can be that that Steve Jobs of Christianity then then I can scale this thing infinitely and take over the world right and it's in its hubris right and he was more than apple though that's the kind of unfortunate yeah but you know so I'm a beginner Christian I would say anyway so what one of the things that brought started getting me here is I went to a Bible study it was a I think it was Anglican but with guitars in a converted warehouse in San Francisco so it may not have been but anyway they had real bread but anyway but I only went to the Bible study and anyway my and it was the structure of the Bible study was the the priests would tell us what the point of each book was and I learned stuff in there that I did not learn as a child in Presbyterian Sunday School or in Catholic Elementary School or in the little books my mom used to read to me with the cartoon characters before it went to bed that King David conspired to kill his buddy and slept with his wife so basically my conclusion was all of these heroes are scallywags I didn't ever know that but to me it the lesson I got first of all was like well I guess there's hope for me too but the other one is like because this is a point being made earlier you couldn't be a hero Steve yeah exactly exactly I want to kill my friends and sleep with their wives yeah and I can still have like an unborn child and lay face down on the you know the floor for a week and still doesn't you know get my child to live I just watched The Chosen do so you know you're gonna see how much of a deletante I am if I continue to talk but my point is the about the you know these these Steve Jobs who hold the church together and they're like if Joel Olson gets caught like diddling a kid or something like that what's going to happen all those people and you know maybe they can reject him for all sorts of other reasons you know legitimately but it's it's King David you know Jesus Jesus his biographers try to you know they they ensure they link him to the lineage of David but that guy man after God's own heart yeah so so you know how how can you how can you not just judge but condemn somebody who's trying and fails even if he's you're like your leader if you are it's like you put him on a pedestal and I guess that's called idolatry and and so that's that's um that's one of the things that turns me off a lot to online apologetics and apologetic debates is ad hominem I think that's the right pronunciation against the man some people are annoyed even because your your mic goes against your jacket and it's oh yeah thank you for the feedback I think maybe does this work yeah that's better oh okay all right I thought it would be better we should we should land the plane here and I have some super chats to get to so any any last comments on Mark Driscoll symbolic world that that'd be the great title of a video I'm gonna have to make a video just entitled that mark Driscoll symbolic world well I just wanted to say that since Bonnie's here and and Chad was saying you know we rarely get to identify with my ethnic origin I just want to say it's good to have a fellow in the in the street and appreciate your presence here I'm going to your home kind I'm going to your home country this summer I'm going to visit Italy three weeks in Italy awesome we need to talk yeah I'll make sure you get to the good places so all right thank you any any last words um just one thing about the super Christian and the professional Christian and that's one thing right one of the other things we miss when we do that and and this is not exclusive to Protestantism by the way but when we make our image of what it means to be a Christian of something else that disqualifies Jesus right that's especially a concern off of a men's conference with monster trucks and you know like bodybuilders and crap like that any definition of a Christian masculine Christian that disqualifies Christ right is wrong right and and that's important and and that's that's kind of what all of this thing does right is you know we have this tendency to hey look there's a faithful Christian that's that's a good thing like we should we should be encouraged by that we should you know that should should work for us right but instead what we tend to do is we tend to make them and some image like our image of Christ and and that's a that's a that's that's a really bad thing to do to somebody who's fallen and frail and finite just the same way that we are and maybe he's gonna pull a David so yeah super Shane any any last things on Mark Driscoll symbolic world oh he just glitched all right well I'm gonna I'm gonna take everyone out of here except for my beloved CW and we are going to do the super chats together I'm looking forward to this here we go get a recurring feature maybe maybe we got we got we got we got Mountie 50 pounds that's even more than fifty dollars thank you Paul for caring about us randos except for the ones you know who you ignore oh there's me yeah what do you think about this Paul what do you think about the Baxter getting the big the big get I think it's awesome I think I can't wait to watch it I think it's good this is why this is why I'm not a super Christian this is why we have a body PVK doesn't have to do everything that happens in the in the corner I have my role to play and and we have more and more channels and voices in the corner so more and more things conversation could be really explosive like I really do because like I said like you know Roy actually believes that both Luther and Calvin latently endorsed the Eastern Orthodox understanding of God he's had trouble finding like you know concrete evidence for that but it's a very provocative assertion that links the essence of Protestantism to Eastern Orthodox spirituality at its core in terms of the ontology and if anybody understands what the fuck I just said that's an exciting idea all right our next super chat two major Protestant thinkers of the 20th century explicitly embrace the Ethan Orthodox view of God Karl Barth and Herman Doyle weird perhaps CW and Roy will discuss what do you think about that Paul did you get a comment on the ontology today I'm excited for it I am looking forward to this maybe I have to bring you so Shane didn't get a chance to talk chain was there something you want to say yes and no but I'd rather just listen for another opportunity it after did it have to do with the ontology at all no okay it had to do with your guys's broader discussion and yeah so I'll just wait and see if it comes back up all right we're getting close to land in the plane so I'll bring you well then let me go ahead and okay no go ahead go ahead I've got one more super chat with CW so I was having a conversation chat after that to do that CW can help me with so I recognized that there was some parallel between aspects of your guys's conversation a minute ago and this conversation I was having with a friend of mine about the the challenge of somebody requiring or even including a statement of faith because there are positive reasons for having such a thing and there are just unfortunate boundaries that such a thing puts up like in my in my church group there is what group is that same I'm not telling you in any case I mean and that's the the thing is it is difficult to word a statement of faith in such a way that doesn't exclude somebody in that in in certain ways that's the intent is to say in this group these are the things that I'm not saying that these are the things that these are the boundaries we're making we're intentionally identifying ourselves with these people and and without those people and it's it's it's so frustrating because depending on who's in charge writing that statement of faith it can just be tragically exclusionary where is where is Sam when we need him or Luke who they're confessionalist no these are the these are the issues with confessionalism and in a sense again can't live with it can't live without it and and so so where the rubber met the road was in this specifically everything seemed great with the statement of faith that my friend and I were reading on our church's website until they got into the area where they were talking about their treatment of the Bible well like and I said there notice I didn't say ours and of the church itself and it is those two things are so ridiculously difficult to say how to what degree like because interpretation of scripture is impossible to avoid so when you make some claim like we believe the Bible well either it's meaningless or it's very specifically exclusionary in certain ways and and then also with regard to the the value of the Bible the value that you hold around like participation in church itself how do you say in the same way that you say we lean on the Bible so heavily we depend on it this is so critical to our relationship with the understanding of who Jesus is and how we ought to follow him the same is true of our interaction with each other in church like without each other we're so lost in this and yet to say to try to quantify what is required of a member with regard to statements they make about how they are going to treat the Bible and interact with church members is just oh it's so torturous it is I love the fact that you and your friend are reviewing the statement of faith on the website you know there's almost a sense in which like yeah we already have a level of detachment that is distorting the entire phenomenon here perhaps anyway so throw that in the mix for next time maybe huh all right thank you Shane you bet and then he's gone I'm in charge your chats are alive I'm clicking I am I'm not going to avoid any super chats here I want to make good on the implicit agreement that I supposedly have through the great Church of YouTube to our dear our dear brother CW Weeks so super chats are a lie no okay now here's one from Neil who's you know who's been on the channel did vocal expand did vocal expand on this simo simoly crawl concept could that be an element in the understanding of the meta modern well if we knew what the fuck that was maybe maybe maybe we could begin to explore this question but but CW the super chat demands that we voice in part consciousness Congress that never gets spoken out loud would you ever see the SNL skit where it was like what was it like Obama's angry inner black man or something yeah he would interpret that I'm that for you yeah I appreciate you being my inner black man CW and that's that's that's that's quite supportive of you well I'm afraid we have now come to the end of the program where I am going to play some branding and CW I'm going to give you because you you obviously you contributed forty five dollars to this to this to this fine endeavor and yeah so any any last final words before the branding commences you know I hope that people get excited for the possibility of Christian talking to Roy because I do believe that in that conversation lies the latent possibility of exposing a lot of convergences that haven't been explored between the two major constituent groups of our little corner family namely Eastern Orthodox folk and wild eyed Protestants and I do I do think that there's a much deeper abiding continuity there not just with them but you know with our Roman Catholic brothers and sisters as well that has yet to be explored I agree I agree I think that's an helpful insight and some people I'm sure are out there wondering why I would give CW f-bomb dropping Minneapolis resident that he is excommunicated literally because he made them do it to him sort of but this is a whole show Paul I know well so but okay now that you have the audience you've done your first conversation and your second conversation both subs yeah you know well I thought I would start out easy wavin' gentle you know I tackled unbelief with Nathan Norman first and then I went right to race in America with Andre Henry and predictably everybody was perfectly happy and nobody you know had any strong feelings at all and so what will the next conversation be next will be fucking Paul VanderKlay if if if he agrees to come on so yeah it'll be the great dressing of wounds is okay well Chad has dropped a super chat in the that we absolutely must engage charity and brotherhood or no right now now in order to close this out we should participate in the in the in the in the liturgy I'm about to say the special words and we'll see if you can respond with the special words ducks eat bread they do they do they like it see there we are all right everyone went an hour long today but so say we all yuck yuck most expensive Friday Q&A ever participated Wow yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah well where are you oh boy yeah walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me oh Jesus walk with me walk with me yeah my mama me walk with me to you all with my yeah and walk with me to oh yeah yeah walk with me walk with me hold my hand hold my hand oh oh yeah yeah Jesus oh oh yeah yeah walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me yeah Jesus walk with me yeah yeah yeah oh yeah yeah yeah yeah I said walk with me, I said walk with me, I said walk with me, I said walk with me, How y'all doing? Walk with me, walk with me, walk with me, I'm on my way to the end, I want Jesus, to walk with me, Walk with David, a little shepherd boy, you made him a great king, I know David shouted for joy, Walk with David, a little shepherd boy, you made him a great king, David shouted for joy, Walk with me, walk with me, walk with me, walk with me, On a long Jesus journey, walk with me, walk with me, gotta walk with me Lord Yeah! That was rocking great brother Oh yeah Music