https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=x-baSlYBOAE

 This is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I walk through my current draft of my Sunday sermon. And we've been going, we started in Exodus, really a series about liberation. And liberation is an interesting topic because it begins obviously with the liberation of the slaves from Egypt. But then just as the old preacher saying goes, first you had to get Israel out of Egypt, then you had to get Egypt out of Israel. And that's what happens in the desert. And to get Israel out of Egypt takes, well there's no real timeline, maybe a few months to get Israel out of Egypt. And then 42 years to get, at least to try to get Egypt out of Israel. And then by the looks of the book of Joshua, really never quite succeeded. Now in the Ten Commandments, as I mentioned a few sermons ago, the Protestant Reformers looked at the first and the second table of the law, which likely had no correspondence to the actual tablets that had come down with Moses. There were probably two copies of the same covenant that would be placed in the Ark, which would be saying something about God living with his people. But in terms of these two tables of the law, the first is Love the Lord your God, Commandments 1 through 4. I am the Lord your God, you shall have no other gods before me, no graven images, take the name of the Lord your God, place the name of the Lord your God upon a vain thing. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, the first table of the law. And then the second, honor your father and your mother. And then some quick commandments that everyone seems to agree upon. Sometimes I hear these Christian atheist debates and oh the Ten Commandments and it's like you shall not kill, you should not kind of commit adultery, you shall not steal. Everyone, you shall not bear false witness against your neighbor. Everyone seems to agree with Commandments 5 through 9, almost universal agreement. And you can find these commandments really throughout the ancient world. Now, I've really summarized this slide too already. And these come short, you know, in short bursts, two words in Hebrew, you shall not murder, you shall not kill, you shall not commit adultery. And well, there they are. Now we'll pick on US presidents for now because why not? Who in these pictures violated the seventh commandment? Now think about it a little bit because probably the answer is jump out at your mind because when you look at the seventh commandment, you shall not commit adultery. The meaning is completely obvious to you. And more than likely, if you're listening to me in American culture or in Western culture, you understand exactly what the commandment means and you understand exactly what you are and aren't supposed to do. So if I had you to circle the adulterers on this page, you would probably readily do so. Bill Clinton, of course, rather famously with Monica Lewinsky. Well, what's the definition of sex? And then with George W. Bush and Barack Obama, we seem to have two presidents that had, at least from external appearances, quite good relationships with their wives. They seem to love their wives quite a bit. They seem to have been faithful to their wives in many ways, sort of the model Protestant image of the nuclear family. And then, of course, we have our current president who has a reputation. I'll just leave it there just a few days before the American election where he's up for reelection. I don't. My intent is not to make this a political sermon about the president's taste in women. But if we look a little bit more deeply at the commandment, it gets a little tricky. And again, I'm pulling on the illustrated Bible backgrounds commentary, which has a lot of interesting takes on things. The biblical texts reveal that the death penalty could be imposed on those found guilty of committing adultery. Oh, boy. But in the ancient Near East, adultery is considered an act of sexual relations between a married woman and any man, not her husband. Monica Lewinsky was not married. I don't know about Donald Trump and these women that he tends to pursue. I don't think they were married. So what do you mean? What? That's not adultery. Oh, well, we would imagine they committed President Clinton and and Donald Trump committed adultery against their wives. But that's not really how it was written or understood in the ancient world. Married men could have sex with single women and and either or not subject with single women and. Sex with single women and either not be subject to any penalty in the case of prostitutes or their own female slaves or subject to a penalty much less severe than those for adultery. And that was pretty common in terms of law codes in the ancient Near East. So, again, we're sort of reading these commandments and what we thought these commandments supposed to be clear and obvious. And, well, in their context, everyone sort of understood then. But contexts seem to have changed. As some of you might jump in and say, oh, that's that old double standard where men could do what they want, but not women. Well, not necessarily exactly, because in the contemporary frame, we like to get all sciency and evolutionary biologists have basically said, well, is it the double standard or do men and women have different genetic agendas? Presidents Hollywood stars have always seemed to have this this biological urge to sow their wild oats. Now, low status men have seemed to have the same urge, but high status men seem to have much more availability of women who are excited to do it with them. Now, to the degree to which Genghis Khan had willing female participants, that could certainly be argued. But recently there was a genetic study that suggested that one in two hundred men in the world and obviously a great deal many more in Asia percentage wise are direct descendants from Genghis Khan. Genghis Khan, at least at this point, is the one human in history who we can very quickly identify as being the most manly man to have spread his wild oats further and more completely and more successfully than any other identifiable single human being that we know within what we look at as modern history. But now women have a different agenda and a different strategy with respect to passing on their genetic codes. Women, females, due to long gestation, invest in each offspring and try to leverage the male to invest their in the woman's genetic descendants. In other words, men are looking to spread their seed all over and women are looking to invest in just their few children and to direct the men's attention to be faithful at home. And so that seems to say that, well, rules against men male philandering seem to be along the lines of female genetic strategy. And this, of course, builds up all. Did you ever notice in Cinderella how it's always the evil stepmother? She doesn't care about the offspring of other women and she's bitter about raising them for men that's often called cuckoldry. And a few years ago, Sam Harris, celebrity atheist, made the comment, each of us has twice as many female ancestors as male ancestors. And when you first hear that, you say, oh, that can't be because every single one of my ancestors is a product of one man and one woman coming together to make a child. Well, the way this works is if you look at the the your your tree and it goes back and back and back, what you begin to see is that if you count all the distinct females, you find that there's lots of men who maybe not in a particular generation, but back over generations. Look at Genghis Khan. Genghis Khan would, especially if you're Asian, appear in your family tree many, many, many, many, many, many, many times. And if you look back into the ancient world, into a world of rampant polygamy, there were, well, if you look at the total number of people on your list of descendants and you count them as male and female. Well, all those women were able to pass down their genetic material and there are half as many men on the list. And you say, oh, this guy explains it at a at a core thing. Well, exactly half the branches of a tree of ancestors are occupied by males and half by females. Duh, more of the males are repeats. You see, the claim refers specifically to the number of unique individuals that's in the tree who became ancestors and remain ancestors today. Why do these trend female? A greater portion of females successfully reproduce because human societies typically range between mostly monogamous to highly polygynous. More males never reproduce, thus never occupying a single slot in anyone's ancestor chart or have fewer offspring, thus more likely to have had all lines die out in the present day. That means that the female strategy of investing in their young actually really works well for women and about twice as many women get to actually carry on their genetic material to future generations than men. An extreme example is Ganglis Khan as an ancestor of women living in Mongolia today. He does not occupy one slot in their 24 genera- he does he does not occupy one slot in their chart 24 generations ago, being one sixteenth millionth of their ancestry, but may appear over a million times over. Being one sixteenth of her ancestry. Ganglis Khan's wife, Borte, on the other hand, will not appear a million times because so many of Ganglis' children will show up on our home individual's chart where mothered by many other women. Other men from the 12th century Mongolia are sparse or entirely absent. Ganglis Khan blotted the landscape and dominated the terrain with his genetic material. That would be called mammalian male success. No, the numbers are not exactly two to one, but the but the probable source of Harris's statement is 2007 article about research in the New York Times finding this genetic material. Now, one might argue that well maybe high status males like United States presidents and good looking Hollywood stars. Now Brad Pitt was born the same year I was. Why does he look so good and I look so like this? And if you look at well Brad Pitt recently in a in a in an article said Brad Pitt jokes about his personal life being trash mag fodder. After his cheeky Golden Globe speech, Brad Pitt was again made public mention of his love life, this time labeling it it disastrous. Well, why would you say that Brad? Brad, here's a list of well really only the celebrity girlfriends that Brad has been with. And the assumption in the contemporary landscape is that he's had sex with all of them. The number is probably doesn't you know double this if you can sit her girlfriends beforehand and hookups with groupies or who knows what who knows what and where but here's the crazy thing about Brad Pitt. Brad Pitt, unlike Genghis Khan, hasn't reproduced. The intervention of the pill has radically changed it seems what we do with sex. Now Brad Pitt's fertility seemed to have come with woman number 14 on this list Angelina Jolie, who he was with from 2005 to 2016 married in 2014 separated in 2016 and they're currently in a bitter custody battle over their children. Angelina Jolie seemed to like to adopt children from all over the world and then it had a set of twins and one other child with Brad Pitt and that's who they're currently fighting over. After this Brad Pitt found a married model apparently. And so at least against Bill Clinton and Donald Trump, Brad Pitt is the adulterer because Brad Pitt apparently had sex with a married woman. And Brad Pitt had done that before I have no idea. But this shows you how radically the pill and contraception has changed the entire landscape of sexual and familial behavior in the contemporary world. Now, none of this should be news to anyone, except if you live in the predominantly Christian world, because what happened in Christianity with respect to sex and mating is what these two scholars Tom Holland and Tom Wright and their conversation on Unbelieveable a couple of years talked about in terms of the Apostle Paul's depth charge. While some of these patterns had been in the Jewish communities, Jewish communities were a small group within the Roman Empire. What happened was that the Christian religion began to remake assumptions about marriage and slanted the whole thing much more towards monogamy. The Apostle Paul told men to love their wives and give themselves up for their wives. Submit to one another as to the Lord, the Apostle Paul tells married couples. And this was radical in the Roman Empire. And it began to remake and reshape family life and reproduction, growing in the Christian community and spreading and spreading to the point that by the time we hit, let's say 1950s, United States, North America. That was the cultural standard. You had the same sexual standards of fidelity for men and women, which is why when I showed you that first picture, you said, well, Bill Clinton committed adultery against Hillary and Donald Trump committed adultery against seemingly all of his three wives. And this for the ancient world would have been absolutely normal. High status men had sex when they wanted and women basically worked the other reproductive strategy, which is invest in their children. So while Donald may cheat on Melania, she invests in Baron. That's simply how the common human practice goes. Now, the Christian standard, however, is high aspirational. In fact, many Christians really struggle to meet this standard and many Christians don't in fact live up to it. Although Christians do live up to it at higher rates than others, at least Christians who are serious, go to church, pay a lot of attention to their Christian belief. Christian faith tend to commit adultery at lower rates than the rest of the population. You only call out the double standard when I mentioned those presidents before because you've been tutored by Christianity and the Apostle Paul in many ways was more successful than Genghis Khan at least promoting an idea. The Apostle Paul, who, to the best of our knowledge, had no children himself. When we read the Catechism on the Seventh Commandment, it bears all of that out. It is, in a sense, in a phrase that Jordan Peterson got in trouble with, enforced monogamy. What does the Seventh Commandment teach us? That God condemns all unchastity. Of course, this is leveraging Jesus' words in the Sermon on the Mount. And that therefore we should thoroughly detest it and live decent and chaste lives within or outside the holy state of matrimony. This is, as C.S. Lewis called it in mere Christianity, the Christian standard. And in the Protestant Reformation, the nuclear family in Luther's mind became the little church. Sex is for marriage exclusively and even, well, we're to be chaste, the Heideberg Catechism says. Does God and His commandment forbid only such scandalous sins as adultery? We are temples of the Holy Spirit, body and soul, and God wants both to be kept clean and holy. This is why God forbids all unchaste actions, looks, talk, thoughts or desires and whatever may incite someone to them. This is a high bar indeed. And in thought and in action, even a committed Christian like Jimmy Carter raised eyebrows when he was president, when he admitted to lust in his heart. The country in the 1970s sort of sort of giggled under its breath at it. But you can see how quickly many things have changed. In fact, not too long ago, I had a very interesting conversation with a YouTuber named Voush who described himself as a gender abolitionist. And, well, that's something that I never heard of when I was growing up. A gender abolitionist basically says that, well, we should get rid of pretty much any talk about both genders and people should not be considered to be male or female or anything like that and should be free to do as they wish. This is in many ways a product of the sexual liberation movement in the 1960s. Prior to the late 1960s, there was a social stigma against premarital sex, extramarital sex and same sex behavior. These were considered to be archaic rules best done away with and consenting adults should be able to do as they please. How is this working out for us? What do you think? There's a very interesting article in the New York Times about a woman and the title written by a woman and the title of it was he asked permission to touch but not to ghost because at this point, basically, consent is the only rule, at least in the New York Times. And she talks about this younger man that she was dating who've been schooled in the new tradition and asked consent, probably tutored at Title IX in colleges, about what to do. And she writes this, sex makes me feel unsafe, not because of the act itself, but because my partners so often disappear afterwards. Whether I waited hours or months before the first time. So it's after sex when I feel truly vulnerable. Yet something else about his asking also made me uneasy. It seemed legalistic and self protective, imported more from the courtroom than from a true sense of caretaking. And each time he asked, it was as if he assumed I lacked the agency to say no on my own as if he expected me to say no, not believing that a woman could have the desire to keep saying yes. So a little bit offended at that all of this permission asking. Still, I like that he was trying to keep me from keep from hurting me unawares. He texted me that night reassuring. I decided I would call his asking lovely. I decided I would try to learn. The second time he was in my bedroom, and I'm going to clip not read the more salacious parts of this New York Times article. He paused with his hand at the zipper of my dress. Is this OK? He said. I looked him the eye. I didn't laugh. I said, yes. And then it goes on and then I'll skip that part while he was waiting for his Uber to arrive. He asked if he could cook me dinner next time steak with sauteed mushrooms and fig balsamic reduction. I mostly make scrambled eggs. I said he laughed and kissed me and said, See you soon. I did not see him soon. I texted him a few times in the days that followed playfully at first and then more pressing. He ignored me. At first I couldn't believe he didn't answer. And then I was devastated. My roommates didn't understand why I was so hurt. So much more hurt than usual because he kissed the soft part of my arm. I said. And then he disappeared. They looked at me blankly because he asked for my consent over and over. So sex felt like a sacred act. And then he disappeared. A sacred act, one roommate said laughingly. Girl, you sure don't treat it like one. And she was right in a way. Asking about my feelings during sex didn't extend to caring about them after sex. Consent is not a contract of continuation. But in the days and weeks after I was left thinking that our culture's current approach to consent is too narrow. A culture of consent should be a culture of care for another person, of seeing and honoring one's humanity and finding ways to engage in sex while keeping our humanity intact. It could, it should be a culture of making each other feel good, not bad. I think she even wants to go deeper than that feel good thing. And if that's the goal, then consent doesn't work if we relegate it exclusively to the sexual realm. Our bodies are only one part of the complex constellation of who we are. To base our culture of consent on the body alone is to expect that caregiving involves only the physical. But wasn't that the goal of the liberation movement to say, well, if it's physical entertainment, consenting adults should do as they want. But perhaps sex is something deeper and has to do with mind and heart. And if you only want my body, then maybe you don't really want me as if me is something that isn't just my body, but actually involves my past, my future, my whole self. She's discovering something that is very ancient and very old. And in church, we might say very sacramental. I talked to a young man a couple of weeks ago. He was homeschooled from big family. His parents were committed Christians, but not too committed to church and so struggled with that. And in college, like many others I talked to, he deconstructed. And what that means is sort of gave up belief in certain parts of his faith. And the resurrection of Jesus is something that for him, at least at this point, is sort of doubtful. And so then he was asking me, well, is belief in the resurrection of Jesus really something that a Christian should have? Can't Christianity be more about doing Christian things and acting in a loving way and all of that? Why is it that this act? And so then I asked him a question. Why is it that the act of sexual infidelity is so important to men and to women even today when so much of the rest of the sexual landscape has been liberated from these old norms? This is the one prohibition, it seems, we have not liberated ourselves from. In fact, we have taken the Ten Commandments and strengthened it so that Bill Clinton couldn't just commit adultery against another man by sleeping with that other man's wife. Bill Clinton committed adultery against his wife, and Donald Trump committed adultery against his wives. What's going on? What's the deal with the act? And I said, well, it's that one act where all the layers come together. And this is exactly what that New York Times writer understood, that something about that act, something about sexual union engages all the layers. And yeah, it doesn't have to. We've had slavery and prostitutions and one night stands forever and ever as common as as human beings are. But but somewhere in the back of our mind, people feel that this is different. This is special. There's something like a sacrament, a sacred thing in the midst of a common world where more than just my body, something that is deeply me is involved, even if I can't quite really put all my words around it. Something is breaking through. Now, in the ancient world, in many ways, they had liberation before we liberated things. They had all sorts of ways in which sex was practiced and often sex was a religious thing because people noted that sex, alcohol, psychedelic drugs were sort of portals to another world. And so you would have the Temple of Aphrodite, where they would be temple prostitutes and shrine prostitutes and a bunch of things, because the experience of ecstasy that sex induces sort of made them imagine that this is a religious thing. But these moments of ecstatic escape couldn't last. They were merely experiential, often with a post ecstatic downside, which this woman is writing about in The New York Times and says, OK, consent, consent, consent. What I really want is permanence. What I really want is communion. What I really want is one fleshness. Now, the resurrection is that one act that breaks through the shroud of death and links us to the age to come beyond this world. The portal then bleeds into the rest of life, making more and more of self-denial, living a sacred thing. And so when the Apostle Paul and Jesus teach about this, that's what they're pointing to, that sex isn't simply transactional. Sex involves us at a deep level and gives us a pointer to a life that we want, but can't necessarily secure on our own. This is why the chastity, hence the chastity interpretation in the Heideberg Catechism and the Christian standard remains a demanding standard. The Christian standard remains a demanding standard whose reward is often in the strengthening pursuit. Often rewards are like that. If you want to have the reward of being well, being able to play a musical instrument, it involves self-denial. Now, some Christians have basically imagined that, well, if I just follow the Christian way, then I will have the best sex ever. It's not exactly what it means. What it suggests is that there are deeper things to be found, deeper portals to be discovered than just sexual fulfillment. Now, high status men are in many ways doing what they've always done, and this is throughout the Christian centuries as well. High status men and women do as they do. Not a lot of seed sowing anymore. That seems to be too expensive. The government requires us to main chain our children financially, and children are not cheap. And so with the help of contraception, it's sort of pagan temple escapism. Or is there another way of pursuing another way of glory, of resurrection and eternal life in a more permanent way? It is indeed telling to have Brad Pitt talk about his love life as a mess, because in the eyes of many, he certainly has had the best, but he looks back and thinks, maybe there are deeper things that I have rushed over. Maybe there's a portal to another place. Maybe there's a simple portal that connects a costly sacrifice to eternal reward. Maybe there's a portal that invites us into his disciplined life to find that the age to come can increasingly break into the age of decay and wait for all of these fulfillments to finally come to pass.