https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=UaYtKNeWTK8

 Hi, this is Paul. The following is a video that I'm not in, so if you're not interested in this, then that's just fair warning because I'm not in it. But it was a conversation that Jacob had with Catherine and Eamonn Wilson, who were the organizers of the Thunder Bay Conference, and Father Eric, who attended the Thunder Bay Conference, and all of these individuals have been neck deep in the, or at least three of them have been neck deep in the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and in this little corner of the internet, and all have followed a lot of these conversations carefully. And Jacob put this, orchestrated this and put this on his channel, and I thought it was a really tremendous sort of thinking about the importance of the Thunder Bay event, which is why I'm sort of putting it on the time slot that I posted all the other Thunder Bay events, and thought it would make a good video to include with all of those other videos. I just, I thought the conversation was tremendous and there was a lot of important stuff in it. It's fairly long, of course, but Jacob's channel is very small, and so most of you wouldn't get a chance to see this, but I thought there was a lot of good reflection on what's happening in this little community, why is it important? So of course, Father Eric is a member of the Roman Catholic Church, Eamon and Catherine are both Protestants, Jacob is a Hasidic Jew, so there's a fair amount of diversity in terms of perspective on this. Jacob is a very interesting individual. He's got a lot of, he's a very creative thinker, he's got a lot of his own ideas, and he's been a very big asset in this little corner of the internet. So I wanted to, I asked Jacob if I could share this on my channel, and he jumped back, yes please! So he was very enthusiastic about me sharing this, and I'm very enthusiastic about sharing it, so I hope you enjoy it as much as I did. Shalom! I am here with the Reverend Father Eric Seitz, and Dr. Eamon Wilson, and his lovely wife Catherine Ovelson, and we are going to discuss what happened at Thunder Day, and what we can learn from that and take forward with us. So take it away guys! Well first of all, it's nice to see you Eric, I haven't seen you since the conference, so this is nice. I've been curious, since we said we were going to do this, I've been curious what your thoughts have been since the conference, what your takeaways were. Yeah, yeah. So I had to leave early Sunday afternoon, I had things going on on the Monday afterwards that I couldn't miss, so I had that long drive across Minnesota, back to North Dakota then, and you know, while I was driving back, all I could think about was ecumenism, and just this, the quality of conversations that I was able to have with different people there, really, really, it's just, my mind was going in that direction, you know, like, and I guess something I would want to see is see if we can bring different churches together to be able to have that kind of quality of a conversation. So that was my first takeaway from that. It was especially interacting with, did you meet Michael? He was probably about 6'4", Orthodox convert, yeah. I got to interact with him a fair bit, and I think he certainly put that in my mind, but our conversation too, Eamon, yeah, it was all just kind of swirling, swirling around in there. So yeah, that was my big thought, my big thought. So well, I'll say one thing about that. So there has been talk about something in the Southern California area, sometime maybe spring, maybe in the summer, maybe in the fall, and I mentioned to somebody, you know, we really need to invite the Roman Catholic Church as an organization, because I think part of, it's important to recognize that the Catholic Church is represented by many people, but it is an organization, and it's a very large and important organization, and the response I got back, which made me laugh and will hopefully make you laugh, Father Eric, is we invited the Eastern Orthodox. Have you seen the meme, right, where there's the two people standing there? It's like, are you guys friends? And the ones labeled Roman Catholics are like, yes, and the Eastern Orthodox are like, no. Yes. Well, my comment, my response was, I think at least in the United States, a lot of Eastern Orthodox are Protestants playing at being Roman Catholic, because the Eastern Orthodox, there's no official, well, there is the OCA, but people go from one patriarchate to another and float in a way that's very, very Protestant in the United States that you wouldn't actually get to do in an, you know, if you were in Greece or Russia or any place that has its own patriarchate. But besides that, you guys who organized it, hey, Garth, what say ye? And we have an audience. There are people, if anybody in the audience wants to chime in and ask questions, certainly, but the Wilsons made Thunder Bay happen. What were important lessons you learned? What were things you would never do again? And what are your plans walking forward from here? One of the funny things about the conference was that we planned it like two years before it happened because of COVID, right? So we... It was 2019. We started planning it. Yeah. So in some ways sort of miraculous that it ever got off the ground at that point. But I think that that gave us, it's like an interesting window because I think no other conference I'll ever plan again will I have two years in which to kind of like let things, you know, brew. One of the things that I think was really good was having four speakers. I think that that was, it provided nice opponent processing because we had two theists, two atheists or non theists. So you had differences there. You had two more scientific, two not scientific. And I think because there was that you were able to have people sort of within their own circle. So like, you know, Richard and John could talk science and Paul and Jonathan could talk faith. And so you had a little bit of like conversations within their own circle, but then across the aisle, obviously there was a lot of that too. And so I think getting a mix of both of those things, I really liked what that did to the overall conversation. So I think that's a takeaway that I would feel like we would want to mirror again. Yeah, I was, I was struck by how there's a hunger for this outside of our corner of the internet, both in conversations with Mondrell and Vervecky. They both commented on how in the academic world, there really is very little dialogue going on. I was having dinner one night and I mentioned to Vervecky my experience at the Canadian Psychological Association National Conference this past June. And the way that they, the way that they set it up, they had one hour, they have one person headlining, you have three people presenting for 15 minutes, and then 15 minutes of Q&A. So basically, you're just getting an abstract. There's no real engagement. I wasn't impressed. I was asking questions afterwards of the presenters. Most of them were at arm's length from anything they were presenting on. And Vervecky just said, like, yes, that's what's happening at the APA. That's what's happening in several different academic organizations. And Mondrell, I think it was after the first day, was just saying it's the most enjoyable time he's had in a quasi academic setting in decades. Because it's you come in, you present, you're gone, and you don't go deep, and you don't interact with one another. So I mean, I think we've tapped into something that's really needed everywhere. And people are hungry for it. I think people are tired of fighting and culture wars. And it just doesn't really go anywhere. So that was a that was a big takeaway. And just the conversations with people who were attending. I heard that over and over again, I think to hear from two other people that are in academic circles that they were seeing what I felt like I was seeing. That was a big take home. And something that stuck with me. It reminds me of, go ahead. Yeah. So I'm listening to Awakening from the Reading Crisis, what I'm working out right now. And recently, in one of the episodes, Dr. Vervecky was talking about how he wants cognitive science to integrate different disciplines, right? Like neurology, psychology, and all these different sociology to be able to be integrating those things and, and having the different disciplines not only like, come to some kind of a mutual understanding, but actually transform each other, right? Like to cause a shift, to cause a change. Not that it like bulldozes or destroys because he's not doesn't want to do it in a reductive manner. But that they would, you know, this opponent processing, right? This changing relationship between them. And he actually used as a counterexample what most interreligious dialogue turns into is, we talk to each other, we find common points of agreement. And the goal is mutual toleration and respect, which is great, you know, but because it's nice to not have violence all the time. Yeah. But, but, but I think there's, there's, yeah, there was, there was, that's, I think that's what we were getting there, right? With the different people we were talking to. And the space that was created was where we could kind of lean into each other. We could kind of push on each other and, and allow ourselves to be pushed a little or to be changed to receive that motion. Yeah, so. So my question was, and I think that kind of butterflies with it is, do you think having it at a church or enhanced it, or would it be better? Because I know it might be easier in some ways to have conferences like this at a church or some religious environment, but you could also have it at a university or campus or something like that. And do you, what do you think maybe some of the up and downsides of using a something, a place like the Abbey as opposed to a university? I think with the, the Abbey is not your typical church space, which is part of why I think it worked. You know, I, on the top floor, I don't know, probably 20% of it is a coffee shop. That's just open to the public. And the spaces within the Abbey are already being used for things like they have dementia cafe for elderly people with dementia to come in and have coffee. They have, it's a space for the community to come really. So it's, I think you have to have a coffee shop. And I think that's a good thing. I think that's it was unique that it worked at the Abbey. I don't know if it would work as well at your typical like religious space. I could be wrong, but I think that the space of the Abbey is part of what facilitated it working so well. Yet some folks said that they liked it because that it was a religious space because there was religious art and stained glass windows. And so there was this sense of the conversation being more serious. The things that you're doing are more serious and that there's a sense of like bringing in the transcendent into it. And so you're already taking things more seriously. But on the flip side, it also is probably an environment that is challenging for some people to enter. Right? Like there's some people I know that wouldn't go to a conference held in a Catholic church. It wouldn't go, you know, and I'm sure the flip is true. There's people who wouldn't want to go into a Protestant church, even if that church is regularly used by the community for tap dancing and recitals and whatever else. Just because it's a religious space, that's going to be an obstacle. I would hope, like we have a really big community, like in our corner of the internet. There's a lot of folks that are involved and a lot of people who listen, even if they don't choose to join the discussion. And my hope would be that we would have these kinds of events happening in all kinds of contexts so that it would facilitate different flavors of discussion. So religious centers holding the conversation might bring out some elements or attract different people, but then a university would attract others and make other people. It might bring a more scientific slant the same way that a religious center might bring a more sacred kind of slant. My concern with the religious or a university is that the normal mode that you get into in a university is one of two. You have lectures and you have debates. And my fear would be you get into that space and people would automatically slip into elections and debates, which doesn't mean it can't work, but people would have to intentionally be conscious of the fact that they're choosing to not use those schemas when they're engaging with each other, unless they're asked to present a lecture. But even then, we ask the guys to design it to sort of be a platform for future conversation. It shouldn't be a closed ended box of a presentation. So I would say we have lots of different things. Sorry. What was interesting about Urban Abbey, and this is something I picked up pretty quickly, is that the abbot, Scott, he never, to my recollection, ever described it as a church. And that's got to be intentional because the word church just pops right out of most people. So he's very intentional about not using that word. And it's got to be to not bring along those kind of churchy, I already know what church is, I don't need to go there to learn anything, if you've got that. So that made, I think, the space particularly suited. To this conference. I was also surprised that the Baptist Church had an image of Jesus in a stained glass window. They don't usually go for that. They're a little more zwingly, and I think. They are. Yeah, they are. But yeah, yeah, I know. I also found it surprising the first time I went to that church when it was a Baptist Church. It was probably 20 years ago, the first time I went in that room. And I was surprised when I first walked in. And they had other images of Jesus previously, too. The church that had it. You know, you go into, there's a women's Bible study and prayer room, and they had a couple pictures of Jesus on the wall there. And where the coffee shop is now. The coffee shop is now. This is an interesting Baptist church. And I grew up very iconoclastic. So that was like, at the time, it was a little boundary pushing for me. Well, stained glass in general is not a very Protestant thing to have, right? Well, they'll do it sometimes, but it's usually abstract patterns, right? Not, not. Yeah, so anyway. So let's talk about as far as big and small. I know one thing about having it in Thunder Bay was it was very difficult to get to. I actually considered flying in and flying out. And it was like, yeah, there's no flying in and flying out really quickly. And so, I mean, I'm kind of thinking possibly if it's in Los Angeles, then there's a lot of like, okay, lots of people very easily can come and leave. And it's convenient enough. I mean, Jordan Peterson is having three concerts in the Los Angeles area, two of them sold out so quickly that they got the Honda Center, which is 18,000 seats for the third one. And it's I think it's going to sell out on short notice. And so there's a very different feel to something that may have, hopefully, and I do hope this corner of the internet will one day have 18,000 people at our conferences. But, you know, when I talk to some of the other people in our corner of the internet, the idea of an 18,000 person conference is the last thing they would ever want. Because having a small gathering of people talking together, cohorts, cliques, right? So is there a a certain aspect to which maybe we do want to have these types of things in somewhere that it is far outside of the norm, and you get a small number of people? And do we want to also have big things where you feel like you went to a concert, right? And now you're a dead head for Paul VanderKlay. How do you keep the large and small, how do you keep it from being mega church anonymity versus small, you know, house church type thing, thoughts? So I'm thinking that the size of the conference and the amount of time you got to spend with just individual participants actually makes that transformative dialogue more possible. The fact that I would keep on bumping into the same person over and over again, the fact that I could get to know their story a little bit, and I couldn't do that with everybody that was there, but I was able to do that with enough people where you can actually build relationships. That's certainly something that, and I don't remember, do we have 200 people there? About 150. 150. That's something that that 120 to 150 crowd, Dunbar's number, hello, can actually provide. But, you know, maybe the bigger things have other things too. Yeah, I would think a larger conference, it would have to be, either you would have to find a way to be able to break down into smaller groups, or it would just be a totally different feel. Like, it's a different agenda, you're going for a different feel. And yeah, like you said, we're like concert, the action's all on the stage. We're not trying to bridge that gap as much. So I think it, you could, if you broke it into groups that were that smaller number, and you intentionally, I think it's possible. Or you could just say, yeah, we're going for a totally different thing. And it's one, I would be sad if it completely took over and there was no smaller gatherings. But I think to also have a larger gathering. Sometimes that's nice for folks who maybe are a little intimidated by the idea of a group where you would be seen and known, you can kind of put your foot in the water with a big group. There's some anonymity there. And it can have the feel of like, I'm among a lot of people who are like minded and value what I value. And so that can reinforce what I value for good or for ill. But you know, so I do think there's a place for bigger gatherings, but I think it would have to have a different flow than the one that we did in Thunder Bay. And you know, I mean, that's present certainly in Catholicism too. So you've got your Sunday congregation. You could also go to daily masses, which you'd have maybe 40 people there, and you could get to know them pretty well. You could also go to a big mass with the pope with 500,000 of your closest friends. So, you know, it's like, like, and, and all of that's Catholic. So I'm sure there's similar ways of doing things in other churches. Yeah, it's so right now tonight is the last part of the Festival of Booths. And during this year, apparently, after the whole COVID thing, so there is the priestly blessing that's, that's done at the temple, which obviously, like, this is something that has not been done for many, for thousands of years. And apparently, they had a group of some 500,000 people for the priestly blessing at the temple. Yeah, which is far beyond anything we do in Judaism, because during high holidays, it's prohibited to use sound amplifications. So it, yeah, I haven't seen the videos yet. But there are videos of stuff like that. But I think it is important to have both aspects. At some, there's something about being part of a group of thousands of people that creates a certain rhythm and solidarity with anonymity that while being in a smaller group is, so I actually would like to see both kinds of things. And sometimes you can have, okay, so we have these large, you know, presentations or whatever, and we have smaller breakout groups. But yeah. There are some of the personalities in this little corner of the internet. And I speak specifically of Pastor Paul, who would probably hate to be a VIP and have VIP tickets. Because if you have 18,000 people, it's like, not, you know, like, I got to just kind of hang out with Paul, and it was great. And, but, yeah, we got 18,000. It's going to be a little less possible because the big three that people came to see, you know, there was always somebody who wanted to hang out with them, wanted their attention, all that, even with just a paltry 150 people there. So. Amen. I'm not going to let you be quiet. Well, I've been thinking about this a lot over the last week or so. I think ideally, you would have both. With larger scale, I'm not sure what it will take for what's happening here to grow. You don't have a central figure or set of ideas. It's more a way of relating to one another. And I've wondered how that scales and how a larger movement is created from that. I keep hitting dead ends. I'm not saying it's impossible, but I'm not really sure. I'm not really sure how that would work to be having, you know, multiple events of, you know, we have 18,000 people. I would speak to something really big happening, but I'm not sure what that would be. You know, okay. I am going to introduce something you guys are all going to be very surprised at me introducing it, but I talked to Catherine about this a little bit and Paul Vander Klee introduced me to this movement in Toronto, actually, which is calling itself the Jesus movement. And they talked a lot about the difference between a centered group and a bounded group. And I think actually you kind of need both centered and bounded groups. So with a bounded groups, you have a boundary and some people are inside and some people are outside. And I do think we do kind of need that. With a centered group, you have something that is a focal point and it keeps people focused together as a group on one thing or how far distant they are. And I'm probably as distant as you can get while still being centered on Jesus. And frankly, I am perfectly fine. And the best I can figure is it's kind of unfortunate that the meeting house in Toronto has been having problems, which has to do with people misbehaving. But to me, it seems for this corner of the internet to have a Jesus centered. And if you honestly are Jesus centered, right, if it's really, okay, all we're going to say is this is focused on Jesus. And obviously my conception of Jesus is very different from any, all three of you, but other people. But I think there's something to be said about a human being and that human being's life, which allows us to put away maybe the dogmas and the creeds which work better for a bounded set. Because you can say, hey, you know what, I look towards this person and this is one of my favorite images to show on this channel. It is a painting, I believe from like 500 years ago called Christ crucified. And for me and my channel, this has been a focal point. And I'm guessing like if people were to say, well, who would say we should center on this? I'm guessing Father Eric would be number one on that list and I would be number four on that list in this little discussion. But for me, I think, at least for me, and the verveci types might not be as happy, but maybe the pageau and Vanderkley types would be. I am perfectly fine with this being the central icon towards which we gather. Yeah, what do you guys think? I mean, I'm all for it, but not hard to convince me. Yeah, and that's something that with a 2000 year old tradition that I'm in, we struggle to do. We struggle because oftentimes the momentum of tradition, the institutions, these things can take your focus off what's at the center. A little gotcha question, I'll sometimes play with Catholics. I'll be like, hey, who's the head of the Catholic Church? You know what people will say? They'll say the Pope. They'll say the Pope. They'll be like, no, Jesus is the head of the Catholic Church. The Pope works for Jesus. He is the vicar of Christ, which means he's not Christ. So yeah, just like, oh yeah, and I usually get a little chuckle out of that because I try to make it lighthearted. But yeah, keeping that focus on Jesus could actually be difficult. Can we convince the Protestants of this? What do they call it? Iconolatry and idolatry? Iconolatry would be good and idolatry bad. I don't think that's the way the Protestants look at it. I've probably got it. I've never heard of iconolatry. No. It is a term that Protestant use to explain why, and actually Jews also use, to explain why there are ancient images. We are not actually, Judaism is not as iconoclastic as most Jews think it is, and it certainly wasn't 2000 years ago. So having icons was not considered the problem. Worshipping icons is what Protestants would say and most of them would say, well, and mostly Jews would also say is a problem. And that term iconolatry is used as a, I wouldn't say necessarily derogatory, but a... It's got the word latria, which is the Greek word for that which is given over to God alone. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Okay. Yeah, it's, man, I feel so many tensions about it. Not so much as a Protestant. It's, obviously, as a Christian, I say yes. And then there's this part of me that is, that sees that there's a space that's open right now and I don't want that space to be closed for people who are part of this corner of the internet and are participating. I don't want them to feel like, well, now that space isn't open any longer and they're going to be pushed out. Not that I think everyone would. More like a concern that I have is that then become so directed towards the theological to the religious that there isn't the same openness that's felt by them. And at the same time, I think, well, there has to be something there. And of course, I think that's the best. And the thing is, when Dr. Peterson talks about Christ, you know, people who aren't Christians can resonate with that. And we'll be honest, we're all here because of Jordan Peterson and nobody would have been in Thunder Bay except writing in his wake. Nobody would have been in Thunder Bay except writing in his wake. So it's not as exclusive, you know, because maybe look at a whole host of figures that are talked about this quarter, you know, Tom Holland and the Sargon fella, people who are, you know, not formally attached to any church, don't say they're believers, but still have a great admiration for Christ or at least the story of Christ. So that's, you know, that's farther from the center, but still oriented towards it. I think it works because they're not Christians. I think that I've thought of this, you know, over the years, and I'm not alone, a lot of others have said this. It's like if, if Peterson were to become a Christian, would that just sort of end it all? That's what's largely closed. And I kind of think, I think there's some truth to that. I think we need people who are not Christian saying, yeah, you know what, this, this vision of Jesus, this icon of Christ, yeah, I can be on board with that. And the minute that they're gone, I think it's, I think it's done. I think it becomes a Christian thing. So as I do, I was at a church this morning, and the discussion was focused on Isaiah, and they brought up Isaiah 53. And being the Jew in the room, somebody decided to ask, how did Jews not see Jesus in Isaiah 53? And the person directing it went, you know, let's not have that discussion right now. Very wise. And, and the lady who asked it actually came up and apologized to me afterwards, which she did not need to do at all. So this makes me think that maybe, and if we are talking about Jordan Peterson, then maybe we can talk about the suffering servant, and the suffering servant is a type of Christ. It's a type of Christ that Peterson has spoken about a lot. It is from the Hebrew Bible. And one of the things I've been trying to do is reach out to Muslims more. I'm not sure how Muslims feel about this. By the way, Matt, you are new here. Welcome. Apparently he went to Thunder Bay. But maybe a more acceptable image is the suffering servant. And you can take that to be Jesus or not as you feel is appropriate. I just more meat on Jesus, you know, like we can actually sit here and debate, you know, reasonably who the suffering servant is. Jesus was a man who lived 2000 years ago. So I don't know if that would work. I agree there's more meat on to the the fully more fully fleshed out idea of Jesus Christ the man. I think the fact that it's not as filled in is what gives me centering around the idea of the suffering servant maybe creates more space for other people. Because I really would hate it if it if we created a center set group that then excluded a lot of people who have baggage around Christianity around Christ. See it as closing off the conversation. I feel like that would really be a disservice to everybody. So I agree with you that it isn't as fully fleshed out. But given the goal of creating a conversation that is not just ecumenical but is like even broader than it because what we want and what's been so good I think is that the space that we are in is very much like the courtyard. There's room for everybody to come and basically the rules of engagement are you need to come with a certain attitude. It's a way of engaging. It's a way of being able to have a perspective, talk with one another without trying to lose that. But you genuinely are open and you're actually listening and you come because you're willing to really engage. You're not just there to convert people or make yourself heard. It's real dialogue. But I would hate to lose that flavor I think. Eamonn, I'm not going to let you be quiet. Very similar thoughts to Catherine. I have the same concerns and think that it creates more space by being less defined. Again, I'm going to be leaning in a certain direction on all of it and think that Christ is the more clear embodiment of all of that. But I guess that's where the conversation happens in part. And the doorway can be a lot broader, more open than that. Yeah, because we're talking about how do you create the space to continue to have the conversation we've all been having that best is a vessel for all of that. And then within that conversation, we can have our own particular voices, obviously. But I like that the suffering servant is an archetype, but it's an archetype with a moral, like a very strong moral and ethical slant to it. Because part of that is how we're going to be defining the mode that we come to one another in. We could easily flesh out, okay, what would it mean in these conversations or in this space to be willing to suffer, to engage in a way where you're willing to be the one suffering? How would you serve the other people in your conversation? How is the fact that you're willing to share your thoughts a way to serve other people? You can do a lot with that as the center or focal point. That if we were to choose something more arbitrary, like just dialogue or something, it doesn't have the same kind of implicit sort of virtue. Yeah, dialogue is just, it's, there's not much to it, right? Whereas with a person, with a human being, you know, with Socrates, with Buddha, with Jesus, with whoever you want, you know, it's like there's something there, a lot to wrestle with. You know, we're more moved by people and examples than we are just by concepts. The concepts and ideas, they always come later when we're trying to figure it out, analyze it. Yeah. And, you know, I just, I think about, I think about Jordan Peterson, he could talk about Christ from his position and people found it really compelling and not off-putting at all. And maybe, you know, I mean, I don't know if you guys have ever talked to Mark Lefebvre, but he's very intent that we, the church people, should not be trying to convert Jordan Peterson. And he thinks that would, that was a mistake, which is, which is, I just thought that, okay, well, we need to invite Mark in. Well, okay. He could make his points. I take that idea seriously. I'm not saying I agree with him. I have to say, I think when a lot of people, when they ask me about this part of the internet, they ask, they say, oh, you're talking to people who are open-minded. It's like, no, actually, I'm not talking to people who are very open-minded at all. I'm talking to people who have a quiet confidence. And that quiet confidence is in an idea of the logos, which is, you are not going to teach me anything that is true, that is going to make me move away from my God, because my God is the God of truth. And I have zero fear of the truth. I have fear of lies, right? So when I talk to Father Eric, I am not at all under the impression that I am suddenly going to make him believe any of the things I believe, or to Catherine and Dr. Amon here. And that's not the point for me, certainly. And I think for a lot of people, the point isn't, okay, if I do convert you to my thinking, and to my extreme surprise, there are people who I have actually converted to my thinking. And I have to say, extreme surprise, because nobody ever agreed with me before in my life. But I am perfectly happy if people agree with me. When we have the conversation, I'm not pulling punches. And that's what people actually like. Well, the people who like me, as opposed to the people who dislike me, and there's plenty of those, who think that I should be pulling punches, that I should be more polite and kind. When I talk about the Trinity, I don't pull punches. It's polytheism. I'm not pulling punches. At the same time, I am speaking to people who I'm not pulling punches. That's not an affront to. That's not shocking or disgusting or a problem to. Because they realize, if I agreed with them, I would agree with them. And there is a better ecumenism, which is much, I would say, much better than the polite ecumenism, where we don't talk about whether or not the suffering servant is Jesus. Where we don't talk about, okay, so what do Jews believe about Isaiah 53? Or then the polite one. And so this idea that, oh, it's, I should, or you should, more to the point, believe that somehow it's better if Jordan Peterson, well, if that is the case, then I will leave it to God. I'm sorry, I'm going to subject you guys to one of my favorite stories, but I love telling stories. So there were three students of the Magid of Mizritch, who was the student of the Baal Shem Tov. And they were walking down the street and one of them was Rab Baruch, who was the grandson of the Baal Shem Tov. And he was very rich and very strict. And he was known for being a, you know, harsh type of guy. And one of them was Rabbi Levi Yitzchak of Berditchev, who, his moniker has become Ohed Yisrael, the one who loves Israel. And he was known as a very kind and gentle person. And the third student, the youngest student was the founder of the Hasidic dynasty I belong to, which should tell you who's going to be, who's going to have the best answer here. And they were walking down the road and they saw a farmer, a Jewish farmer who was wearing his phylacteries and wearing his prayer shawl and shoveling muck in the horse stalls while saying his morning prayers. And Rab Baruch sees this and he becomes very angry. And he says, if I were God, I would strike him down where he is. How dare he profane these holy objects and the prayers with while he's shoveling muck. And Rabbi Levi Yitzchak of Berditchev said, if I were God, I would make the man exceedingly wealthy. So he never had to shovel muck again. And he would never feel that he had to interrupt his prayers with such menial work. And the altar Rebbe said, if I were God, the world would be exactly as it is. And so if, if I were God, the world would be exactly as it is. But at the same time, we also have a normative vision. And I don't think we need to get rid of that normative vision in order to accept the sovereignty of God in the world. We can speak truth and believe in the logos and believe in dia logos in sharing the truth as we see it with each other and living the truth in our lives, while at the same time, accepting the sovereignty of God. And now I'm going to stop preaching at you guys. Yeah, it's a good story, Jacob. I'll keep that in my back pocket. I won't have the guy's names, though. So it'll be a, three guys. It'll be a, it'll be a skinny rabbi, a fat rabbi and a young rabbi. Three, three students of the Baal Shemboz. That's, that's funny. If we've discussed the subject, I do have other things I do want to ask you guys about, but I want to, I don't want to dominate the discussion with, with me, Jacob. And if we can, I think we should move on. guys about. But I don't want to dominate the discussion with me being so talkative. I mean my thought is just I agree with your view of what healthy ecumenism looks like. I think the conversations of what does everybody agree in common and let's just plant our flag there are old and I mean maybe they had their time in place yeah to reduce prejudices and increase tolerance less violence that's nice yeah that's nice but I you know I don't there's always radical fundamentalists but I don't think the major problem in America and Canada is you know Catholics and Protestants and atheists and Jews killing each other because they can't see common ground like that's not the problem so I don't like you said I think it had its its purpose and I think it it doesn't have the same role anymore and the kind of conversations we want to have are the kind where like you said you really are here to engage other people and the voices that are most engaging and interesting are people who have a perspective and they aren't afraid of the truth that other people might bring because they they follow truth and that's what they value and they don't worry about that but that doesn't mean that they they come without anything in their pockets you know so I do very much value that and I would like to find whether it's the suffering servant or another something else I would like to find something to put at the center I think Jacob said it is a very generous idea to say well why don't we put Christ at the center or Jesus Christ or like that's a very generous thing to do and it's something that you can do more effectively than we can do because otherwise it just feels like saying I want to put my camp at the middle and my vision at the middle and everybody else why don't you come rally around my flag and it's very different if you were to say okay here's here's an icon that I'm not super close to like you said there's sort of like this trajectories and you're more on the outside so for you to be able to do that is very different than I think you know especially someone like father Eric to say okay everybody come let's circle around Jesus and let's get this by the way it's literally he's literally right here that's right yeah I'd say the the problem before was people killing each other over religion and now the problem is they don't talk to each other one of the most striking moments in my my doctoral studies was I was doing a placement at a practice that actually mostly did work with the Catholic Church and the other pre-doctoral student was an atheist guy and I think it was probably three quarters into our time there and he just like randomly turned to me and was like you know Eamon I'm just I'm so glad that I got to meet you because I'd never met a Christian before and this friend was gay as well and he said I thought that all Christians just wanted to stone gay people so I thought that yeah I was glad that you're not like that and Christians aren't like that and he's maybe 10 years younger than me but I was I was struck I was like wow you know there are are people in their their 20s 30s that um they've they've maybe never really talked to somebody who's religious before and just sort of left to whatever their side imagines the other is like and that that only was transformed through through engaging and actually talking about what you believe so that some of those misconceptions can be dealt with and then you'll see where there there are genuine differences as well that was my experience doing assessments for the the Catholic Church it was like oh all these things I heard as a Baptist about Catholics growing up and a lot of these things aren't true and that wouldn't have happened without the time spent together and and really getting to hear what they really think you know it's your point Jacob. So next question we talk about centered groups but at some I think there is also a necessity for bounded groups I think there are people who um I think you need to be willing to exclude some people from the conversation because they are problems and they um you you need sometimes to be able to say no you are outside um where where do we put our boundaries where what is not acceptable what is outside in this part of the internet? Well I think some of the easy ones are like what's outside are um I feel like personal attacks when you move away from discussing ideas and you're just mad at somebody and now you just are trying to do a character assassination or you're just going to yeah just be personally attacking others that's outside of course I'm probably speaking right away as like as the perspective of a mod right I'm like what are the things that make me delete your post and talk to their mods and say do we need to think about kicking them off um so it's like if you are going to be personally attacking other people if you won't engage with other people in good faith you know you strum in their arguments you come in you say oh well you said this and they never actually said that and they you won't take correction on that you're not actually a good faith dialogue partner you're bullying you're pushing um now obviously that's like a judgment call about when it crosses that line or when someone's just emotionally worked out but those are things where it's like that's not the right spirit that's not what we're trying to do here um I think there's lots of conversations where it's like I don't even want to entertain those conversations I don't want to have the conversation of is pedophilia okay like no that's not a conversation and I'm not willing to hear both sides like nope there are just some topics where I'm like those topics are so morally repugnant that I refuse to even accept them as like reasonable questions that we should be asking as a society like no there's just some things that are obviously out of bounds and I don't want to hear your moral argument for why it's okay so that would be my first couple of things and what's tricky about it is we can very we can intuitively know when somebody else is participating in the same thing that we are right like are you playing the same game that I'm playing I know games is not the best word for it but you know I hop onto the server there's this crazy guy Sam Adams and he doesn't believe in the Trinity you know that's like what's up with that but like he didn't tick me off you know first off because he wasn't claiming to be a Catholic who didn't believe in the Trinity you know so it's like he's already outside the wire on that um that bit there but but also it's just like he was just there he was making his points he was um yeah making his points doing the back and forth you could you could tell intuitively on levels that you know you couldn't reduce to an algorithm that uh somebody's playing the same game it's a it's a it's a participatory doing um we're doing the same kind of conversation um and so basically all of that you know bad faith arguments um and personal attacks have nothing to do with that that game but we can't we can't just like have a have an AI do it let me push back against the personal attack thing because I think um there's a lot of people who um will misunderstand what I think is the nugget in what you're saying um first of all it's not a personal attack for me to say I think you're wrong and that doesn't mean that I have to start every sentence with I think I can just say you're wrong and in our little corner of the internet we should understand that of course that's just my opinion without you know that's just your opinion man right um and at at the same time I mean yeah I think I think part of the problem is when you have strict rules people will try to game those rules will start will try to play games with those rules and um you know I was speaking to a friend of mine who actually works at Google and um oh by the way Dr. Andani is a um Muslim scholar who is um I would actually love to have included in this discussion um he uh has been on Sam's channel several times I believe uh and um so uh Thunder Bay was a conference that we had that actually Eamon and Catherine put on um in Thunder Bay Canada and um so yeah the the discussion is about where our community is going to go in the future and um I wanted to highlight Dr. Andani uh partially because I I think we really need to have a uh direct um invitation to Muslims to be included in in the conversation and um while Dr. Andani is from a very particular and somewhat controversial um what do I even call it um denomination is a bad word for it but uh tradition within Islam um I I I certainly welcome his participation partially because the Muslims who are uh very ready to uh it's called takfir to call him a heretic uh maybe the precise types of people we don't want to include but unfortunately um they their voices are very loud on the internet let's put it that way um and I I highly highly recommend um community of interpretation not not not exactly sure um that's so we call it our little community um actually Dr. Andani if I had your um your contact information I would send you a um you know what I am actually just gonna put the link in and um we're opening it up uh only to Dr. Andani for now because I I really would like to have Dr. Andani join us if he can but um what was I saying um you're pushing back on personal attacks and wanting to clarify what what that meant what that meant what constitutes one yeah right um and and you know disagreeing with you is not a personal attack on you and people have to um use their you know what many many people both say that I attack people personally and I would like to think that I really don't despite the fact that any anytime the question of the Trinity comes up I will say that it is in fact um welcome Dr. Andani um I I will say that it is in fact um idolatry I'm sorry what I meant their personal attacks was more like if I were to attack your personal history your appearance I'm going at you as a person I'm completely avoiding ideas and I've just shifted into an assault which I I don't see you do those things Jacob so I I think it's it's different Dr. Andani how are you uh hello first I just wanted to say thank you to you because uh I know um this week you sort of stood up for me uh in that other stream with uh and I heard what you said and uh you know you were not buying what you were selling um so I appreciate that uh because I you know he's I couldn't even I think they've like put me like they've blocked me in that chat so like he can come and say all these things about me and I can't even respond so you were my only advocate on that yeah unfortunately um while I've been trying to I I have been trying to engage the Muslim community um and certainly you have as well um honestly um I don't know if you saw Jordan M um just put out a video uh Dr. Somebody um destroys Jordan Peterson and it was a very serious like destroy and uh the Muslim community has been very very unhappy with uh Dr. Peterson's message to the Muslims and it's like what I'm sorry when you act like little children expect to be uh to be treated like little children and if you cannot have a discussion with an isla ismaili miss and their problem wasn't even with ismaili so um ismaili islam has been very very um influential throughout muslim history and Dr. Andani is a scholar of Muslim history um and um but it is a uh tradition within I hope the word tradition uh is is correct within uh shia islam which is and it is now a minority position within shia islam and shia islam is a minority position within the greater Muslim community and part of what people have been um very unhappy with Dr. Peterson is that he told uh Sunni and shia muslims that they need to stop fighting and the response I've gotten is who are you to tell us to stop fighting well I'm sorry but with the massacres of shia muslims the genocide of shia muslims in southern Iraq and in um other parts of uh the middle east um yeah I didn't mean to completely weigh lay this discussion but at the same time and actually I would like to see to know what Dr. Andani thinks of the idea of centering this group around the concept of the suffering servant because I think um for Christians that would be acceptable I believe for most Jews the concept of suffering servant would be um acceptable I don't know if it would be as acceptable in the in the Muslim community but um yeah since we're having this discussion I really um I welcome your participation Dr. Andani I mean you do have in shia tradition the notion of redemptive suffering right like Imam Hussain and many of the shia imams were like massacred or persecuted by certain political authorities and shia muslims like commemorate you know they remember that suffering uh so you do find in the shia tradition some even parallel like what happened to Imam Hussain and what happened to Jesus on the cross and this sort of thing um so new tradition I think some Sufis the mystical tradition of Islam they will talk about suffering but more as an individual thing like you know for god tries his servants with with suffering and pain and loss to purify their soul so it's more of an individualized thing in the sunni tradition than the shia tradition it is remembering the suffering of god's righteous ones is and crying for them is a devotional act any responses or we we can go back to the discussion we were having about a bounded set and what rules we would establish to say okay um maybe if if the idea I I I do like the idea of the suffering servant as a center and obviously we're not making any decisions here where I don't think any of us are authorized in any way to make decisions but I think this this might be a useful discussion for this corner of the internet going forward um and um as as far as rules for maybe what is out of bounds um uh you know if if anybody wants to contribute more to that discussion um yeah Dr. Eamon I nominate you to speak where my mind was going was uh there's a process of learning how to engage people that way of the way that we're looking for and um but we can say what you're not allowed to do uh that positively there needs to be an eye to what are the necessary skills that character perspectives that allow somebody to engage in that way um you know I think even over the last year or so you know Katherine and I have engaged with some other Christians who maybe if you're not as uh open and um to those discussions you know we'd say that you're still you know in many ways lovely people and that we even would say people and that we even would say that it's like oh yeah I can see myself 10 or 15 years ago being very much like they are right now currently and um if this is going to grow uh this conversation and the participants in it uh there needs to be some thought in the direction of um how how do you cultivate that how do you help people um learn how to do that and that might if we can articulate that maybe that helps us in you know discerning what what is really out of bounds more clearly part of the uh part of the fun thing is that you know I don't think let's say when I entered seminary that I would have been able to engage or when I was kind of in my early years of formation right because there's something about uh just a certain level of maturity in your faith right and you know most reasonably functioning faith traditions will produce a type of maturity that gives you uh confidence there um um and but you know there's there's no way to become mature without passing through that immature stage uh you know so we we do need to give give people a little bit of grace in that I might have come in you know at 22 I might have come into this corner of the internet really swinging hard um whereas when I was 27 you know five years but five big years I think uh I find this stuff um I yeah so because I think generally with politics just seeping into everything and since politics is is in every corner of our lives um you know some of it's by design some of it just happens it's people are being trained to have that knee-jerk reaction um the us versus them and uh they they don't have the psychological structures necessary to to really engage in it they're not learning it from anywhere um and maybe there's there's no way to systematize that I think that there is a process certainly of maturity I even think I guess in our work as therapists often like you're working with couples it's like okay you know they're they're coming out swinging at one another and you're you're laying some groundwork on how to get there and how to get there and you're you're learning some ground rules and then you're you're teaching skills um doing a lot of teaching skills and people don't have to regulate emotion um and to even be able to uh sort through in their own mind what they're thinking and to have the tools to reach out to someone else and I see people learn that regularly uh and those those are similar tools that I think people are using in this corner of the internet to communicate with one another um yeah so when when you're doing this with somebody do you have to overcome fear is that the big thing big time I would say my biggest failures as a therapist in my early years were it was almost always marriage counseling and it would be couples just like laying into one another and it I remember this one couple they were in their 50s it's amazing they they were even willing to see me um in a way I think I was like 29 at the time and uh the the wife and husband would just they would swing at each other and I would intervene somewhat timidly early on um and I remember it's probably like a month in meeting with them just thinking like man they're coming here and they're just beating each other up every week and I just need to suck it up and stop this from happening and it facilitates them because they clearly can't do it on their own and so I think my heart was absolutely racing uh before those meetings uh I think you know 12 years out from that uh at this point uh my pulse doesn't go doesn't raise you know one beat per minute it's just sort of flat at this point but um yeah it was it was very nerve-wracking I had to learn how to regulate myself there's a step there but but even even coming into the capacity you know I was talking more about your clients and with yourself um you know talking about how to how to approach situations in a new way how to open up new possibilities in a relationship those sorts of things um you've got to be able to be brave to do that and and that's that's I think that's maybe the you know it's like I've got to be able to hear a really good argument from Jacob every once in a while right and it does happen ladies and gentlemen it does happen um a really good argument from Luke Thompson a really good argument from Sam Adams a really good argument from um uh Bazzani whatever he's have to say his name you know um and and just like not have that crush me you know because a really good argument is like oh man I never thought of that before I don't have any response to that right now and but you got to be able to just stand there and and and not have that threaten your identity uh even as you acknowledge what's going on there another piece to it is trust uh that that allows you to have some of the courage you know I think that you're just setting yourself up in front of a firing squad uh and right this person isn't just trying to trick me yeah and early on when I'm working with a couple I realize I'm first there if they trust me even if they don't trust one another I can facilitate that they can borrow from me until they they build that up um in their relationship so you can loan other people uh that trust if they if they trust you and and that's where I think some of the success the Thunder Bay event was because the the audience the attendees were able to borrow the trust that the speakers have for one another with one another like Paul trusts um Dr. Verveke not to just you know try to dress them and down in front of everyone um and and that creates the space yeah like I think a lot of what has worked to build the the kind of conversations that we value and we want to facilitate is modeling from the guys that we watch right modeling the D logos and then when you because it's hard to to put the boundaries around how do you do that but if you watch it and after you're like oh okay I get the feel of it I've got the flavor I could put my toe and I can try to do that um it's what more easily caught than taught well and the where the idea for the conference started even before we were driving to Sue Lookout was uh I was mowing the lawn um out at the lake listening to Dr. Verveke and uh and Vanderclay talked with one another that uh one where I think Vanderclay was running through a presentation or a talk or idea he had and was just asking for honest feedback and I was like that's it right there that that's real trust that's modeling um conversation from two different perspectives and if people could see that then they could embody it and it's it's it's trust in the other person that you're talking with which is essential but it's also trust in we could say it's simply God or you could say the truth right and that if what this person is saying is actually true it won't destroy me right it'll make me good it'll build me up it'll make me strong um yeah yeah yeah um I don't know how much time you guys scheduled for this um I am willing to go all the way until sundown because uh sundown is actually the festival of booths um uh but if people are I think this can be the beginning of a larger and longer conversation that I think our community needs to have I want to invite you guys if if there's things I haven't put on the table which you want to put on the table I want uh to discuss those um we can take um questions from the audience we actually have uh according to youtube there are 12 people watching and usually that that's an under count um and if uh if you guys are willing we could even have other people if they are willing to turn on their cameras please um we can have other people join us for the conversation but uh I want to stop dominating this conversation and and let you guys uh the the more important people take take over sure um so I've been reading reformations that was a book Paul was reading about a year ago it's a history of Europe basically 1450 to 1650 um and um you know looking to uh what the uh protestant performers were were asking for uh and I'm reading through this and I'm like dang a lot of that's been delivered you know maybe maybe 400 years after the fact but let's take a look uh we've got biblically based preaching right um now I'm not going to say there's no such thing as a topical homily in a catholic church but the standard is you know you go to the gospel and uh the first reading the second reading responsorial psalms that's the first thing to talk about right so we've partially delivered that and I was very amused when uh we were at the uh the urban abbey and the gospel reading of the day was the parable of the dishonest steward uh which meant that they were using the revised common lectionary because that's what we were reading in the catholic churches as well and paul completely ignored it um the protestant reformation has transformed the practices of indulgences within the catholic church we no longer accept alms for indulgences right that practice is completely reprobated we no longer give out paper certificates saying that you've earned an indulgence it is entirely an oral agreement uh and we no longer place specific time frames uh on a partial indulgence it's either just a partial indulgence or plenary indulgence we're not specifying that uh clerical celibacy well we still have that but it's not attached to all the money anymore right and I think that was a major reason for complaint is that all these clerics like if you wanted into these positions of power you had to do this celibacy thing nowadays I'm decently well taken care of but uh there's no um there's not the money there used to be so that's a good thing we now have liturgy in the vernacular I think we might have overdone it a little bit uh but that's beside the point you now have the liturgy in the vernacular and uh the cult of the saints uh just ain't what it used to be um certainly people but people now think of saints as their friends in heaven like like not so that they can go to god for them but it's just nice to have friends in heaven you know and as examples uh which I think was more the thing um and we still have the papacy we still have the real presence of the eucharist which is trouble for some protestants and the masses of sacrifice so what I'm saying is is that real transformation is possible um and hopefully we don't have to have wars to do that in the future thank you for coming to my ted talk hey I actually really appreciated you running through the list like that I'm like hey that that actually is very impressive and I don't feel like I've been that we've been this is this feels like I read about some of this medieval stuff and I'm like I can see the complaints you know um so I don't feel like I'm being untrue to myself untrue to the the tradition that goes all the way back you know past the year 800 I don't feel like we're being untrue to that so so the reformation is over and uh the protestants can all come back no we still have the pope and we still have the masses of sacrifice oh those are those are things that are aren't going away I have thoughts on the pope but I won't share them now they're not they're not ready they're not ready for youtube this is why wilson's what do you have to say for yourselves I'm sorry no yeah yeah I mean I I feel like there's so many things to talk about so many things to talk about um but I we all I'll go in this direction um I think in protestant circles what um what I've observed over the last 15 20 years has been um a desire to be more grounded historically and um in our beliefs uh and that's meant you know some protestants sort of moving more into like the the anglican church or you know other Protestant traditions that go back further and uh I think that speaks to just how people feel like they're floating in in air I think of um I was actually asked to to do a training this coming week uh for some pastors out in Atlantic Canada and I think that's a good thing because I think some pastors out in Atlantic Canada and they sent me the email last week they're like oh could you do uh you do an hour on uh on identity and um you know its implications for pastoral ministry and I'm like okay I need a little longer than a than a week uh I think to prep and have it be have it be up to snuff but uh who we we are is there's an intergenerational element to it there's a historical and soon as you rip that out um I don't know how people define themselves uh I I see that in the indigenous communities that I'm in where it's like you go back one or two generations that's like we don't know residential schools sort of erased all that and uh and as much as they they talk about that and I think it's true um it's not unique to them uh my my non-indigenous clients I see the exact same thing and I think horizontally speaking uh one of the strengths of of this corner of the internet is it can provide some sort of um identity um I think a historical grounding is um is necessary uh for to tend to have that kind of confidence I think it's really really difficult not to I think that's why the the the non-religious people uh that that I know in my personal circles I think that's why they keep going to Buddhism um because there's some sort of historical grounding in something and I don't think that it's it's possible to to be an atheist and and you're just sort of a 21st century person just out there and not not really like sort of lose your mind eventually uh and and so what you were saying um um you know father eric there I just think yeah that that historical piece it touches down on that you know why why are we where we're at and um I think that that's also is a pathway back towards some some more unity um so I don't know how we would tackle that in terms of identity um I think that has to be front and center I think people are literally dying for a lack of it and our our the broader culture is trying to answer that question I think to spectacularly horrible results um to a horrible effect and um I think we need some bridges there if more people are going to to come in and maybe that is through the suffering servant um everyone's familiar with that and it dimensions of it have been inverted I think a lot of what's there in the the woke movement is is the inversion of of everything that we see in the suffering servant so I think that there's some real power there people because people do identify what they're suffering and you can ground them in something much richer just just in that uh see all the different faith traditions talk about this idea this concept yeah I don't know so I'm I'm interested to see where that conversation goes and see it as uh meaningfully connecting to uh larger issues of identity and purpose that people are are they're drowning in uh before Matt left he did have a parting thought um suffering servant is insufficient because without further contextualization it's not clear why that's even good um I have to say that yes there um it it is not clear to a lot of people why that's even a good thing when you say the suffering servant you're actually talking about something to aspire to be um and part of for me I think in reaction to Christianity uh oh we have somebody from Twitch and I have to include this as a barber I love this podcast and that the men's faces is the perfect evolution of beards um okay uh this is the farthest thing from a perfect evolution of your stage one and then father big mac is stage two and even is stage three okay okay um but um I I think in reaction to Christianity a lot of um especially more do I call it modern mainline Jewish denominations have so um have had such a reaction to the con concept of a suffering servant and of course we have the prosperity gospel which um is I I think we can all agree is is heretical um where you um assert that um God would never let his um servants suffer and um you know for me I I think yes there is the missing context of recognizing the value the aspirational value of being the suffering servant um at the same time you know Jordan Peterson I think part of what made his fame is to say life is suffering and how do you how do you do that right how how do you live your life through that yeah that's where my mind was going to Jacob I thought well there's at least uh you know a foot in the door with suffering just being a reality and you know the the servant part yeah I guess there's some debate there but what what are you really going to do are you going to become more powerful and crush everyone are you are you going to hide and try to drown yourself and in pleasure or avoidance um and maybe that's a sorting um natural sort of point of departure for people if that's doesn't sound good to you either you're just not suffering at all um or you think that um there's there are other options that you should pursue in your suffering than you know serving other people and then and dying to self and and being more outward oriented then yeah that's probably not the group for you I think Matt's point that without context that's a phrase for a lot of people that they it doesn't track you know if they don't have a faith background but I don't see why we couldn't provide context for it yeah that's yeah like if that's the issue which is a fair issue then um you know give it some context and that's a good thing speaking of bazani people in the west I think uh suffering is something unusual going on as if it's not the norm and therefore a personal injustice um I think certainly victim culture this idea that you uh that there must be some oppressive form which we can we have some capacity to definitely take off um to to make disappear this utopianism and again I think that the prosperity cause gospel is is the worst form of this right this this idea that um and one thing I've I've particularly spoken to a lot of people about is for example um the people who will tell um gay uh gay people oh well once you accept christ in your life you will no longer be gay and they accept christ in their life and they're still gay and um that has been um I know crushing to a lot of the faith of people but it's like did you the people who say things like that I wonder what kind of lives they are living are is your life really that free of sin like I hear people tell me oh yeah um accept jesus and you will no longer sin and I'm like are you telling me you think you're you're no longer sinning and to some extent they I guess they are it's a particular level of self-awareness um or lack thereof yeah or lack thereof yep yeah yeah well that's what happens like this when you try and emitatize the eschaton uh suffering is the norm this life is not meant to be like paradise you chose the steps to better yourself and you love uh your life condition your life condition okay uh polar nights you're obviously new to this uh corner of the internet your uh I did not actually include um links to things uh but uh hopefully I mean I think we've been discussing a lot of very important things about where our community is going to go in the future um I I do want to continue this discussion um I think part of it is going to have to be well you guys have your consciousness and conscience um channel and your discord server and I've been poking father Eric about starting a catholic server he's not I don't I don't want to mod I don't want to be a mod I got enough going on here I got enough people to moderate here I invite uh some of our catholic audience and I do know we have a catholic audience to uh consider volunteering under the direction of the magisterium to start a uh not a part of the magisterium I'm not a bishop well you can put us in touch with the magisterium yes I that I could do that I could do yes uh no I and this this has been one of my things in my little drums to beat in this corner of the internet is um engaging uh I think a lot of us uh and I keep on saying I'm the most protestant of us all um as protestants we we engage the catholic church through individuals and individual churches and um I don't think that's the proper way to engage with the catholic church it's not about bishop baron alone it's not about even father Eric sites alone even though he is my favorite candidate for pope currently um it I I think you have to engage the catholic church as a church and um it and uh every time I bring it up it lands like a bombshell but uh majority of Christians are catholic and you just have to accept that 50.2 percent last time I checked of the Christians in the world self-identified Christians in the world are catholic um this is the largest and longest lived organization in human history um and so if we are going to be serious in our ecumenism we're going to be serious in even I would say engaging Christianity um you cannot do it despite the fact that in the United States we often try to do it without engaging the catholic church as a church um so uh yeah that's that's my little drum and you guys can comment well I'll put Eric father Eric in charge of doing that for us so yeah yeah I I do worry sometimes Jacob that someday you'll call some archdiocesan chancery and ask for a engagement from from an official and and they won't know what to do with you uh they already don't know what to do with me um well can you send a representative to this meeting and they'd be like no you know I I encourage everybody to get Sally Jo's little book you know um with the church surrounded by the roses um I've been thinking about that a lot recently the church is surrounded by the roses and they're they smell nice and they're beautiful and they're going to choke you off and kill you if you don't cut them down a little bit so um Mark Lafette was uh was passing those out at Thunder Bay yeah yeah this is actually a Sally Jo original that I have in the background um yeah the artists hopefully the artists are going to uh are going to save us um and yeah I mean again um hopefully this is an ongoing conversation and it's not it's not an easy conversation but I think we have something going right now that's pretty awesome and I think it is something that can and should grow and I look forward to the day I want to see large conferences and those large conferences don't need to mean the death of the small conferences yeah um they can hopefully be an outgrowth of that and I don't think the large channels I mean we have some large channels um and I would actually like to see uh I discussed this several times with Paul VanderKlay and I discussed it with Katherine um actually having a 24-7 channel for our little corner of the internet where if we need to we will play um but it it won't have a backlog it will just be a channel um where we have different people come on and talk and if you want to hear more of that there will be a link to that actual channel and so um I I want to see all the little bubbles coming together into a larger hive without necessarily you know a lot of people want their bubble to grow um sure would would I love if rather than 500 subscribers I had 500,000 subscribers yes I would but a I don't think that's ever gonna happen b that's not the flavor that a lot of us need and want um I keep on going back to Jethro and um when he goes to Moses and he says um you know you need leaders of of tens and you need leaders of thousands and things that come up and um to some extent we need that Moses um I don't know who that Moses exactly is going to be and it has to be a process of uh bubbling up but if we don't have the hierarchy and part of the reason um I do keep on pointing to the Catholic Church is because subsidiarity the Catholic Catholic doctrine of subsidiarity is um one of the probably the most successful way of keeping organizations local at the same time um you know having a structure that at the top look you have an organization of a billion people and that is an amazing thing to have and um you know doesn't mean any of us here are a huge fan of the current pope or the previous pope or whatever but um yeah I I think we we have to consider hierarchy hierarchy is incredibly important and unfortunately one of the things we keep on thinking is oh well we need a king we can all agree on and that's not how hierarchy works you have to have bishops and priests and deacons or however you're going to do it and um yeah hopefully I mean I I would like this channel to be something like that I want my discord server to be something like that but I also want it to be a part of a much larger umbrella um and that's the conversation I hope we're having here I like it I like subsidiarity too seriously like like the the the words Catholic social teaching were always suspicious to me until I learned subsidiarity was was a part of that and then I'm like oh that's what I've always thought yeah so subsidiarity I mean I I recommend uh people look it up but it is the idea that um every issue should be dealt with the most local unit that can deal with that issue um so if it is something um that can be dealt with on an individual or you know parish level then it should be dealt with on a parish level and if it means a diocese or arch diocese or you know a national conference or um to go all the way to the Vatican then the test of elevating an issue is whether the jurisdiction is actually competent to deal with it at that level um and yeah it it works um and I think you know uh to some extent for example my discord server has become the Jewish slash messianic discord server um and there are things we discuss on the Jewish slash messianic um thing and uh we talk a lot more about the Dead Sea Scrolls than most people do and um you know maybe we we have to consider arranging ourselves in smaller units which are willing to be under bigger umbrellas and um part of a large part of that is is discussions but a large part of that is also um a an attitude of service of okay I don't need if I would be a leader I need to be a servant first right and um if you cannot serve a community I cannot serve a community of 500,000 I can barely serve a community of 500 um and if if you cannot be the servant of that large of a community then maybe you need to recognize that and limit your attempt at attempted reach to what who you can serve um very good okay well I've got a crock pot full of sausage and uh sauerkraut it's calling my name and that sounds beautiful um the the whatchamacallit seems to have kind of died down the conversation on youtube and twitch I am going to end the broadcast here and to be continued please like subscribe comment and make your own videos and have your own conversations about these topics thanks for having us on Jacob and thank you wilson's for organizing the consciousness and conscience conference in thunder bay Ontario uh it brought a lot of joy to my life our pleasure and lots of other peoples too thank you we had a wonderful time