https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ujzQdvStHqA

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Wrap for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. According to YouTube, it's been six years since I made this video that sort of took off and my YouTube channel and everything around it sort of began. It was about Jordan Peterson, a Canadian psychologist who sort of stirred things up in 2016 complaining about the Canadian government's attempt to force certain pronouns on the rest of us. In the wake of that, he began something that he had long wanted to do, which was have a public lecture series about the Bible, the book of Genesis more specifically. And so he rented a pretty good size theater, five, six hundred seats, and he sold tickets, thirty, forty dollars a pop, and packed it out pretty much every time he did it for fifteen lectures. People traveled from all over the world to listen to him talk about the Bible. I began to realize this was happening and thought something's going on here. I should pay attention. Since that time, many Christians have been wondering and waiting and hoping Jordan Peterson would cross the line and become a Christian and somehow formally join a church or say something specific more than what he's already said. And well, I keep telling people the moment what quite likely won't be exactly what you're looking for. And it probably won't be just what you think. But then again, when Jordan Hall got baptized and became a Christian, that's been pretty cool. But you can find hundreds of videos with millions of views all about, is Jordan Peterson a Christian? When will he become a Christian? What does he think? Yada, yada, yada. This is a this has been a near obsession on the Internet for six years. Just recently, there was a conference in Florida that I did not attend called the Symbolic World Summit. And it was a lot of people surrounding the work of Jonathan Peugeot. Some of you, of course, know his name on the Internet. Some of you in church might have heard me refer to him before. And at this conference, an Orthodox priest named Father Stephen DeYoung gave a lecture on Nietzsche and the resurrection. And at the last minute, it was announced that Jordan, in fact, was going to attend and be sort of a surprise guest. And that anticipated a lot of hopes. Well, here is Jordan. They're going to talk about the resurrection. It's going to be an Orthodox priest. What will happen? Well, what will the Orthodox priest go into? In the sermon, we're going to talk a lot about something called eschatology, which means the study of the last things. And there's sort of two modes of eschatology that come into play in Christian theology. One is called realized eschatology, which means realization of Christ's salvation now in my life. And the other is anticipated eschatology, what happens later. One of the things that I've been noticing is that with the renewed interest in Christianity around Jordan Peterson, around orthodoxy, around Jonathan Peugeot, around John Vervecky, all the usual characters in what is called this little corner of the internet, a lot of the focus has sort of been on realized eschatology. How can we understand these terms and their benefits for me here and now today? Now, a couple of weeks ago, we bumped into this when, in fact, Jesus meets the rich young ruler and Jesus invites the rich young ruler to sell all that he has and follow him. And he goes away sad and then Peter somehow gets a little defensive and insecure and says, we have left everything to follow you. And Jesus says, truly I tell you, no one who has left home or brother or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for me and the gospel will not fail to receive a hundred times as much in this present age. That's realized. Homes, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, fields along with persecutions. We weren't really looking for that. And in the age to come, eternal life anticipated, realized, anticipated. But what is the relationship between them? But many who are first will be last in the last first. Now, I titled that sermon with this question, was Jesus saved? Was Jesus salvation realized in his life? Now, you can find this tension all over the place. Nadia Bolz Weber is the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America's installed first pastor of public witness. She's been a popular blogger, a popular speaker. She's a tattooed Lutheran preacher who has a high profile, has written books that have been read by many people. And of course, because today, if you have any status at all, you're supposed to have a substack. So she has a substack called the corners, which some of you will find interesting. And she's doing question and answer. And so John asks, what does the language of saved mean to you? I've struggled to understand this, although it seems like there is a subjective experience here that raises a whole other realm of language. And she goes on to talk about dualisms that she is resisting. They gave me a very dualistic worldview. Good, bad, saved, lost, us, them. I guess I felt free from the anger about my fundamentalist upbringing when I could look back on it and not view it dualistically. And so doesn't want that dualism. So John says, what does it mean by saved? And she gives a list of things. Well, she's being saved from the totally made up burdens of the existential nightmare of hell. Being saved from my own anger and bitterness about it all. Saved from my need to be right about this. Saved from self-obsession. Saved from addiction. Saved of dualist thinking. The word in Greek for saved, sozo, means wholeness. Okay. And that's what it means. That's the answer to the question. Well, Father Stephen DeYoung gives this long talk about Nietzsche and the resurrection and people listen to it and... And then there's a question and Jordan Peterson wants to ask a question and he takes up the entire question and answer time with... Well, there was more answer and more talk than question that Jordan gave, almost gave sort of a little mini lecture in there. But right there in the middle was the main thing that moved him from his seat up and to on the stage. You can boil that question all the way down to, but what happens to you when you die? Hmm. All this not able to Weber, well, we're going to get rid of this dualism. Oh, okay. There are issues with that, of course, because it sounds very nice to do away with hell and tell someone raises the point that Hitler, Stalin, and Mao sort of got away with it. Oh. And how about the guy that molested your niece? Did he get away with it? Oh. And then if there is in fact no consequence for our behavior in this life, in the afterlife, then everything sort of gets foreshortened and you get situations like you had in the breakdown of many countries when we must judge our enemies here and now. But does torturing them really sort of restore things? Oh. So if you take away that whole anticipated after life thing, suddenly things start to get weird here and now. And sort of the talk that Jordan Peterson was giving to Steven DeYoung was very much connecting with that because saying actually what comes later impacts what I do now. And so having knowledge of that and thinking about that actually impacts the choices I make today. So please tell me what happens after I die. Now I'm not going to try and summarize what the Orthodox priest said, but it was kind of as complex as the lecture that he had just given. And most of it had to do kind of with realized eschatology. What I wish he would have said was this, right out of the book of Job. Now I can't tell you that if I had been giving that lecture, I would have had the thought to quote Job 19 at that moment, but I of course have the comfort of being an armchair Monday morning quarterback and watching this whole thing unfold via videos. But I would want to say to Jordan is what happens after you die? Christian hope is in the resurrection of the dead. And those stark plain terms that have been used from the beginning are probably the best language we have to communicate our hope and what we are looking for. And that language is as ancient as the book of Job. Now it would feel really good to say that and if I would have had the forethought and the wisdom to be able to put it quite so eloquently as a biblical citation, even one from the Old Testament, but would it have changed Jordan? We sort of run these little fantasies in our mind that we're going to say the magic word and then everything's going to change, but I'm not in any way sure it would have made a difference any more than the answer that Father Stephen de Young gave. This in fact is a very old problem. The next text as we're reading through this Gospel of John, then the Sadducees, who say there's no resurrection, came to him with a question. Teacher, they said, Moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother. It's very realized in this world. Now there are seven brothers. The first one married and died without leaving any children. The second one married the widow but also died with leaving no children. It was the same for the third. In fact, none of the seven left any children. Last of all, the woman died too. At the resurrection, whose wife will she be since the seven were married to her? And this is really, even though again this is an ancient group, this wouldn't be a kind of question I would find surprising from 21st century atheists saying, yeah, this resurrection stuff, just think it through a little bit. It sort of gets complicated. What age will you be when you rise from the dead? What kind of world will you be resurrected into? How exactly will this work when we sort of pop into the world and, you know, are we going to have a common language or somebody over there going to speak in middle English which I can't understand and and and and and and there's a million things that can go with this. So maybe you should just give up on this whole anticipated resurrection thing because it's more problematic than it's worth. Jesus replied, are you not in error because you do not know the scriptures or the power of God? Ouch. I mean there's almost nothing worse that he could say to them and there he says it. You don't know your Bible and you have no trust in the power of God that he can actually resolve the kinds of problems and dilemmas that sort of pop up to your head that's only this big. Because after all you're walking around in a world that you barely understand with a head that's only this big. When the dead rise they will neither marry nor be given in marriage. They will be like the angels in heaven. Now this raises all kinds of other questions too. Now about the dead rising. Have you not read in the book of Moses in the account of the burning bush how God said to him, I am the God of Abraham the guide of Isaac and the God of Jacob. He is not the God of the dead but of the living. You are badly mistaken. You are badly mistaken. Now the whole marriage business let's put to the side and the whole being like angels well there's and there are lots of questions in there too. But Jesus is very clear that for God Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were in some ways very much alive even though they were dead and buried in this world. And that then leads to whole other ranges of questions that of course we could talk about and try to figure out. But in terms of what happens after you die Jesus basically is saying Moses is pretty clear and don't dismiss the power of God to manage what you can't imagine. Now what's going on here? Who are these Sadducees and what's happening? Well we're sort of going through the book of Mark but if you've looked in your Bible at all you might notice that we're sort of playing with time because we're actually in discussion about what happens after Palm Sunday and in terms of the calendar that we are marching through Palm Sunday is still ahead of us but we're looking at all of these talks and doing all these sermons to sort of set up Palm Sunday and Good Friday and Easter and Ascension and Pentecost, these main points. And last Sunday we had Jesus authority questioned and the parable of the tenants and paying taxes to Caesar. What you have here in this little section between chapter 11 between Palm Sunday and Good Friday is you actually have the aristocracy in Jerusalem basically taking Jesus on in public debate in the temple. They want to test him to see what he's made of. Many would like to simply discredit him and make him look a fool in front of the crowd that after Palm Sunday really adores him and they basically just want to take him out first in terms of his reputation and then probably so they can kill him. Now the topics that they cover as we've seen are topics that even today people are interested in just like this text we just read but the topics aren't necessarily what this whole section is about. This is all about can Jesus actually go into Jerusalem and play with the big boys or he is he some hick from the sticks who might get a following of uneducated people way up there in the Galilee where you know that's the hinterlands but here in Jerusalem where we're in charge and we know better and and and we've had years of learning study and all of these things will show Jesus that he's playing with the big boys now. One of the teachers of the law came and heard them debating noticing that Jesus had given them a good answer he asked him of all the commandments which is the most important the most important one answer Jesus is this hero Israel the Lord our God the Lord is one love the Lord your God with all your heart with all your soul with all your mind with all your strength and the second is this love your neighbor as yourself there's no commandment greater than these well said teacher the man replied I'm going to be your neighbor and I'm going to be your teacher the man replied you are right in saying that God is one and there is none other but him to love him with all your heart with all your understanding with all your strength and to love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all the burnt offerings and sacrifices. Now this had been pretty well established by the Hebrew prophets and the whole community agreed so while some leaders are trying to take Jesus down others are listening to him and thinking this is kind of surprising. When Jesus saw that he had answered wisely he said you are not far from the kingdom of God and from then on no one dared ask him any more questions. So in other words they want to take him on in public debate they want to humiliate him they want to discredit him they wanted to lose status and reputation with the crowd and now basically Jesus has won he has taken everything they've thrown at him and handled it even to the point now that he is gaining in status with some of their own. Okay well let's shut this down now because that that clearly isn't working the way we want it to and so now Jesus turns the tables on them. While Jesus was teaching in the temple courts he said why do the teachers of the law say that the Messiah is the son of David? David himself speaking by the Holy Spirit declared the Lord said to my Lord sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet. David himself calls him Lord how can he then be his son? And the large crowd listened to him in delight. In other words this whole business of platforming Jesus to humiliated him has in fact gone entirely in the wrong direction. Now this little section is a little bit complicated it's from Psalm 10 and here in this Psalm it's a Psalm of David and there's a lot of tradition that sees David sort of as a prophet speaking by the Holy Spirit and David says the Lord said to my Lord sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet and and now remember we had just had this business about Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob still being alive and so who is David talking about? If generally speaking a son is deferential towards his father but David is calling this son of his Lord. How can a son of David be higher than David? In fact this son of David this Messiah in the line of David is supposed to in fact do what David did sort of David put down the Philistines and then some of the other neighbors around the kingdom but this one is going to do it completely. The Lord said to my Lord that's the Messiah sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet and everybody hears this and sees the brilliance and thanks just like they kind of thought in Galilee we've never seen a preacher like this. As he taught Jesus said watch out for the teachers of the law they like to walk on the street they like to walk around in flowing robes and be greeted with respect in the marketplace and have the most important seats in the synagogues and places of honor at banquets. They really love they worked all of their life to get to these places in Jerusalem to be in the best seats to build a big reputation to be known to be famous to be wealthy to have all of the things that come along with it to be powerful to rub shoulders with kings and generals from Rome and Caesars they love the status they've been doing all of this they've been working up a ladder to get to the very top and Jesus says watch out for them well well why now Jesus isn't talking about all of them in fact Nicodemus who we meet in the Gospel of John he's one of them so the point isn't exactly that this is always a bad thing but remember he was talking about wealth and how difficult that is well power and status and reach are also hazardous for your soul apparently they devour widows houses and for a show make lengthy prayers these men will be punished more severely Jesus sort of enters into the prophetic role but unlike paganized Old Testament leadership these people are playing with the lines of their orthodoxy but use even true religion as an idol to climb the ladder themselves to climb the ladder themselves and like the kings that the prophets denounced they don't really care for the poor or the widows or the underclass who they are charged to protect they really care about their status and their fame and their wealth and their reach and their reputation now now this is really complex because on one hand Jesus is very famous and popular now but soon they will be yelling crucify him he is really popular now but soon even his disciples will run now let's bring in the eschatology thing again because their leaders use their position to realize their best life now realized eschatology often at the expense of those they are called to serve Jesus sat down opposite the place where the offerings were put and watched the crowd put their money into the temple treasury many rich threw in large amounts but a poor widow came and put in two very small coins worth only a few cents calling his disciples to him Jesus said truly I tell you this poor widow has put more into the treasury than all the others they gave out of their wealth but she out of her poverty put in everything all she had to live on now this is one of the most famous stories and with these sayings and these stories and things like don't let your left hand know what your right hand is doing Jesus completely revolutionizes this whole our thinking about this whole business of wealth and giving and status and power but we still play all kinds of interesting games with it now the meaning is obvious it connects with what comes a few weeks from now a few weeks ago of how hard is it for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God and remember the response of the disciples to that whole conversation who then can be saved well it's nice to get it would do away with dichotomies as Nadia Bolz Weber likes to but Jesus has just put up a whole bunch of dichotomies here a whole bunch of dualisms wealth is a sign of God's approval so says Job's friends Job is a wealthy man who is also righteous and he's suffering so Job you must have a secret sin but what's going on here and then we come back to the question how realized was that widow's salvation how realized will Jesus salvation be why is this woman giving out of her poverty is she anticipating something now you can quote Job 19 to Jordan Peterson and maybe he'll be inspired and maybe he'll even get on a video and say I now believe in the physical world resurrection of Jesus Christ and everybody will say yay what's on YouTube next what does it take for us to believe in the resurrection of the dead and what does it mean for us to believe in it at all what does that look like and how does that change us and how does that work does it make our eschatology realized does it make our eschatology realized does it make our salvation realized or does it make our salvation anticipated now I have this little fantasy of you know telling Jordan quoting the book of Job to Jordan but we've been following this story all along what if Jesus just told him straight told him plain well you know three times he tells the disciples we're going to go to Jerusalem I'm going to get arrested I'm going to be killed and then I'm going to rise again and nobody shows up on Easter Sunday morning none of the men at least to say yay we're waiting for you Jesus happy Easter nothing I think if we tell them straight then they'll know didn't work for the disciples well what about miracles what if what if there's a miracle and and one of the crazy things about the Jordan Peterson story is one of one of I think one of the most bona fide public miracles that I've seen in the last number of years happened to Jordan Peterson's wife his wife gets a diagnosis of a certain kind of cancer that in all of medical history since this cancer has been tracked nobody was alive one year after anyone was diagnosed with this cancer and she not only had she had the diagnosis confirmed by someone else and then not only is she healed by this cancer but she somehow has intuition or or something and and she says to Jordan I'm going to be healed of this cancer on our anniversary I mean this is like the biggest most obvious public miracle that I can point to right now and does Jesus stand on Jesus does Jordan stand on stage and say I believe in the resurrection let me quote Job 19 no the disciples saw miracle after miracle after miracle they didn't show up at the tomb Easter Sunday morning hooray welcome Jesus welcome back no no banners no nothing they're still hiding in the house and the women are going to embalm a dead body what if Jesus comes to us in a dream no that ain't going to do it either you're going to believe Jesus when you're asleep but you don't believe him when you're awake it's not how we live our lives the crazy thing about this story is Jesus is unsaved right before our eyes his salvation doesn't look any realized and nobody is anticipating anything it's all a mess the disciples ran and hid his rivals mocked him his friends wept the only women that the only ones that went to the tomb were women looking to embalm a corpse embalm a corpse but this love this sacrifice this gift has been like a drum calling the unsaved to the foot of the cross to get saved and and realized and anticipated yes both but but how that lands how that colonizes how that gets inside of us it's sort of a mystery there's no formula for it there's no algorithm for it we can't track it when it happens we see signs of it Jesus doesn't win because he beats his rival at rivals at theology after he has the big showdown and he owns them all they're still going to yell crucify him Jesus doesn't win because he does more miracles does more miracles than everyone else and the miracles are just more reason to kill him Jesus doesn't win because he can't be bought off with money and power he can't and you know all of his rivals seem to be neck deep in it all but that doesn't save him they still kill him in fact all the money and power is used to line up all the dominoes so Jesus gets executed by the Romans Jesus wins because the son of God loves more and better and harder and more sacrificially than all others that's why he wins so what is our confession? Job 19 works great. I know that my Redeemer lives and in the end he will stand on the earth and after my skin has been destroyed yet in my flesh I will see God I myself will see him with my own eyes I and not another. How my heart yearns for him how my heart yearns within me now how much do I believe it? Do I believe it enough to sell all I have? Do I believe enough to give like the widow? Do I believe enough to surrender my body to the flames? Do I believe enough to you can look at the list in first Corinthians 13 about love the point is love do I believe enough to love the unlovely to love the unpopular to love the common to love my neighbor to love my family and to love the stranger and even love my enemy that's what it comes down to but what does this sort of love look like? It's like a woman of ill repute who washes Jesus feet it's like a poor woman giving out of her poverty it's like how many small and common things we see every day it's like the person that comes and cleans up the yard at church or fixes something or spends a little time and visits someone who's ill or brings a meal over to someone who can't get out to the supermarket all of this common stuff that's what it looks like now some of that joy is realized but so often it's anticipated what happens after I die why? He who calls he calls who he calls how he calls them that's the way it is I can't summarize it any better than that I don't have an algorithm for you I don't have a formula for you to fill in he calls who he calls how he calls them and when you hear his call please respond because the joy of this statement of this profession of belief it's realized now and it gets realized in love and in care and in sacrifice I know that my Redeemer lives and that in the end he will stand on the earth and after my skin has been destroyed yet in my flesh I will see God I myself will see him with my own eyes I and not another how my heart yearns within me amen