https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aPMyU5201yE

 Per se it's not rationality. It's certainly not right. It's not the contents of thought It's something more like direct apprehension and you know in clinical in clinical practice Rogers Carl Rogers particularly taking a bit of a leaf from Freud, but He said that if you attend to your clients, which meant listen to them, but it meant attend didn't mean engage Engage them in rational dialogue. It meant more like listen They will transform psychologically as a matter of course Right and and that's not a small observation that That there's that there's potential for correction and Correction and and and potential for correction in betterment built into the deployment of attention and So if you go to videos videos ago about my about agapic The the power of agapic attention for betterment That's sort of it. And and if you that's really a very clever thing to perceive because You can boil it down to a very binary way that Children need attention from their parents and that attention improves them again back to verveckis observation about about agape that Attention is in a sense a very low level basic agapic power to draw betterment and enhance agency into someone That's a that's a huge observation And I don't know, you know, I've heard Peterson make this point at all. This is part of the reason I know My my youtube channel is insane. I get that Because I I listen to things again and again. I stick with a conversation like this with Sam Harris It's like oh I listen to Sam Harris. I mean for all the reasons that have already detailed but Having listened to Peterson talk about Carl Rogers and attention. I've never before Seen the connection between that and verveckis agape, for example but I I think I think that's it and again this is where the christian intuition about loving in order to know Offers some bridgement between the fact value distinction or the is ought distinction that even as imagined contentless That attention might be That there's there's still a tell of In christian terms the life we were made for in something as common As attention That's a that's a rather profound Idea one again. Why do I make these crazy videos? Why do you watch my crazy videos There is a certain amount of insanity to what i'm doing here. I I fully get that but What you all do through this crazy contraption of youtube is that I talk to you and you talk back and sometimes I say things that Make you a little upset and then then I really hear from you But that that give and take that back and forth that dia logos. It's all part of the process and it's all healthy and And even something as seemingly benign as attention Is a tell At least i'm going to say this is a christian minister of the grace and power of god for our betterment And it's right there in the in the loving gaze of every mother to her child And it's right there in the encouraging attention that a father gives To his son or his daughter That's a profound thing that again I I I come up with these insights when I do this crazy thing of critiquing and Commenting on videos and conversations that again, even though i've heard peterson make this point many many times I've never thought of it before maybe make a little clip out of this