https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sYbEowcANUk

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a very special guest today on my channel, someone whose work I've been following closely and we've never spoken before, we've just chatted for a few minutes before I started recording now, but this is Alastair Roberts. And Alastair, why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? Thank you. I work with the Theopolis Institute and the Davenport Institute. I am blog at Alastair Adversaria. I have a podcast, YouTube channel, and I do all sorts of things in various places. But most of all, I'm concerned with theology. I blog on issues related to reading scripture and technological changes in our discourse and how Christians relate to that. I've written a lot about Jordan Peterson, who has really interested me in the past year or two, and that's the basic introduction to who I am. Okay, and you live in the UK? I do, Stoke-on-Trent. Okay, and you grew up there? I grew up in the Republic of Ireland. Oh really? My missionaries and my dad planted a church there. Oh, interesting, interesting. Now I first noticed you when you wrote a piece, Understanding Jordan Peterson, and you underneath a picture of Peterson from the TED Talk on your blog, you had a terrific CS Lewis quote. And when in March of 2018 you connected Jordan Peterson with CS Lewis, I was all over that. So when did you first notice Jordan Peterson and why did he grab your interest? Relatively early on, actually. I first came across Jordan Peterson. Not sure exactly what linked me to him, but 2013 there was a TEDx talk that he had on reality at the University of Toronto. And I thought listening to him, it was an interesting avenue into his thought. Most people first came to awareness of Jordan Peterson around the time of the Bill C-16 or in the context of the interview with Kathy Newman and the release of 12 Rules for Life. But for me it was that video and I saw that video and I thought, here's someone who takes reality very seriously and engagement with reality in a way that I don't hear many people speaking this way today. So my ears pricked up and I thought, I need to pay attention to this guy. He's saying something that isn't being said elsewhere. And his message is not primarily about free speech in the context I heard it, about free speech, about all the controversial political issues that later became associated. But it's about how we relate to reality and thinking about reality as a realm with weight and significance that we need to come into contact with. And from that starting point, it's made a lot of sense about the way that he speaks. Because I think this vision of reality is something that underlies all of his work. It's not primarily about conflicts in the culture and these sorts of things. That's just the surface. The deeper level is how do we embed ourselves in the reality and the truth of that reality. Now as a theologian, you have what degrees from where? I have a master's from the University of St. Andrews and a PhD from Durham. I did my PhD on the Red Sea Crossing and Christian Baptism, a study in liturgy and typology. That sounds cool. I know a lot of people here don't have to say what, but I think that sounds cool. I'm very interested in typology, which is about patterns and I often think about them as musical motifs that we see developing through scripture. And it's very adjacent to the sort of thing that Peterson's talking about in these great archetypes that we see within Genesis and elsewhere. I would treat them slightly differently, but there's definitely a connection. The symbolic world of scripture has always fascinated me. And particularly with my work with the Theopolis Institute, it's something that I'm seeking to make more public and to discuss on a broader church level. That's really interesting. That fascinates me because, of course, the work of Jonathan Peugeot and his work on the symbolic world, then that because Peugeot found Peterson too, and I think probably for similar reasons. Yes. So you followed him quite early when he basically got grabbed by the status rocket with C-16. What were your thoughts when that happened? Well, I came to that from the background of having seen this previous material. And I was first of all, I was impressed by the courage and the calm that he showed in his response to that. There's a sense on occasions that we're living in a world of lots of children. And then suddenly an adult walks into a room and you notice someone who speaks with a courage, a determination, a fortitude and a clarity that is absent most of the time. And when a lot of students are treaking and engaging in the shrill outrage and someone walks in and is calm and measured and clear and speaks with weight and gravitas, it makes you pay attention. And I think we've been waiting for that sort of person in many contexts. And when someone like that comes along, I think it was the same thing with the Cathy Newman discussion, that within that, you saw someone who was speaking as an adult in a conversation that's so often reactive and childish conversation where we just do not have the courage to speak seriously about things. Yeah. Now, now you, like me, come out of a conservative, reformed, Presbyterian background. Now I don't know if for a while Jordan Peterson was a guilty pleasure that you kind of kept secret, but since you've been blogging about him and speaking about him, is there any dissonance that comes with your conservative reformed background and then Jordan Peterson? Or have you found that they sort of come together somehow? Well, there's certainly been some resistance from friends and other people within contexts I've been involved in. But for the most part, there's been a sense of appreciation for what Peterson has brought to the surface. And also a recognition that Peterson is resonating within our constituency, particularly for me, who's engaging with a lot of young men who are interested in theology, interested in thinking about these deep questions of reality. These are the people who are listening to Jordan Peterson and also people who are engaging within the world of new media. Peterson has really used new media in a way that very few Christians have used new media effectively. The sorts of conversations that you're having on your channel, these aren't things that most Christians do. And Peterson's work, I think, on YouTube and there's an entrepreneurial way that he's adopted new media in ways that have enabled him to circumvent some of the traditional gatekeepers of the university and other institutions. And even the work that he's been doing lately and thinking about an alternative to Patreon, that is a significant thing. And I don't think that we've had enough of that creative use of new media in order to create new conversations, new possibilities. And more generally, alongside that, I've always been someone who's read widely. I've always believed that Christian faith is an engagement within the Grand Human Project. And we're all engaged in the Grand Human Project. We have many fellow travellers, many of them who are quite surprising. When you see someone like Jordan Peterson, there is a sense of recognition that this is a fellow traveller and a journey that I'm engaged in from a different angle. But I have a great deal in common with this man. And I want to speak with him, engage with him and learn from him. And so I've never had a sense of Christianity as something that prevents me from doing that, rather propels me into that. Now, I've mostly focused on the wake behind Jordan Peterson from a missiological perspective. I've also, that's kind of what I've done with my conversations with my other videos. For me, that's a lot of processing, thinking out loud, trying to piece things together. Why do you think Jordan Peterson is important, not only in terms of what I see as a missiological opportunity for the church, a lot of young men getting interested in the church, but in terms of more the academic side, what do you see him bringing to the table and into the conversation that you find to be important, both as a Christian, but also as an intellectual? Yes, a number of things. I think one thing is that when we think about the scientific worldview and our account of reality, we've tended to have an account of reality in which all of the most salient aspects of human experience, love, joy, personal relationship, a sense of belonging within the universe, companionship, communion, society, all these things are seen to be almost epiphenomenal. And the reality of the world is fundamentally just matter in motion. There's a lot of the scientific view that tends to give rise to that understanding, to alienate us from the reality of the world, that the reality of the world is ultimately one from which we're exiled and we exist on some sort of apparent surface that's created by it. Peterson's work, I think, challenges that. It gives an account of reality in which science is only part of the picture and the salience of human experience, something that's expressed in the form of myth, is something that is true and real in a way that is not opposed by science but complements science. And I think that's something that Christians have always had a deep sense of, even though we've not always articulated it well, that reality is not just about matter in motion, but these things that are aspects of our personhood, love, the reality of engagement within the world, truth, these sorts of things matter and they're not just apparent. And I think the way he speaks to that is important. Also when he talks about the development of the human person and the individual, these sorts of things, we've tended to think about psychology and the development of the human person very much as making people functional members of society. And we've not considered the way in which functional people who adapt well to society can actually be deeply dysfunctional within the bigger picture, particularly when you're thinking in terms of totalitarian societies like those of communism or Nazism. And I think Peterson brings a deeper awareness of the individual's connection, not just with the surface of culture, but with the deeper reality that underlies culture and that the individual, in their experience of suffering, in their experience engagement with truth and in their witness to truth, is the wellspring of a healthy society. And for those of us, I think, who have a sense of the importance of a community of witness as we challenge each other and seek to dig down deep wells into reality itself so that the water of life will spring up and affect society, that's something that resonates with us. And so I really think that's something that Peterson could give to the church and to society more generally. So for instance, I wrote recently on the subject of the Peterson's engagement within free speech debates. And when you think about free speech, usually you think about it in terms of the negative freedom of not being restricted from expressing yourself. But for Peterson, there's a deeper duty than that, that we have the duty to seek truth and that speech proceeds in many ways thought. Speech enables us to internalize different voices, to engage with those voices in conversation, and out of that to have a deeper apprehension of a reality that underlies all of these things. And that, I think, is an account of free speech that I've not heard elsewhere. There's very few people that are engaging with speech on that sort of level. And I find that just refreshing. And so I think Christians can gain a lot from that. One of the things that impressed me about your work is that I don't see many people seeing Peterson at this depth. A lot of the evaluation of Peterson, both in the church and in the broader culture, has tended to focus on a lot of the attention-grabbing elements. Many of us, including myself, didn't know anything about him until C-16. The Kathy Newman interview and then later, you know, 12 Rules for Life. So a bunch of these things. Why do you think there's a reality going on here that people are sensing but don't understand it? My sense is that a lot of people get interested in Peterson. On the surface, they might grab onto one of these more hot button issues and maybe align with that. But there's also a deeper sense that people have of him that there's something going on here. I don't know what it is, but I know I should pay attention to it. And then they just kind of sit there and try and figure it out. But maybe that's where I've been because I've been, he right away grabbed my attention. I looked at a lot of what he was doing. I said, this is important. I don't quite understand how and why he's having the effect he's having, but there's something more going on here. Because now you've been writing about him, you've been talking about him, and you've been doing this, at least at some times, in some pretty conservative, reformed, Christian area. So how does that go? Well, one illustration I find very helpful when thinking about these things is when Marco Polo went to India, he expected to, he went to the East and he expected to encounter strange and wonderful beasts. He's been taught by all the beaster areas of his time that this is what you find when you go to the ends of the world. And so one of the things he's expecting to encounter was the unicorn. And sure enough, he finds the unicorn. But yet he's a bit surprised because the unicorn has hooves a bit more like an elephant, it has a tough, rough, blacker skin. It has a face that's more like a warthog. And then it does not have the grace of a horse or anything like that. Of course, he saw the rhinoceros. But he'd been taught by his background books to expect a certain sort of thing and just fit what he saw within that category. When we're thinking about Jordan Peterson, I think often we have all these background expectations, and we have these slots that we like to fit people in. And Jordan Peterson comes along and, well, near enough, we'll fit him into this slot. And I think that's what many people have done when they've encountered Jordan Peterson. But yet, for me, encountering him, I've thought this is a strange and wonderful beast, something I haven't encountered before that doesn't fit into the categories. Let's pay more attention, and let's dig a bit deeper and see what is there that explains all these different characteristics. And so that's really the way that I approached Peterson. And perhaps I had an advantage in having the first exposure to him, the exposure that I had. The other thing I think is difficult within the current environment is everything is so snarled up within the antagonisms and polarizations of social media that we don't experience things in solitude. And so when we're responding to someone like Peterson, we're already primed to respond to him in a particular way by the social dynamics in which we first encounter him. So we encounter him being linked by someone who's to the right of us. And so we react to him as someone who's on that camp. But yet, if you read him in solitude, it's a very different sort of thing. He doesn't necessarily fit into the polarized sides. And that antagonism that we see playing out on the surface is just something playing out on the surface. Dig down deeper and you can see why one of my first encounters with Jordan Peterson was links from MetaFilter of all places. And MetaFilter is the extreme left the blog. And it was fascinating. One of the first comments beneath the links was, this guy's amazing. He could start his own cult. But that sort of engagement with some without knowing how they fit in, I think, can enable us to come to discovery, because we've not already presumed that we know what we're exploring and engaging with. And so for that engagement, I think, out of that engagement, I've been trying to give other people a sense of this guy is more than you think. You may be surprised at some things that he has to say. They don't fit into your familiar categories. Now, where do you think this thing is going? Some of my concern, you know, the when he, so he did a he did an interview with a Dutch blog, which is really an interesting blog to be associated with in the Netherlands. And he did a summary of 2018. And in many ways, he's been sort of an accidental tourist on this stage, and that he, you know, so, you know, early on, we learned from one from one unflattering article done by a colleague, you know, he wanted to he was looking to purchase a church. And and then he was renting out this theater in in Toronto, and doing the this biblical series talk. And then of course, his book that he had been working on before any of this was released, and the timing couldn't have been more perfect. And then he starts this book tour, which has gone on for 18 months, which most of his YouTube fans can't have access to his near nightly I've been to I've been to a couple of them, they're, they're very Peter Sonny, and in terms of what he's doing on stage, it's pure him. And again, being received by sellout crowds all around the world. But there's he had he was the subject of a number of hit jobs done early on by the media left that very much wanted to frame him quickly and put him over there. Yet most of his efforts have that we've done sporadic interviews on his YouTube channel, but there's a sense I get from a lot of followers of concern that he's kind of being distracted by the money and the status, and maybe he'll wind up as the new Dr. Oz on daytime American TV. So there's a fair amount of angst amongst the the Peterson lovers out there in terms of what 28 where he migrated to in 2018. In terms of his project, any any thoughts on this? Now he says that the book tour ends in June, he will have or May and then he'll have May to October as kind of a sabbatical where he'll think and work on new stuff. There's talk that he'll talk with some Cambridge scholars about the Bible, which should be very interesting if you and I have an idea of who he'll might be talking to. And then in November, he'll do a biblical series again. But then in January, his new 12 more rules for life comes out. And then I wouldn't be surprised if he starts another 18 month book tour because that has to be both enormously personally gratifying for him, he gets a sense of that, but also financially lucrative for him. So amongst a number of people in his following, there's a fair amount of anxiety about where is he going to it is not that he's going to get taken down by the left the left leaning media, but that he's not he's going to be basically tempted into an unfruitful corner. And some of the possibility that I think you've probably described right now better than I've heard anybody else describe it just won't come to fruition. Any thoughts on that? Well, first of all, I think that we should distinguish Jordan Peterson from the broader phenomena that he brings to the surface. And those things are not going to go away. There's still going to be a lot of alienated young men who can be connected by this sort of connected with this sort of thing. And that's not going to go away. The people that have surrounded him, they may move on to someone else. But the underlying dynamics are still going to be there unless they are properly addressed. And so I wouldn't focus just upon Jordan Peterson, there's a lot of movements that have a limited lifespan, but they have a great effect in the long term, they create a movement that you go through. And you go through it, and you're no longer in the movement. But at the other side, you're a different person for having gone through it. And so I think that's something that might arise from his work that there will be an impact left upon many people who will carry on that work in other ways. There are many aspects of the work that I think Jordan Peterson's project inspires that he's not going to be doing himself. There needs to be a lot more work done in creating, consolidating, and developing imaginative new institutions that can resist some of the dynamics that restrict some of the conversations that we've been trying to have, a lot more extension of the conversation. So it's not just about Jordan Peterson, but all these different people who are, I think that's one of the things I've appreciated about your channel, that you reveal it's not just about Jordan Peterson, that Jordan Peterson has provoked a conversation that many people are having now. And even if Jordan Peterson were to leave tomorrow and just retire, that conversation would still be there, and it would still be going on. And I think many of us will be continuing it in our various quarters. And that's another thing that this conversation is taking place in a great many contexts. It's taking place in churches, it's taking place in movements among new atheists, it's taking place in a context of universities, and these different contexts, again, it needs to expand out into further contexts and to connect with more people. As for Peterson himself, I think he takes an awful lot upon himself, so I hope he gets a good rest sometime soon, because you can tell the pressure that he's taking upon himself, not least emotionally with all the burden that you're bearing with different people's stories that they're sharing with you. And I do traveling around quite a bit for speaking and things like that, nowhere near as much as Peterson. And I know how exhausting it is to speak night after night for a month, and to just have a lot of people talking to you and sharing with you in ways that they're deep, issues that they're deeply concerned about, and to share that with them, and to be on that journey with them, that takes a lot of emotional energy, and it's a lot more energy than just speaking, even though speaking takes energy. And so I feel for him, I also admire his family, the amount that they have supported him for something. They're remarkable, you can't do that sort of thing by yourself, you need other people around you to support you, and so I admire them greatly. I hope he takes a few months out just to relax, not just to do a new project, he needs to catch his breath. And also I think my concern has always been that he doesn't become a reactive political voice, that what he's engaging in is not primarily a political struggle, but a struggle to get down beneath the level of politics to the bedrock of reality. And that's always been the danger, that as people engage with his work, they want to conscript him to their political sides. I think even Christians want to do that, they want to see him as an ally for their particular projects in engaging with others, rather than actually going down beneath those into the reality that should lie beneath. And that's where his work has been strongest, and I hope that that's what he returns to, and he does not allow the fame, the attention, and all the drive to get him involved in these political debates, that that won't distract him. That's my concern, and I think at many points you can see him returning to that bedrock. When I've seen him speak on free speech recently, he very clearly brought it down to the bedrock, and I was encouraged by that because it's so easy to see the free speech issue just as a matter of antagonism against the left. And that's how many people I think have interpreted Peterson, he's just a reactive person on the right, but at his best he's far from that. He's someone who's getting beneath the debates to something that underlies it. I think that's, I'm on the same page with you. I, when I go to, so the last book tour event I went to was in San Jose, and Dave Rubin often starts out framing, part of, because of who Dave Rubin is and what he's done with his channel, he starts out framing Peterson in that social political context. And every time I see Dave Rubin do that, I kind of, because I'm, because there's so many contexts for him. There's, I think there's the side that you and I are interested in that tends to be more the philosophical, theological side. There's the, there's the, the, the, the, there's the, there's the practitioner of psychology who wants to help young men straighten up their lives. There's kind of the social movement guy who is very angry at post-bloody, post-modern neo-Marxism. And then there's now the guy who's become a celebrity and which of these Petersons will endure. I think they'll all continue, but you know, in terms of all of us know that are, we're bounded by time and space and our time is limited. And so the priorities you set in terms of how to work and where to work, they, they have a significant impact. And on that front, I've often been concerned about the way that the intellectual dark web has developed. In part because of the incredible antagonism against Peterson and others within that movement from the left. But yet we need the left in the conversation. And the more that the left is absent from the conversation, the less we have the critical sort of challenge to our voices that will enable us to be sharpened. And so I find myself reading a lot of stuff from the left. I find it important to think for myself, if I'm going to develop my own thought, I need to be engaging with these voices. And when I read Peterson, when he gets onto some of these issues related to cultural Marxism, post-modernism, these sorts of issues, he could do with a lot of sharpening up from people on the left. But yet there are so few people who've engaged with him well. And that just frustrates me because what Peterson's work represents, I think, is a call for a context of speech where there are these different voices engaging with each other. But yet he's been increasingly pushed into a corner where people are just talking with other people who agree with them or on the same side with political ire or on the same sides of certain political and social antagonisms. And I find that unfortunate. Not sure there's much that he could do about it in some context. But when people watched, for instance, the Kathleen Newman Peterson discussion, I think they saw something of an engagement between two sides and just moments of recognition within that, that maybe we can learn from each other. Maybe this person who seems to be just a misogynist, someone who's a right-wing reactive type, maybe this person has some knowledge about reality that I can learn from, and maybe I'm not completely right in my position. That, I think, was a heartening thing for people to see that there could be a breakthrough within the impacts in what isn't a conversation. But partly that is also one of the reasons I think people have found YouTube so encouraging, that YouTube allows for long conversation where you're not necessarily entering the conversation with a key set of bullet points that you want to hit, but you're going to see where it takes you. And we're learning together and we don't know where we might end up. And those sorts of conversations are what I'd follow Peterson for and what I hope we'll see more of in the future. But for that to occur, I think we need a lot more goodwill and the establishment of sort of common good between people on the left and the right. There's a comment that Scott Alexander made a while back on his blog Slate Style Codex. He talks about free speech as comments. And the way if we're always drawing from that, and if we're always using free speech as a means of antagonizing the other side, rather than thinking that free speech is that which protects speech that is aimed at truth. And speech that is aimed at truth, speech that is serious, will always be objectionable to people. It will always be difficult. It will always be unsettling. And I think none of us have had many serious conversations in which we didn't have our feathers slightly ruffled. There's a sense that you need to go deep. And as you go deep, you will bump up against reality. You'll bump up against those other voices that push against yours. And yet there's something good that arises from that. And free speech protects that commons. But yet when that commons is just used to antagonize other people, it ceases to serve that purpose. So what I would like to see more than anything else is the development of context where we are exploring and widened conversations and engaging with interlocutors from across the different areas of the spectrum. Let's talk to some people who are postmodern theorists and see, yeah, there is some sense to what they're saying. There are lots of problems that we can push back against, but there are also things we can learn from the way that they are seeing things. And cultural Marxism, there are things there that are more complicated than they might disappear on the surface. It's worth understanding it first, and then we can engage with it critically. That's what I'm hoping for. And I think Peterson is someone who can do that. I would like to see the environment where that was possible. I'm not sure that there is that environment at the moment. Yeah. And then the question of what will create that environment and whether this will be something that he's shown an amazing capacity for creating situations where these things come to the surface. No, I very much agree with you. To pivot a bit here, part of obviously the C16 debate, the intellectual dark web, that group has focused on questions of social justice. Now, one of the things I most consistently get criticized for in my comments section is when I do on YouTube what I don't tend to do in my real life church, which is say anything about American politics, when I mentioned the fact that for my whole life long, I've tended to vote Democratic Party. And many of the people who follow my YouTube channel are political conservatives in the United States. And this isn't unusual for me because most of the Christian Reformed Church tends to vote Republican. But I had always been on the left wing of the Christian Reformed Church, partly because of my father's work in what in the 60s and 70s have been called inner city ministry. My father was a pioneer in racial reconciliation conversations in a conservative reformed context. And actually, he wasn't alone in that. There was a whole cadre of people coming out of Westminster Seminary, Philadelphia, people like Roger Greenway, who was Christian Reformed like I am. Roger Greenway's father was a CRC minister, and I'm friends with his son. Scott Greenway, who's a CRC minister. Harvey Kahn, who had been a missionary in Korea. Ray Bakke. And it's really out of this cadre that Tim Keller came out of and planted his church in New York City and Redeemer Press. And of course, that for many people is probably the biggest, probably the most successful fruit of that movement in the 60s and 70s of what in conservative reform circles was racial reconciliation, inner city ministry, ministry to the poor. Part of why, part of my frustration in this is that I've used these terms for decades and without, unproblematically, just this is for many of the Dutch CRC folks, well, this is kind of these weird inner city missionaries, but they're okay. And now suddenly what happened then in the 90s, or really the 2000s, is that I kind of felt this entire area that we had, my father had ministered, worked in it, I've worked in it, had kind of been co-opted by this new social justice movement that suddenly changes the script. Now, just a couple of days ago, in fact, someone pointed out for me, and I'll put the links in the comment, I thought some of the best stuff that I had read on your Davenin Institute site about social justice. And again, I was really impressed with how you engaged Jordan Peterson, and then, oh, he's talking about this too. And I almost felt like C.S. Lewis and, I forget his friend's name when they both like, oh, you like North mythology too. And I read some of your, and again, I'll put them in the link, and I thought, wow, this is interesting because on one hand, we're over here saying, well, we don't really want Jordan Peterson to get too much into the political food fight. And on the other hand, we're both interested in this political food fight because at least from my corner of the world, I used to be a pro-life Democrat. And now if you say a pro-life Democrat, people would say, there's no such thing, that's like a unicorn. I'd say, no, there used to be pro-life Democrats, but, you know, so how did you get into this conversation about social justice and how social media and some of what's happened in the last five, 10 years has morphed that conversation? And partly because I've always been fascinated with the way that technology changes things and particularly how it changes the way that we have certain conversations and the dynamics of society have also really interested me. I'm a sort of online sociologist, anthropologist. I find it fascinating to watch people and what makes things and what are some of the dynamics that lead to the conversations that we're having? Why are we relating to each other in the ways that we are? When it comes to social media, I think it has shaped these things immensely and it's led to new antagonisms, it's led to new alliances. In part, it's broken down some of the distinctions between the conversations that you have on your side of the Atlantic and on mine. Many of these conversations have become far more related to each other and there will be people participating in both. I think the social justice issue has also represented a movement from an older left that was far more interested in issues of poverty and race would be associated more with that realm of dealing with issues of poverty and class and those sorts of injustices that relate to that. And a new sort of politics on the new left, which is associated very much with identity and within that new politics of identity, it's interesting class has very little salience within that new politics and poverty does not seem to appear in the same way. For instance, you talk a lot about identities online. You don't really see poverty online and you can see a lot of many poor people just would not be online to the same degree or in the same ways or in the context where people as they're walking down their street, they will see with them their neighborhood, they'll see poverty there, perhaps. But it's far harder where do you go to see poverty online? These things aren't visible in the same way. But yet the internet increasingly is the spectacle through which we understand society. And I think the whole movement around Trump represents something of that failure to deal with the issues of poverty to engage with that world of people who feel disaffected and feel cut off from a party that traditionally would have supported them and made space for concerns like the pro-life movement. Think about the early pro-life movement. There were people on the Christian left who were arguing about abortion as violence against women's bodies and as a sort of escape valve for a deeper network of social injustice that we do not provide for such women. We do not provide a secure social order. And as a result, we have abortion as an escape valve for that injustice. We need to deal with all of this because ultimately that is a case of violence against women's bodies. It's also something that is a signal of deeper injustice within society. You can't have that conversation now. And there's very few places where you will hear that sort of position expressed. Within the UK, there's never been the same degree of a left-right split along within Christian circles. And so I don't have a clue how people within my church vote. It's a strange thing, I think, within the US context, but within the UK, that's quite typical. You would have certain senses of how they vote, but you could be surprised. I mean, even a few years ago in a general election within the UK, all my family voted and we cast six different votes. And there are definite political differences within my family, but there are also deep agreements. It's just politics seems to be a lot more a matter of prudence and how do you address these particular issues. There's less a sense of this deep ideological difference. But yet on the internet, I think we've seen those ideological differences blow up. And we see that now in the context of Brexit, the debate in the UK, which has been polarizing in a way that previous debates maybe not to the same degree. On social media, I think what you see is within the realm of the spectacle, what do you have in common? You have in common politics, mass media, sport, entertainment, all these sorts of things. And increasingly, ideology is that which provides you with the, is that which is the solvent into which all these different particular issues can be dissolved and you can find your view as one that is presented an antagonism to others. So for instance, if you're thinking about concept like the patriarchy, the patriarchy actually stands as this grand signifier for a host of different issues within women's lives. It could be spousal abuse. It could be the sexually harassing boss in the workplace. It could be some wolf whistles that you find as you go home from school. It might be the situation of the woman who does not get the job that she thinks she should have or doesn't get paid as much as some other men within her workplace, whatever it is. All of these things get congealed within this one concept of the patriarchy. And then you have within the spectacle, these symbols of that. And it's like this head of the Hydra that has broken the surface of the water that must be crushed because it represents the entire beast that lies beneath. And so something like Kavanaugh becomes a grand symbol of everything that's wrong with the world. And that movement to the realm of the spectacle and the symbol and it's projected onto reality. See the same thing with Coventon boys and the reaction to that situation, which becomes not just a particular case of what should these boys have done and how do we deal with that situation? Actually, we're not the ones in the position to do that for the most part. We lose sense of any subsidiarity and local authority within that situation. But what we have is this is a grand symbol for everything that's wrong with the family. That would the country and with dynamics of men and women, with racial relations, with families, all these sorts of things are placed into that one grand symbol. It doesn't matter that thousands of people marched in the march for life. You have this one grand symbol and then also a bench of heroes remarks and those stand for everything. Those are the symbols that represent the deeper antagonisms and everything else is something that is dissembling or dissembling that underlying antagonism and is fundamentally illusory. And so I think that new framing of the political landscape means that ideology has a lot more sway in a way that it wouldn't have in a context where you're a lot more locally rooted. When you're rooted in a local physical concrete context, you find there's a lot of common good that you can find with people who are on the other side of the political fence. You do not have to agree with them on everything. And actually, politics is broken down to size. It seems to be a lot more a matter of the art of the possible, its prudence. What is the best way of approaching this thing that we all believe is a problem? So when you're looking at homelessness, for instance, there may be different approaches to it, but fundamentally people agree that it is a problem and that we should have compassion and we should deal with it on some level. They disagree on the right approaches and the right level of which to deal with it. But yet, when you have this debate in social media, I think it's very hard to see those factors within a local community that can break our differences down to size and enable us to find common ground. And I think as we've lost that, our antagonisms have become deeper and more intense and then those get projected back into the concrete context. So we no longer feel that we can relate to members of our own families and people who live next door to us. You'd almost get the sense that we'd be better off if we just all turn the screens off for a little while and actually go out and talk to your real neighbor and discover that this, in a sense, we're living up in the heavenlies, which is these false reflective images of our imaginations instead of the actual intersectionality and diversity of a real life relationship, where in fact, well, you do share a tremendous amount of common interest and common language with this person with whom you're supposed to be a zero-sum mortal enemy of. Yep. Now in our email conversation before we got into this, before we had this conversation, you mentioned, and I thought that was a terrific observation, that ironically, what seems to be getting lost in these highly gendered conversations is just some of the most obvious aspects of gender within this conversation. Could you say a little bit more about that? That really got my attention. Well, I think as we've both noticed, Jordan Peterson particularly resonates with young men and why is that? Is it just his message or is it something about who he is? And I think it's something about who he is in addition to his message. If he were a woman of the same age expressing those same viewpoints, I think many young men would say, this is a very wise opinion. This is a wise woman and I can learn a lot from this person, but yet they wouldn't so glum to him, to a woman who was saying those things as they do to Jordan Peterson. I think it's the fact that Jordan Peterson is, as many people call him, a father figure. He represents something of what these young men want to become, who they want as a mentor, and we've lost a lot of that within our society. I was thinking about this in the context of scripture recently. When you look at the New Testament and you read the concept of sons, what does a son mean within the New Testament? Within our society, we think about the son as someone enjoying intimacy with their daddy-child relationship and that relationship is very much one enjoyed by a young child and their father within the home domestic environment. But yet within scripture, the paradigmatic son is the adult son. It's the son who engages in his father's business, who has learned his father's trade, who works with his father, who acts in his father's name, who inherits from his father, who receives a bride from his father, all these sorts of things that represent a deep bond between father and son such that the son is the image of the father. He reflects the father in a way that is seen within the broader realm of society. He's entered into his father's shoes and that is something that many young men, actually very few young men enjoy. They do not have that deep relationship with men of an older generation or men of an older generation that can bring them into that community of men. They also lack brothers and have companionship of other men who are on a similar journey. Now, male groups, I think, have tended to function using certain dynamics that are specifically that play into male tendencies and also represent a vision of manliness. So things like the emphasis upon agency, that agency is where manliness is expressed, that when a man comes of age, he expresses himself through his capacity for agency. So does he have strength? Does he have courage? Does he have mastery, honor, these sorts of things, fortitude? And often these are virtues that are associated with virility and manliness. And we've not had much of a place for them within our society. And where they have been expressed, we've often tended to pathologize that. And so men have tried to seek these in other contexts where they've not been found, where they can still retain these. Often within sports. And often I think men are looking for these things in entertainment, things that formerly would have been found in the workplace with other men or in context of thought and engagement with other men, where they have companionship and they can push up against each other. And male contexts tend to be more agonistic in that respect. Now, when we look online, online, we're all supposed to be neutered. We're not supposed to, gender isn't supposed to be a real thing here. We don't have our gender bodies. There's, I mean, it's supposed to be a realm where we've moved beyond that. But yet you see all these gendered effects online. Why is it that 90% of Wikipedia editors are male? Why is it that we see the vast majority of people within the social justice movement, it tends to arise from female groups? Why is it that the new atheist movement was such a male heavy group? By contrast, why is it that we see the gender split by different forms of social media? For instance, on YouTube, that there's a lot more males on YouTube. Why is it that we see news articles, that 80% of comments beneath news articles are by men? Now, as I think we see those things, we'll see some of the differences that are causing some of our antagonisms. Because in female groups, there's been a lot more emphasis upon inclusion and the person. Now, when I first went online, the internet was a very male place. It was a place where you went out to the frontier and you engage with weird people with weird ideas. Now the internet is a neighborhood. And the concern is to manufacture consensus to ensure that wrong thinkers are put outside. And there's a lot more emphasis upon policing of this community and appealing to third parties, these sorts of things. And those are the dynamics that you find more typically in female groups. I think we're seeing the same thing in the university. And Jordan Pearson has referenced this at points that the whole social justice movement tends to be, there is a correspondence or there's a correlation between that and women, not just feminine traits, but being a woman. And I think there are reasons for that. Traditionally, the broadest networks of society were networks where you had to go outside the domestic environment. You had to engage with people at the frontiers and more agonistic and very much focused upon strength. And if you're going to be a public figure, you had to be seen as combatant, an antagonist. You had to be challenged. You had to be pushed. All your views had to be tested. Whereas increasingly, what we're seeing, I think, is the context of social media allows the dynamics of the more intimate groups, which are more female dynamics, to be spread out to the widest groups. And now you're seeing the dynamics of what used to be the dynamics of politics and the more antagonistic male dynamics of politics are now being collapsed into the dynamics of polite society, which are the dynamics of a more female group, which have a lot more sensitivity about inclusion, about equality, about no hierarchy, about things like an avoidance of antagonism and agonism and these sorts of factors. And so I think part of what we're seeing is a breakdown of the old order, which was provided by just the gen, I mean, something you see in society after society, just the way the sexes relate and the way the spaces tend to play out. Now we're seeing things increasingly collapsed into a realm where men and women are operating together and are at odds with each other. And that, I think, is causing problems for both men and women. Both of them do not function well when they're forced to operate on the other's terms. And I think many men have found this difficult, for instance, within the church, that the church can be felt to be a very feminine realm where their strengths aren't really engaged, where they're not really engaging with other men, where the vision of piety is one that actually downplays virility, is one that suggests that you should not really play up to these male strengths. And so I think what Peterson has engaged with is this sense of alienation among many men from something deep within themselves, that men formally would have expected to find companionship with other men, outlook for them manliness, their masculinity, and a sense of that having value in society, not just being toxic and having to be a neuter. I mean, we want men who aren't toxic, but we want men who are not just safe, neutered people, but people who are dangerous but good, people who have strength, but they use that strength to build people up and to engage with the fortification of society. And I think that sense of a disconnect is one that we're increasingly seeing online where many of our debates are playing out in a gendered way. And so I think when you read some of Campbell and Manning on the rise of victim of culture, that shift is a gendered one. It's a shift from the honor culture to victim, to dignity culture, to victimhood culture. But honor culture is a very masculine culture. It's one that's focused upon male strength and agency pushing against antagonism and standing up for your rights and that of your family, and to a dignity culture which puts, curbs some of the excesses of that. So you're not going to have a duel about this academic disagreement. You're going to work it out in the context of the academy. And if you can't do that, go to the law and the law will sort that for you. But it's a sense of dealing with hyper agency, the obsessive agency that can lead to violence. And now I think those agencies have increasingly turned to a victimhood dynamic where you're protecting people who are not functioning as agonists and strong agency. There's an emphasis upon protection and ensuring of empowerment, which is a different dynamic from power. When you're empowered, you don't have power yourself. The source of the power is outside. And so I think we've seen this sort of shift. And along with that, what we're seeing in the university is within those realms that are female dominated, we're seeing the dynamics of no platforming. We're seeing the manufacturing of consensus in a way that squeezes out debate and the agonism of actually working out these issues. In argument, we're seeing appeal to third parties to close down opponents or to act against opponents. We're seeing attacks upon reputations, pathologization of opponents. These sorts of dynamics are the dynamics of female competition more than male competition. And I think what we're seeing is the challenge of dealing with a public square, dealing with realms of work, for instance, that are increasingly mixed between the sexes and realms of communication. Whereas historically, these haven't been mixed. They've been far more distinct. There's been interaction. And that is a difficult thing to manage. And I think you're right. Historically, we have managed the integration of these aspects with differentiation. This is a, you know, I often I read, oh, I read, was it Ken Woodward? It was the Newsweek, it was the Timer Newsweek Religion Reporter wrote a book a few years ago, just kind of his summary of the last 50 years. And you had in churches this interesting interplay of, well, often men had all the official positions of power. But anyone who actually knew how the underlying power dynamics happened in those churches, no one would argue that women didn't have a tremendous amount of power, often, in fact, veto power. Friends of mine would have, you have these, so in the Christian Form Church, we've had this huge fight over women in ecclesiastical office. And, but it would be very common to be in an all male council meeting, and a man would, oh, he couldn't make the decision that night. And the pastor would, you know, slide over the phone and say, why don't you call your wife so we can make this decision tonight? I mean, everybody understood that the interplay of power and position was compartmentalized, but the the nexus between them was often implicit and, and not formal, informal. And so now with this particular, there's kind of an analogy of, not only am I getting my identity reflected back to me from these electronic, from these electronic avatars, but, but all power must also come through a monolithic hierarchy, where the, the stated positions of power are assumed to be the only positions of power, whereas again, in church society, in church, churches, we all always knew there were those informal authority, and then there was always in a sense, the shadow government, and the head, but then the neck that turns the head. That's, that's exactly right. And, and so you, you often have this implicit, that was a way of managing the, the gender differences and the gender conversation, but it wasn't legal, explicit, flat, in a sense. And so, you know, one might argue that this, this push has been a flattening and the flattening in part of, part of what, part of why, let's say a natural environment is so non-flat, is that you, you might not appreciate the earthworms, but once you no longer have earthworms, you recognize their necessity. So, you know, it's, you know, when you talk, it's so interesting, because when you talk, I think, dude, your stuff is so concentrated, I've got to kind of, I got to kind of take every one of your sentences and say, okay, well, there's a, there's a paragraph, there's a paragraph, I really appreciate that about your work, because it's like, ooh, you really compress it into something succinct and tight, and I'm very impressed by that. So, thank you. It's really good. And, and so, it's, it's really good. Now, I want to be, I want to be sensitive to time, even though I get the sense you and I can do this all day. Any, any questions for me or anything we didn't talk about that you'd like to throw out there? I'll be interested to hear just your experience of, one of the things that I've been thinking about a lot lately is how to establish groups, particularly for young men, to get them engaged, not just learning, but in active communities of learners, where we're agentically learning together. I think a lot of the time we're, we're given this sense of, there's a teacher, there's a learner, and you passively absorb information. But yet, I think one of the things that we're seeing within these conversations around Jordan Peterson is a sense of a more active learning coming to the surface, that these are people who are changing their lives, who are engaging with these ideas, not just as ideas to take in and think ponder, but we're going to change our lives in terms of this. What are some of the practical ways that you've seen in your videos, but also within your local community, of bringing these communities together and having them work in a way that people actually engage within this broader network or community? Apart from all of the, all of the blessings that Jordan Peterson has given us in terms of his body of work has been that he has become sort of a flair that, so I, you know, I, so I had, you know, Jordan Peterson had my attention, so I'm trying to think through him, and so I'm reading about him, and I'm blogging about him, and I have my blog, nobody ever read my blog, it's kind of a link dump, and I just throw stuff there, I never edit, and it's, you know, again, it's like my videos, it's just my process. I'm a terribly, I'm a terribly selfish content producer in that I'm just doing this because I need someone to talk to. I think that gives people something, I mean, I've found this, my blogging has always been for myself primarily, but people have a sense of engaging with the process that they're learning with you, that they're joining the journey, it's not just the fruits of your completed journey that you're giving before them and saying you take this on board, you're saying, would you like to join me? I don't know where I might end up. Well, that's exactly right. So, one of my friends in Southern California, I've done some online interviews with him, John Vendonk, I, so I made a video because I thought something, YouTube is a different, I didn't appreciate how much of a social media YouTube was, and still I started making videos, and then I realized, oh, this isn't just a platform for disseminating videos, this is a social media, but it's a very different social media from Twitter or Facebook by virtue of its nature, so I made videos, and then suddenly I had hundreds and then thousands of people watching my videos, and as a pastor of a church of, you know, there's 50 warm bodies, most of them over 70 on Sunday morning, this isn't normal, and so then a friend of mine says, well, you have to do a meetup, and I'd heard of meetup.com, and I thought, well, anybody come, I don't know, but okay, I spent the 80 bucks for six months, which is a terrible outrage, well, I get that kind of money, but I still pay it, and I just meet up, Sacramento, Jordan Peterson meetup, and then I set it on my channel, and I thought, we'll see if anybody shows up, and a dozen people show up, and they're not all men, but they're mostly men, and now I, as a local church pastor, local dying churches try just about anything to get warm bodies in the room for almost any reason, and so you have vacation, Bible school, you, I mean, I'm a dramatically, I'm a dramatically unsuccessful pastor in many ways, I am, I am, and I say that people, oh, Paul, don't say that about yourself, my ego is huge, I'm not hurting myself, trust me, I'm a dramatically unsuccessful pastor, and I just put, you know, Jordan, Sacramento, Jordan Peterson meetup, and 12 people show up the first night, total strangers, many of them atheists, and I thought, well, I don't know what to do, so, well, let's just go around the room and introduce ourselves, and that took about half the meeting, and then conversation flowed from there, and, and it's like, and we're there for two hours, and I kind of decided, okay, at two hours, I'll call time, and then anybody can leave if they want to, you know, you have, as a pastor, you have small group skills that you pick up over the years, because you've run Bible studies in small groups, so then I say, okay, well, time's up, anybody can leave if they want to, but if you want to stay, you're welcome to stay, and so we started at seven o'clock, at 1 30 in the morning, the church phone rang, and I knew exactly who it was, and that wasn't a good thing, because it was my wife, and she's like, are you okay? Where are you? It's 1 30 in the morning, and I don't know who these people are you're meeting online, but I'm not sure they're safe, so could you come home? It's like, okay, push them, so at that point, I knew I had to say, I'll start kicking you out at 11 o'clock, but think about this, churches that are dying to, you know, and as a pastor of a local unsuccessful dying church, nobody wants to talk to me, people avoid me when they learn I'm a pastor, or they say sanctimonious things, now I've got a line of people that say, I'm really interested in like God and theology and the Bible and men and women and politics, and so we sit there and we talk about everything, and I've been doing it for over a year, and they keep coming, and most of the time, we're not even talking about Jordan Peterson, he was just the thing that got us in the room together, and so I realized that in the church, women's Bible studies, you can have a dying church, that women's Bible studies, that'll outlast the church, and quite literally in one of our church plants in Davis, the church basically, they got too small to maintain themselves as a church, but part of the agreement in selling their facility to one of our church plants was, could our women's Bible study keep meeting on Tuesday morning? Yeah, yeah, no problem, so women's Bible studies, they're going great guns, all my attempts of starting a man's Bible study, crickets, and these are Christian men, and I know some people do pull it off, okay, I'm a dramatically unsuccessful pastor, I couldn't do it, so then like last night or two nights ago at our last meetup, one of the guys turns to me, and he's actually a Christian and goes to one of our church plants, and he says, I'm really surprised that he grew up evangelical, I'm really surprised that a church lets us do this, even though these were, this is what I always wanted the church to be, because well, and now again, these are men, and and they, what do they want the church to be? They want, and this is something I learned very early on, and one of my rules in ministry had always been, I don't care in a small group setting how heretical or outrageous you have anything to tell me, as a pastor you very quickly learn, people will come into your office and tell you the most unbelievable things because they're true and because they need to tell somebody, so as a pastor you get used to that, so I always tell my small groups, you can say anything in this group, I mean you can say God is a cucumber, I don't care, as long as it's honest, you can say it in this group, and so what has happened in this is we have men coming together to, it sounds terribly leftist, to speak their truth and to bond with one another, and you know we're not painting ourselves and beating drums and starting campfires, you know, I'm not saying anything against that, but that's not what we're doing, we're just talking, but there's this huge need to obviously know and be known, to love and be loved, and for men to do this as men together and to not have to apologize for or be embarrassed by it, and this has been, you know, I've never had a ministry like this, and again if you look at, I, anyone who is, I post a fair number of conversations on my channel, and part of the reason I want to do this is because I want men to see other men talking, and a few of them are women, and some you hardly have any women, well that's because mostly men are coming to me, and mostly men, for very good reason, say yeah you can post it, you know, YouTube is a place for people with little to lose, that's my conclusion, but so, and so then when I look at this and I say why, what has happened to the church, that this is not a place where people can come and speak honestly about what's in their hearts, and I know I'm a pastor, I'm, you know, I've got vows in my ordination, I'm under theological subscription, all of that is true, but why, how have, how, why is it surprising for some people that a church would be such a place, when I think I have always wanted the church to be such a place, and now in many ways, thanks to Jordan Peterson, I am realizing what I've always wanted, but never knew how to get there, and then I talk to other pastors and say you should do this, and they kind of look at me like, well I don't know, and it's easier for me because I have a YouTube channel, I get that, and so I tell pastors, if you want to start one, I will travel to you, and I will publicize it on my YouTube, and I will gain a group, I will get people or bodies in the room to start, but you have to keep the conversation going, and once people get the sense that this is a place where they can confess, where people can hold each other accountable, and we haven't figured out how to do this, at this point we're just talking, and we haven't really been able to establish rituals or institutions, some of that probably will have to happen, but these are very early days, so that's, and to me again, this nothing has been more fun, and you talk about sonship, so my father who planted this urban church in Patterson, New Jersey, and worked on racial reconciliation, he passed away in 2013, and if my father were alive today, oh he would be all over this, because we've never seen anything like this, and it's wonderful and glorious, and I look at it and say, the kingdom of God is coming, I can feel it. I found it incredibly exciting myself, my work takes me around different parts of the US particularly, and parts of the UK, and most of the people I talk to, most of the people who attend the meetings that I'm speaking at are men, and generally I'm speaking about biblical theology, I'm speaking about certain social issues, things like that, and I've found so many men hungry for these sorts of connections, to have first of all contact with reality, let's talk about things that really matter, and let's talk about them in a way that shows their gravity, that talking about reality is dangerous, it's not safe, you can't come to it with a sense of, this is everything that's going to come out from it, and we've got these predefined answers, those are what you're going to arrive at, you will find surprises along the way, it will be unsettling, and yet I think many people are hungry for that sort of thing, because they're hungry for reality, and looking at many pastors, the way that they declare Christian truth, if they declared it with half the conviction and passion and gravitas as Jordan Peterson, we'd be doing a lot better, and I think when I'm looking at Christian truth, I spend most of my time in the Bible, and that's my work, that's my area of study, and looking at patterns within scripture that show there's this deeper order and musical character that's to the Bible, and so I feel a lot of affinity for what Peterson is trying to do, to show that this text isn't just about some events that happened back then that needs some literary analysis or some historical discussion, but this is a text that has resonance for our lives today, and it's something that has a power to change the way that you view the world, and you engage with reality, it is a myth, a myth in that full sense, not in that sense of just being a fable, but in the sense of being an orienting story that helps you to order your life to reality, and I just do not see many people presenting the Bible that way. When you read through the story of Genesis, for instance, there is so much there that you can build upon, and it's a very literary, it's a dense literary artifact that takes a lot of study to see some of the patterns that emerge, and yet those patterns disclose deep truths about our day-to-day lives and how we can find orientation within the world, and even worship. It's another thing that within the Theopolis Institute, so much of our work is about making that connection between Bible liturgy and then culture, and within liturgy there's a deep orientation to reality. This isn't just play acting and entering into a private space where we relate to God. These are the orienting practices of life where we bring the matter of our work and our lives to God and present ourselves before him, where we are formed together as a people, where we are given new names and identities, where we are those who are oriented towards the worship of the living God. When we recite the creed, that is an orienting manifesto for human existence. It's something about this is the deepest nature of reality, and we are going to go out and live in terms of this, and then we end with communion and being sent out. This is something that is deeply oriented towards practice and existence within the world and that deep existential level, but yet so many people lose that, any sense of that within their discussions of these things. Sacraments become just this theological conundrum, how does this work? There's less of a sense of we are being knit together as a community, we are being given Christ's presence, and we are then being propelled out into the world. This is the heartbeat of the life of the church. My work has very much been about trying to recover that sense of Christian truth as something that has this mythopoetic power to it and force, and it propels you into all the reality. I'm so glad we have this chance to talk, because I have been really enjoying what I've read from you, and there is something very much to having, even if it's through this crazy electronic medium, where somebody in the UK and somebody in California in the United States can talk in real time and record it and then upload it and share it. What an amazing opportunity. I've seen few people like you who can put this together the way you have, and who has seen this and articulated it like you have. I really appreciate your work in this. Make sure you let me know when you're going to be around in California. We'll have to do something out here if I can. I did visit Sacramento a year or so ago. No, I'll be out in California later this year. We'll have to figure that out. Any last-minute things you want? I could do this all day, but you're heading into the evening and not everyone can sit, although with YouTube they'll pause it, go to the bathroom, they can do whatever they want. I would just encourage people to look deeper. Peterson has started a conversation and opened up a number of different avenues that you can explore. It's like walking through a grand hallway and seeing doors opened up. There's the philosophical doors, there's the doors into psychology, there's the doors into myth, and there's the door into scripture. I would encourage people particularly to look into that door of scripture. There is a lot more there and it would surprise you just how much you can learn within that grand room of scripture. What would you say to pastors and particularly Reformed churches in terms of why this deserves not only attention but probably also participation? Scripture is a symbolic world that we're supposed to inhabit. It describes that world. It presents us with reality in its deepest, capital R sense. When we're reading Jordan Peterson, he's trying to grapple with the way that myths and texts open up the deeper aspects of reality. He's dealing with the question of belief, not just as believing this set checklist of doctrines, but belief as something that's practical, that leads to a new way of life. Christian truth has always been, I mean Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, and we're looking for truthful ways of life. This is something that we, I think as Christians, have put forward within the present within the text of scripture. It's something that we present within the liturgy. Ideally, churches should present truthful ways of life. So people who are considering, as Peterson is, how truthful ways of life can be conveyed through myth and how this whole process works and how belief is not just cerebral but is something that is practical and existential. They are fellow travelers and they are the sort of people that we need to be talking to. Well hang on, I'm going to close out the recorded part of this, but again I really want to thank you for taking the time and for this conversation. Maybe in a few months we can do it again and when we learn something else or something else happens. I deeply appreciate this opportunity, so thank you so much. Thank you.