https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=9euXR17Xj10

 Hi, this is Paul. Yesterday in my video I noted what Glenn Scrivner said about the Alex O'Connor Richard Dawkins interview. In this interview Richard Dawkins says that he has no respect for any Christian debater that he has ever faced. Who's the most formidable debate opponent that you have had in your career on this question of God's existence? I don't think there are any. Never mind. Atheist Alex O'Connor sat opposite him and he did better than any Christian on the planet ever could do. The questions that Alex O'Connor asks Richard Dawkins are exactly the questions that any Christian would want answered and Richard Dawkins has no answer. Hi, I'm Glenn. I can't improve on that intro. I was with Glenn at the art conference. Sorry to have celebrity name drop on Glenn. I told him I said you're the cleverest man here and he laughed and he'd rather be Rafe Kelly the coolest man there but sorry. Glenn is clever and that introduction is dead on right. I have now made my way through the Alex O'Connor Richard Dawkins conversation and it's an astounding conversation in terms of the whole atheist Christian debate. Now I want us to be a little charitable towards Dawkins. I would you know his he is showing his age. He's 82 and that's you know I work with a lot of seniors. Old age is a very funny thing. For some people it lasts a long time but there are capacities that tend to diminish. You tend to be a little less quick so on and so forth. But you know I'm not saying anything catastrophic about Dawkins but he is showing his age which is absolutely biological. But Alex O'Connor just tremendously impressed me in this conversation. He was I was just I just really impressed there were portions of this conversation that were that were really remarkable. And what Glenn said I can't improve on. But what I wanted to do was use this to to highlight some things that are becoming more and more obvious to me. And I think even the so Justin Briarley of course is doing his podcast and I love his podcast every time a new episode comes out I listen to it just like clear off all my other things and I listen to Justin Briarley's podcast and I hear what he's doing. And Justin is marking something that we are seeing here in Alex O'Connor. The conversation has shifted dramatically. Now this doesn't mean again and what's so interesting about this is Alex O'Connor continues to identify as an atheist but he clearly has been to school he clearly has learned some philosophy and some theology. And the way he quotes C.S. Lewis or Alvin Plantinga with a fair amount of respect I mean Alex O'Connor is seriously contemplating all of these issues and it is absolutely fascinating to watch. Let's let's start because we have to talk about the map of science or maybe we should talk about what rich when Richard Dawkins talks about science he's talking about a map. OK. Let's think about that as we listen to this. It's it's it's a remarkable conversation. Again kudos to to Alex O'Connor. Well well done. And I don't mean this in terms of dunking in terms of Christian and atheist. I think he just did what I think every good conversation should do which is reveal truth. And let's go. Come to the show. Thank you very much. By Anne Hersey Ali recently despite you being perhaps the world's most famous atheist described you as one of the most Christian people that she knows. Why did she say that. I do I am. I'm a great fan of hers. I have talked to her about this. I think the the respect in which we differ is that for me what really matters is the truth claims of Christianity. OK. And this is what's going to dominate the first part of this conversation. And when we talk about these truth claims what is Richard Dawkins thinking about. He's basically thinking about a map because he's he's going to argue that the way that we know truth and later on when Alex O'Connor presents CS Lewis's argument from desire of implanting this argument about evolution. But even early on here as Glenn Scrivener points out there's a moment in which we're really beginning to see the map. Whereas before I think in a lot of the atheist debates the map was so present so up close that we didn't see the map we just we just saw science will science science science will science is a map. OK. And what is a map. And for her what really matters is the morality the politics actually. I think for her Christianity is a bastion against something worse as Hilla Belloc said always keep a hold of nurse for fear of finding something worse. And for her I think she she wants a faith which will help people to stand up against worse faiths. She singles out Islam she singles out China I think and Putin and woke is woke isn't. Yes. And I'm with her on all those. And to the extent that I think that a religion might be valuable for political reasons I would. OK. So I think this is lovely. I mean what I loved about the first part too is that OK. So I and her see a Lee has changed her identification in terms of this religious mapping. She has changed and she is beginning to take on a Christian identity. And she when she says about Richard Dawkins that you know in some ways what a fine Christian he is. It's you know we sort of have this with Jordan Peterson and I do videos about Jordan Peterson some people and Jordan Peterson not a Christian or Jordan Peters the best Christian I know John Ravik he talks about the fact that some people have told him that he's the best Christian that they know. OK. So there's a slipperiness there's a fudginess with respect to these terms we grant that. So when I and her see at least as of Richard Dawkins basically he's Christian or he acts Christian Lee or any way she's going to frame it she's giving him a compliment and she wants to say he is someone that I esteem if I identify as a Christian you know I esteem him I recognize him he's a friend and he again speaks of her. Now this political divide says OK well Christianity works because that's essentially what she says Christianity works because these other threats that we're facing don't work. Now again because this is Richard Dawkins is because we're talking about evolution which again is evolution a thing or is evolution a hyper object. We're talking about evolution that hyper object itself is going to play and should play with our value hierarchies we'll call it that and Alex O'Connor is going to go right in on this and I'm just thinking Glenn Scribner nailed it. Go along with her but I think it's the wrong way to approach religion I think that what really matters about religion is whether it's true. OK and again he's pointing to the map he's pointing to can we abstract this and have make truth claims about it on the map and then take those things from the map and bring them back down to the ground. Now far later in the conversation almost to the end when they talk about we know that science is true because and he's going to go into verification things because we can send things to the moon because math works and slingshotting objects because because these things work. So in that sense they are true because they work. Now Jordan Peterson is also going to come into this conversation and it's going to be interesting because a long time ago about five years ago one of the things that people were hitting at Jordan Peterson for was this idea of Darwinian truth and in some ways where this whole thing has migrated in five weeks both of these guys are in many ways functionally using Darwinian truth as their measure. OK before we get to this point which again Alex is really going to follow up well with just look at the assumption about a religion. So what is a religion? So now we're going back to this question of Tom Holland. The Greeks you know did they know that they were religious? Well not in the same way we were. Tom Holland I think demonstrates nicely that this entire framing of what a religion is is really a very recent thing and an atheist would often claim and again all this stuff is changing quickly. An atheist would often claim they don't have a religion it's only religious people that have religions and religion is you know a religion because of these certain kinds of things these certain kinds of beliefs, mappings, these certain kinds of behaviors so on and so forth and well you shouldn't do this well of course that whole should is deeply into here why should or shouldn't we and in terms of Darwinian truth the idea would be the should that you have is to what get my genes into the future and Brett Weinstein would have been a you know keeping Brett Weinstein in mind is fun with this conversation given where he has been in this whole thing and a little bit later we're going to get Brett Weinstein is not mentioned but metaphorical truth gets mentioned so just fascinating. She doesn't do that she goes she she says I believe in it I am a Christian and therefore well but she has given a whole bunch of she has tried to be forthright about where she's at and and she was very forthright that's basically she was depressed she found the world difficult to live in and some of the recent videos I've talked about nihilism induced depression which I think is a hazard to atheists in ways that it doesn't tend to be to religious people religious people don't seem to have a meaning crisis to the degree that many atheists have a meaning crisis and when you listen to Ion Hersi Ali in the unheard interview talk about why she embraced Christianity she did it in therapy and why she has found it think about this word that gets used in churches a lot this this word has sort of taken up fancy in churches over the last ten years life giving think about life giving in terms of Darwinian truthiness it's almost the definition of all of Darwinian truthiness life giving she found Christianity life giving from a Darwinian point of view you'd think that would be a defeater because she would say this is helping my biology because I have a fear of you know I tried to she says in the unheard interview I drank so much alcohol you know basically you know tried to drown a hospital in alcohol and she finds religion life giving it's not patronizing but I think the fundamental motivation is a political and a moral one I presume now political is almost used again dismissively we could say that it's also a humanitarian one because she believes that if more of the world were Christians rather than atheists or Muslims or some other things I would imagine then actually the world would be a better place you say well well you know let's flip the tables on Vanderklae here what do you mean by better also well let's just use Sam Harris's better and worse well what do we mean by better well sort of a dead reckoning sort of better are are less wars better than more wars yes although what does Sam want to do to to Hamas and Gaza well okay and you see it gets very complex very quickly but she finds it life giving well let's you know sort of imagine that she'd think that now again I found this video just fast I was tremendously impressed with Alex O'Connor in this video as both an atheist and as a person with an understanding of not just biological but also mimetic evolution having coined the term meme you'll have to think of religion as essentially something which serves some kind of social function that that must be why it exists that's why it evolved given that that's the case is it really so inappropriate to think about religion in terms of how it serves us socially if that from our shared worldview must be what religion really is okay now remember what I said about the map this is just amazing what O'Connor basically says is okay so you've got your map all right and we can put religion in that map what is primary is the map primary or actually the living things out now let's call it reductive physicalism says that basically the the lowest possible level the truest possible thing is the physical material and all of sort of the this the the the thinky talky the abstractions the mappings all of those things that have the only reality they have is the degree to which they serve the continual propagation of the genetic material that is their value that is what their value was built upon so in other words the mapping itself really doesn't matter now again they're going to get at this later when he uses brings up let's say the metaphorical truth but in a sense these guys keep wanting to flip it and say no the map is most important and to that I say wow Calvinism much and I'm not saying that dismissively it's just this is in many ways what Protestantism became in a certain and this in a certain in a certain way and and I've often challenged this with Christians and I did before because the example I give is let's say I'm I'm at a church meeting and some minister has behaved badly let's say let's use the let's use the stereotypical one the minister has slept with the organist now this is a fairly safe one in Protestant churches now because there are very few there are fewer and fewer organs in Protestant churches are very few there are fewer and fewer organs in Protestant churches so the minister sleeps with the organist you never hear a minister defending himself before his church board for having slept with his organist by saying but I subscribe to all the correct doctrines it's not a challenge this goes all the way back to the book of James because the book of James basically say well when it comes to mapping certainly the devils must have the best map well then what's the problem with the devils if they have the best map it's because you can talk about the map and the territory so O'Connor basically says wow but the way that atheists have been thinking about religion is that well this is sort of a an offshoot and it must have an adaptive purpose because you know non-religious people are so hard to find in human history and religious people you can look at the Collins's religion seems to be the the thing that is keeping human beings alive human beings out reproduce each out itself with religion and again looking at Malcolm Collins rather chilling statement about well but well maybe I'll just play it I put it in Vander Klaas because I am calling out that the the emperor has no clothes right now and I think a lot of people mentioned collapsing fertility rates before but I think that no one has really so consistently brought it up in a way that the people who want to ignore it have to look at the problem you know when I pointed out because I think a lot of people especially you know on the more progressive side of the spectrum they just want to dismiss it oh the planet's better but when you point out that not a single society on earth today except for maybe Israel we can talk about that later in the conversation has figured out how to have prosperity gender equality and high levels of education and anywhere close to a stable population like considering we are trying our best and I think rightfully so to spread those things across the world that should be like a note like that should be like a oh this system that we think is so great and we want to be the future of human civilization doesn't seem to work at the most basic level that seems like quite a scary proselytization for the future or prediction for the future if you're to say that we need to get rid of one from education equality prosperity or birthright we just need to concede the fact that birthright what we need to do is we need to find new cultural solutions we need to find a way to maintain fertility rates while having education while having gender equality and while having a high level of prosperity and there are many places we can look in the world today to begin to get inspiration for how we might do that you know I think to understand the scale of the threat right now one of the things that I always start people was is when I started caring about this and a lot of people are like why is it that people in Silicon Valley seem to care about this so much and it's because there's a lot of VCs in Silicon Valley and VCs need to chart the economy 50 100 years in the future in the way that you know Wall Street people really don't they're looking at the economy five 10 years out okay so this is very map friendly so VCs are looking at a map this is sciency this is data this is these are truth claims this is all of this stuff and we're going to work on this data in the real world and we're going to arrive at something now later in this video with Dawkins he's going to use something like physics for charting things well even though it sounds really crazy in some ways there are fewer variables in terms of getting an object from earth onto the moon then there are planning human societies into the future and you have to think of that in terms of combinatorial explosiveness because each one of those human beings is a package of massive complexity in the way that even this multi-million or billion dollar space object you wish to launch and get it to land on the moon is not because each of those human beings has within them go back to the last video with respect to Peterson layer upon layer upon layer upon layer upon layer of genetic and mimetic code that has passed through enormous populations up until this present time and is figuring in this person to some degrees consciously but a great amount of it unconsciously and this includes all of us doing the talking and listening here so the massive complexity is even greater or whatever so because of that when i was working at the vc i happened to be working in korea when i was working in a vc and i kept trying to chart the future of the economy and i kept coming to the same answer is that korea had no future at their current fertility rate right now for every hundred koreans there will be 5.9 great-grandchildren we are looking at a 94 population collapse over the next century and when i brought this up with the other partners at my firm and i was like hey like it just doesn't seem like there is any feasible economic future for this country they're like yeah but we pretend like that's not the case in our investments like everybody knows this but like if we accepted it then the economy stops working society stops working so we're just going to ignore it basically and when i came back to the u.s it was like going back in time 20 years like i was in some sort of a sci-fi movie and getting to be this one person who saw where the future was going to go and and having to be that crazy person on the streets like no no no you guys don't understand there's countries further ahead than us on this spectrum okay and we know a few things we know there is no floor no country has hit a a fertility collapse floor yet we know that there is no level of advanced fertility collapse where people freak out or at least not until it's too late because you look at korea right now and 60 percent of korean citizens are over the age of 40 so it's likely already too late for them to turn this this problem around so we need to turn this around before we hit that level but the truth is we probably won't and and and we've got to think of solutions for when we don't turn this around but that's a different topic for later in the interview okay so now again you can you can argue within the point that he's making okay but how this relates to dawkins now he's a biologist and so what does he count he counts populations and now he added sort of the memetic theory and put it on top and when you put these two theories on top what malcolm is talking about and what his entire project is about is recognizing that the genetics and the memetics are deeply intertwined not completely we as human beings have have a have have the most flexible memetic capacity compared to our genetic capacity as any other uh being that we are physically accustomed to bumping into i'll say it that way some of you know why i was careful with how i said that so now pay attention again to the mapping in other words what is happening and and physical reductionist materialist should be comfortable with this because what's really happening the most important thing is that the lower register and the point he's making is well actually human beings genetically haven't changed much something in the upper register is governing the lower register and it's actually destroying it in other words we're sort of on a suicidal thing and you put this next to ian hersi ali and you begin to say well that's kind of the same thing it's kind of the same point that ian hersi ali was making an academic point of view i think it's a very interesting question what religion is all about what does it serve a social function does it does it even have an evolutionary benefit and and what's interesting again is if you say well okay because in this conversation we're sort of saying well religion you go over to malcolm and he's going to say no actually religion is everything religion is everything in terms of the propagation of the genetic host for the mimetic payload religion is everything because without this this doesn't thrive and alex just basically made that argument and uh that interests me as an academic uh to me though it's a huge step to go from even saying it's a good thing even saying that i wish there were more christianity in the world even from to say that is is nothing to do with believing it it's truth claims i mean truth claims like okay so then we're gonna so all right so let's let's just say the mappings irrelevant again they get to this later in this conversation i don't know if i'm gonna have time to get there the mappings are irrelevant as long as whatever however the mimetic to the degree to which the mimetic payload gives us the genetic deliverable goods that would be the darwinian perspective that well do we care what dogs think well we kind of care but but why do we care what dogs think because we care about their behaviors okay do you care what your children think well yeah well why because we care about their behaviors and so we're i mean we're very much knocking on the door of jordan peterson five years ago when he's talking about his darwinian truth his pragmatism all of that his definition of religion he can go back to um lafayette college thank you for being here i really appreciate it um so i was watching a few of your interviews in preparation for this and i heard you speak about religion quite a bit and if you look up what religion means in the webster dictionary you get something like a system of faith centered on a supernatural being or beings or something like that but i've heard you use religion to describe things like punk rockers for example that that's a religious experience so my first question would be how do you define what is considered religious and then sort of as a follow-up to that if say sam harris is what you act out what's that religious is what you act out anything you act out everything you act out is is predicated on your implicit axioms and the system of implicit axioms that you hold as primary as your religious belief system it doesn't matter whether you're an atheist or not that's just surface that's just surface noise so it has nothing to do with divinity or no i didn't say that or it doesn't necessarily have to do with those no it probably necessarily has to do with it too but it doesn't necessarily have anything to do with your voluntarily articulated statements about whether or not you believe in something like a transcendent deity so i mean what you act out is much more what you are than what you say about yourself and what the hell do you know about what you believe anyways you're complicated man fair question well seriously people are complicated you know like we're we don't we're not transparent to ourselves at all that's why we have that's why we have to go to university and study psychology it's like you know we're we're we're not exactly black boxes but we are the most complicated things there are right and we can't even program our vcr clocks so it's like how the hell can we propose to understand ourselves most of you don't know what a vcr is and don't get that joke but old people like me and jordan we get it so you know i'm existentially oriented which is to say that i think that what you hold to be true is best determined as an as a consequence of an analysis of your actions rather than as a consequence of an analysis of what you purport to believe now in order to act you can't act without a hierarchy of value which i tortured the other poor questioner about you can't act without a hierarchy of values because you can't act unless you think one thing is better than another because why why would you act otherwise so that means that you're embedded within a hierarchy of values whether you know it or not or maybe multiple fragmentary and competing hierarchies of value which is all the worst for you by the way because it just makes you very confused that hierarchy of values has an axiomatic it's it's based on axioms and the probability that you understand them is very low because generally people don't understand their axioms but that axiomatic system is essentially your religious system and okay now when he's talking about axiomatic values and yesterday's video we talked about hyper priors all these kinds of or two days ago video hyper priors his conversation with john vervecki now those these are these are all mapping words these are all things up here but when in that video about jordan peterson four minutes and i had an hour and a half talking about it's because all of this stuff you absorbed when you were a child and it's all in there and all these assumptions and then when you go to school you learn to map and you map all of this stuff and but back to the biologists what they care about supposedly is just the the material genetic creature scuttling around on the earth that's what's important the populations of them etc etc etc when i don't think that's why atheists are arguing at all because they act out the fact that the mimetic upper regional level governs the lower completely well completely it's they're connected we don't even know in many respects we we're still trying to figure it out we don't even know what we should feed a human being now there'll be a product placement in this thing suggesting something but i haven't bought it there is a divine creator who made the universe and made the laws of physics they're divine creator who who made the world who listens to our prayers who forgives our sins who sent jesus to be born of a virgin and then be born of a virgin and then and then had him crucified i mean those are all truth claims because none of that matters as long as it helps us fight putin as far as well as that that's the difference between me and and i am i suspect that that she doesn't really believe any of that and presumably so then who really is the biologist that's that's that's the thing because he's like no i am in fact the the protestant because i want you and your truth claims to all be set correctly and later on he's gonna say well how do you know that they're correct well because we can put things on the moon okay but we don't even know what to feed a human being should we feed them where's where's the where's the little placement ad in this thing um uh he's is he hawking what joe rogan used to hawk i thought i find that too quite amazing um so this is the tension in this that you have the biologist well frankly again and what brett weinstein wants to push him on and what jordan peterson wants to push him on is the level of okay have you taken this mimetic theory far enough because you're certainly acting like the map is what should have priority ian hersi ali is wrong for prioritizing the on the ground over the map wow from a biologist many christians and i've seen many christians reacting to this story of ian's conversion issuing a similar skepticism as many atheists have been saying well we care about christianity as a set of truth claims we care about it saying we care about our mapping and we're not so sure she's ready to sign onto our map we're not sure she's ready to make the confessional move about our map something real about the world if somebody can become a christian just by preferring it as a as a as a more comfortable worldview what does that say about christianity i mean i said a moment ago if someone can be a minister and basically live however he wants but say i subscribe to all of the proper date statements again the book of james says well you can be a demon and do that too oh i don't believe in demons oh okay well um there's absolutely nothing wrong with rabbi sacrias no he's a hypocrite hypocrisy what is that go that well for us religion just is a social tool essentially and i think that the ability to adopt christianity just because of its social function is evidence in favor of our case that that's all religion is yeah i think we agree about that and and and so we have this flip because at one point the christians are saying look we won and the athens are saying look we won and but they're on the different sides of the table now which is hilarious no it's it's it's just what matters in terms of the flourishing of the species but very quickly you begin to discover that this flourishing thing is not necessarily whether we figure out whether or not lobsters are flourishing in the warming waters of new england i have a niece who works on who worked on that um are lobsters flourishing if they're declining in number so no they're not flourishing they're being they're being stressed because of climate change and global warming and the waters around new england are getting warmer so canada's getting all of the nice main lobsters thank you america what is flourishing well we can we can we know it by well by counting noses no but then when it comes to human beings we know it by blood pressure or we know it by heart rate or you know it by body mass and then you can have someone who has an optimal heart rate a optimal body mass index perfect perfect physical specimen and they're having a meaning crisis because they say i'm no different than a lobster but i think where we perhaps don't agree wait no i wouldn't say we disagree i would say um that our fundamental motivation is a bit different because i think that for you well if i ask you what you think the the worst thing about christianity is i suspect you say something something moral something about um the problem of evil something about the uh the the horrific ideas of the of paul and and the early christian fathers um that that we're all born in sin and and and we need now sin is going to have an amazing conversation in this and i am running out of time and i am internally debating will this be one video or two but one of the things that gets demonstrated in this is that alex o'connor knows a lot more of the bible and theology than richard dawkins and and again he's 82 so let's let's the bible tells us to respect our elders and and i think at least part of that is is give give people who are getting up there in age a little bit of leeway because they're getting up there in age and they're biologically their brain might not function as quick anymore and they they can't keep up to date i'm sure richard dawkins doesn't keep up with all the kids on youtube and so on and so forth but i mean he just it's not performing well he did the death of jesus that's the kind of thing that i suspect drives your atheism whereas for me oh okay so in other words christians have the wrong map oh and atheists have the wrong map and they spent a decade on youtube fighting over their maps and the argument that the atheist said is that your bad your bad map is causing suffering oh your bad map is causing suffering well what about suffering all of the genuine diversity in our society uh one of its core messages is negative utilitarianism that that that uh the the core evil thing in the world is human suffering and that human happiness just doesn't really matter or it is largely outweighed by human suffering and therefore it's better if humans don't exist and that's the end goal for the urban monoculture i think for a lot of people what do you mean when you say urban monoculture well okay so this well let's just because i'm running out of time the arguments that the new atheist wielded against christians was that your map is bad well why is your map is bad your map is bad because it's causing human suffering oh okay so let's let's give people the urban monoculture map negative what do you negative utilitarianism let's give them that cultural map and then they'll thrive because they won't suffer but are they thriving by counting their noses the way we count lobsters in the waters off new england can human flourishing be reduced that well and now he's saying morality okay well well what what exactly are we talking about when we're talking about morality are we talking about human beings again as if they were the lobsters off of in the boston fisheries or are they like the absolutely pristine athlete who is a physical perfect optimal specimen who is completely collapsing in terms of life doesn't have relationships isn't doesn't have any motivation to live can't compete on the field maybe it's it's it's it's babe ruth at the top of his career drinking himself to death is that flourishing what is flourishing it i that's irrelevant i mean for me i talk about it but for me what really drives it is the scientific question is is there a creator underneath the universe because if there is then it's a profoundly different kind of universe from a scientific point of view okay so i want to debate about my map my map is what's important and and whether i have a mind beneath the universe checked or unchecked that's what matters to me you're fighting protestant confessional wars but you're not doing it in church although i've been to oxford it looks a lot like a church i am i am perpetually indebted to my hosts at oxford i will not name them but if you're listening you know exactly who you are for showing me around oxford went to the got into the oxford debating society that was a super cool thing these guys have their their cards so they could get me into places and it was totally cool but look at what we're doing here well why well because the map is really important i agree the map is important if there isn't to me that's the big question the problem of evil to me wouldn't shouldn't be a real problem because you just say well there could be an evil god and um that that so that that's a lesser question for me yes and and then you start to think about that answer and so let me get this straight that's a lesser question for you because if well maybe if you believe there's no god then the god can't be evil but the whole valence of the universe is being good neutral or evil i think most scientists will say neutral but as i listen to john verveke says good jordan peterson says good i mean if i had a if i had just a little one tiny little simple question to ask these people although i think in many ways that mapping answer would be i think that's a good question because i think it would be probably not a lot of use and and in fact it might much better reflect just sort of how they feel about themselves which just really the map up there really doesn't handle very well uh i think i actually do broadly agree with you and that when i explain why i don't believe in god i do make reference to things like the problem of evil but it's difficult for me to frame those as moralistic objections it's more that when considering a particular world view like christianity i think what would i expect the world to look like and especially considering how suffering is built into the evolutionary system so in other words your answers to these questions are pretty much based on your expectations and how were those expectations formed and why do we bump into how many atheists today not evenly distributed around the world but very much distributed usually in the best countries the most prosperous areas like i say i know a lot of homeless people i can't i it's really hard to find atheists among the homeless oh they may curse god sometimes but they they're not they're not doubting his existence and you would say well these people have mental illness they've got tremendous struggles and difficulties in their lives and difficulties in life surely the first thing they would jettison is some notion of a divine being that they could that they could appeal to but they don't so but again it's imagined that everything is about the map and it's this conflict with this darwinian truth that ostensibly they should be the champions of by virtue of their system now maybe this is a good place to quit i've got a randos conversation right now and i this if you got a video if you don't have time for a lot of video watching this is a fascinating video on so many levels so um yeah leave a comment