https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-t15ON6cz4c

 Hi, this is Paul. Today Jonathan Pujo did a video on Alex Jones, the symbolism of Alex Jones, and it was great, so watch Jonathan's video. But I'm not going to be left out of this party, because Alex Jones is a shaman. That's exactly who and what he is. And his shamanism, and what we can learn from his shamanism via Jonathan, has everything to do with the other big news of the week, the United Methodist Church, the Roman Catholic pedophile priest scandal, and all of this stuff. So that's where we're going. Now, why do I say Alex Jones is a shaman? Well, let's first talk about what shamans do and what they are. And this is from Vervecki's second video. So, this is the point. The shaman is developing psychotechnologies for altering the state of consciousness to get into the flow state. And that flow state is already making them more insightful and more intuitively powerful, but it is also making them generators of metaphor. There it is. It's right there. Did you miss the first time? I'm going to play it again. Alex Jones. I can't think of a better word than psychotechnology to refer to Alex Jones. For altering the state of consciousness. His state of consciousness is definitely altered quite a bit. To get into the flow state. When he is ranting, he is in his flow state. That's where you are when you're ranting. And trust me, I rant. I know what a flow state is. And that flow state is already making them more insightful. Is he insightful in his flow state with his conspiracy theories, his space aliens, his all of the things that Alex Jones is doing. He's in the flow state. He's ranting. This is a psychotechnology and he's looking for well, and more intuitively powerful. It's definitely intuitive, but it is also making them generators of metaphor. And he is generating metaphor at an amazing rate. And he does so to create around him a tribe of tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions of people. I don't know how many. The Joe Rogan video with Alex Jones was boom, up to 4 million people yesterday. Pretty amazing metrics on something like that. Why? Why are we so interested in Alex Jones? Now, watch the Joe Rogan video. But let's talk about how we know the world. Human beings are terrific receptors of patterns. We have amazing pattern recognition. That's why we see faces everywhere. And this is what, again, if you listen to anybody who's talking about human psychology and what our capacity is, we have amazing skills at pattern recognition. Now, the dominant environment for pattern recognition and broadcasting are pattern recognition because that's what we do in culture. We take those patterns and we multiply them throughout the people. That's what it means to colonize other people. That's what it means to have influence in the environment is that the patterns you see are picked up, learned, and broadcast by the patterns of the other people. Human beings are like mesh networks. We just, we see a pattern. Wow, that looks right. We tell it to somebody else. They kind of see it then. Wow, that looks right. They pass it on to another. It's like a mesh network. And you don't, if you don't know what a mesh network is, go look that up. But that's what human beings are like. They're a mesh network. And so what happens is that we human beings are looking at these patterns and we're a mesh network. And so pretty soon we'll all be leaving together. And that's why I say people who say, well, they want to be a Christian, but they don't believe anything. Well, you have to start hanging around with people who believe what you want to believe. And in fact, that's what sociology of knowledge is. You look at a Hollywood star and you start to believe what that Hollywood star believes. Why do we call them stars? Because they are guiding stars. It's just like astrology. We look at the stars and what we see the stars doing, we know that's going to be bleeding down into the colleges and the high schools and the playgrounds. It's celebrity astrology. That's very much why it is. And the language is not accidental. That's why the language is as it is. So we look at the stars, we see how they behave. And pretty soon those patterns trickle down and come into the patterns of everyone else. Now that's an incredible, strong point for human beings. We have this amazing capacity to work together as groups. We hunt as packs and that's what we do in our civilization and our clusters. But there's a downside to this in that once we're all being the mesh network and we're all seeing the patterns, we've got a certain degree of blindness. We're only seeing certain patterns. We're preferring some patterns to other patterns. And so a, now pay attention to the language, a monolithic pattern emerges in the society. Now if you've ever watched Jonathan Haidt, he'll talk about, well you've got a monolith in the middle and you can see this at the hajj in Islamic culture where they're all circling around the, they're all circling around the sacred stone or evangelicals praying at a flag. Or evangelicals praying at a flagpole. They go to the flagpole, here it is, it connects heaven and earth. They're all standing around the flagpole praying. Now someone, one of Alex Jones' aliens comes down from space, see these people standing around the flagpole praying, what would they think? Well the flag is their god. Well maybe it is. It depends a lot on who they are. But this is why the cross goes up, connects heaven and earth and goes horizontal, connects all of us. And the point in the middle of the cross, well talk to Jordan Peterson, he'll tell you what's in the middle of the cross. That's the place of sacrifice. That's the place where heaven and earth come together. This is all deeply symbolic and this is how we are. And this is how we behave with each other even if we don't know why we're behaving. Again we have a, we have a, we have a consciousness Congress that's running ourselves. But our consciousness is only kind of this big. And so we might not appreciate everything our mind is doing but you just try to sit here and commit suicide by telling your heart to stop. It won't work because your brain is smarter than to leave your consciousness in charge of you. All right? So what happens with human beings is we are like a mesh network and we're multiplying these patterns back and forth and we're all colonizing each other and we're all reinforcing each other and the people who are reinforcing the chosen pattern and we don't even know how we're choosing it, we don't even know why we're choosing it, but the people who are reinforcing the chosen pattern, we elevate them to be stars and then we follow them and we create a monolithic culture so we're all reinforcing the same pattern. Here's the problem. That's limiting pattern perception. We're all busy as a mesh network barking the same patterns back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, reinforcing the patterns and then we're starting to exclude those who are giving us different patterns. So I have your in groups and your out groups but again, read Jonathan Haidt, this behavior binds and blinds and so pretty quickly you have a monolithic, creates a joint heaven and earth, you have a monolithic civilization, all these mesh networks barking at reinforcing the pattern but what if you have another tribe over here, another community over here that is seeing different patterns and well maybe your pattern is 70% right and their pattern is 72% right on a given axis that right now is really important for the competition and survival of your own tribes, well it's of a significant advantage for your tribe to have a shaman. Why? What is a shaman? A shaman, again watch John Verveckis episode 2 of his Meaning Crisis, a shaman employs psychotechnology to enter altered states of consciousness in order to see patterns that the mesh network is not necessarily duplicating in the network. Now it's really important that the shaman be a part of the tribe so the patterns that the shaman can see and articulate and feed back into the tribe to refresh the patterns in the mesh network of the tribe, it's really important that be close enough so it be intelligible at least to some of the tribe so that at some point they'll gain critical mass so then that new pattern can get transmitted and be taken into the mesh network and so the entire pattern within the network can continue to get improved okay and that's how tribes, this is why free speech is important, listen to Jordan Peterson, listen to the IDW, so that way you can continue to improve the pattern of the tribe to hopefully have that more in sync with the real world out there to help your tribe actually flourish because to one degree or another the degree that you flourish is the degree that your patterns accurately connect with this world outside of ourselves all right and I forget who was saying oh it was actually Esther on the little talk she did with writer John Buck and Craig, tiny little YouTube channel and she said the best question she ever asked someone here, asked Jordan Peterson if all human beings would die would God cease to exist? Boom right there's the question because the question is well what is God? Well to a certain degree the representation that religious communities give of God is an attempt to somehow sync up, well it's connecting heaven and earth, to sync up with all the ultimate reality out there, that which governs reality so essentially the tribe's religious patterns try to connect up with the God and reflect the God, think about Moses receiving, receiving the law, the God says here are the patterns live them out, look at Hammurabi's code, same thing that's what's in the story, here's the patterns if you live this pattern read the book of Deuteronomy, if you live this pattern you will flourish, if you break this pattern the pattern is the covenant, if you break this pattern the land will vomit you out, that is what the book of Deuteronomy says so here's the pattern now then suddenly you're into kind of this karmic situation and look at the book of Job, both the book of Job pushes against karma so what you have are all these patterns and they're all in the community and they're all in the mesh network but the job of the shaman is to resist all of the patterns and to go out and to get new patterns, better patterns, improved patterns, alternative patterns and then what you do generally so again read the Bible, bad king Ahab, bad king Ahab doesn't like to listen to Elijah, why? Because someone says well isn't there a prophet in the land? Yeah there's Elijah, why don't you call him? I don't like listening to Elijah because he always tells me things I don't like, okay so you have your group think and Ahab didn't like, liked his group think, okay it was working for him, it had his zero, he had his wife from Tyre, they were Tyrian Baal was, they put up the temple to Tyrian Baal in Samaria, he got to get Nabot's garden, all of these stories okay but he didn't like Elijah because Elijah was coming in saying you can't do that, you're answerable to God and then of course Elijah slays the prophets of Baal and then of course Jezebel says to Elijah I'm gonna kill you, all right so the shamans, the prophets are outliers and they've got a psycho technology, God speaks to Elijah, Elijah says to the king and the king says that's not what's on network, you're ruining the, you're ruining, you're, you're, you're harshing the mellow, we've got circling the temple of Tyrian Baal here in Samaria and I'm going to kill you to make you stop, it binds and blinds but this is what shamans do, all right. Now the tribe employs the shaman, rewards them with food, with status, with privilege, the information that the tribe gets from the shaman is in fact privileged, the shaman employs a psycho technology to see the world in a different way, the tribe offers some privilege to the shaman in order for the tribe to see the additional aspects of the world through the shaman's eyes and this dynamic is always, is always difficult because prophets that say things that are out of sync with what's on the tribal mesh network that's being repeated between the people, well they tend to be outliers and often what will happen is they'll be, they'll be, they'll be reinforcing the pattern on the mesh network, some calamity will happen and maybe the dude with the sandwich board that says three more days and Nineveh will be overthrown then suddenly they listen to him because they say, oh well, well we'd better listen, we'd better listen to this guy because we want to survive and then he says, well you know the God of Israel, myself being Jonah, the God of Israel says that you should repent and so the king goes to sackcloth and ashes and all the people repent and then of course Jonah is ticked off because Jonah really wanted God to smite the Ninevites because the Ninevites were being tyrants over Israel and colonizing Israel so again these are the games of the world but the smart tribe privileges the shaman but often the shamans, if there are multiple shamans they're in competition and it's all in competition in terms of trial and error. Can you predict, Nate Silver, did you predict Obama would win? Yes, we're going to elevate you and reward you with status and money. Nate Silver, did you predict that Trump would lose? Yes, you were wrong, your status is reduced, you're not going to be on ABC news every day telling us who's going to look into the future so then Nate Silver's going to have to readjust his shaman skills and look at other patterns. Now his shaman, his psychotechnology is statistics and he's looking at sports and everybody knows if you know gaming sports, I play fantasy football, trying to predict who's going to do what in fantasy football, well that's a huge deal and those who are shamans in fantasy football, they are rewarded, they use psychotechnology and they are rewarded with status and with wealth and with food. Alex Jones has been rewarded but he's also been an outcast. The tribe offers some privilege to the shaman or exiles him in order for the tribe to see the additional aspects of the world through the shaman's eyes. That's what the shaman offers. The shaman offers new patterns into the mesh network so that the tribe can begin to embody the new patterns and with this new embodiment, flourish in the world, outcompete their rivals, gain wealth, status, privilege, power, win, be on the right side of history. That's how all this works. Now this is tied to his idea of divine revelation. What is divine revelation? Divine revelation is, well it's God reveals to Moses the pattern and tells Israel live by it. That's divine revelation. You get to look behind the appearances to that which is hidden. Okay, that's really critical in terms of understanding Alex Jones. Listen to Jonathan Pujo talk about it. Jonathan nailed it. Listen to what is hidden. It's all about what is hidden because we have a sense that there's this causation and correlation and we're saying this happened and this happened. There must be something underneath that's causing it. Well we have that all the time in science, right? Someone drops dead. What do we want? An autopsy report. Why? Something hidden has caused their death. A world leader shows up dead some place. Well what happens? Well did someone kill them? Was there a hidden conspiracy? Who's behind the scenes pulling the strings? And see I'm just not smart enough to unplug my phone before I make videos but it'll stop ringing now. Look at that. I predicted it just like Jung in the report with Freud that freaked Freud out. Except I know when the fax machine clicks. Anyway it's tied to divine revelation and that is the privilege mechanism and this is part of the reason, well if you look at the celebrity atheists and the move to debunk the Bible, they essentially are put into the societal mesh network. The Bible is a bad guide. What God said to Moses, well that's not right. Don't follow that. If you follow that you won't flourish in the land. Now shamans will espouse an alternate world. Now consider the cult of diversity and if you'll send a Jonathan Haidt talk about diversity, I think Jonathan Haidt gets it exactly right. Diversity is really important because what diversity offers are alternative pattern recognitions. Now pay attention why in the, oh now I can't think of the name of the movie, the Jim Carrey movie and then the yeah the Jim Carrey movie. Why is Morgan Freeman God? Why is a black man God? Well he's the alternative and just watch. Now I'm not making a shallow racial argument here. What I'm saying is that, so in Victorian culture men were powerful, women were holy. Why do you separate the powerful from the holy? It's a shamanistic impulse. In American society white is powerful, black is holy and you see this again and again. If you watch movie representations of white churches they're usually old, boring and not terribly relevant. Go to the black church. Well the black churches, they have vibrant music, they're alive. How many times when you look at cinematic representations of the insightful shaman, the holy person, they are not white and usually the main character is white. Learning from the not white person, learning from the outlier. Listen to Peter Rowlands. He basically embodies this whole scheme. Oh we have to listen to the outcasts. Well what do the outcasts give you? The outcasts are shamans. They're affording different revelations to perhaps be useful to your mesh network so you can appropriate their mesh network. You can appropriate their revelation, sink it in with your mesh network and promote it throughout to enable a competitive advantage to your tribe and this is in fact why it's very rational, let's say for a board of trustees to say you know what, our product is basically serving the white community, the Hispanic community, the black community and the Asian community. You know what we should do? We should probably have representation from white folks, men and women, black folks, Asian folks and Hispanic folks. Why? Because we're going to need their patterns so that when you decide well we want to release a car, a Chevy in the United States and we're going to call it a Chevy Nova. Well you think well Nova, boom, that's a big star. That's a really powerful image. That's a star after all and of course some Hispanic might say, eso no va a pasar allá en America del Sur. That's going to fail. Why is it going to fail? It's going to fail because no va. Means it doesn't go. You're going to have a car that says it doesn't go. That's a Nova. That car doesn't go. Well right there. That's why you want a Hispanic on your marketing committee that knows Spanish that says you better not give it that name. That thing's not going to go. So this is why you have Oprah. Look at the hands. Think about the shack. Think about the diversity within God in the shack. You know I'm not making an argument from within evangelicalism at all here. This is what we do. It's essentially shamanism crowdsourced because we become aware of cultural filters dumbed down to skin color markers and when you have representations in movies you have all of these signals and so you'd better make sure you get the signals right. Hence what you listen to in social justice conversations of representation. You're trying to get all your shamans out there to be grabbing the signals. The difficulty is once the cult of diversity is already within the mesh network then you have things like the black conservative. Now he's the outlier. Ah but now you've got the other dynamic happening. Now everybody wants to talk to the black Republican because well he's a black Republican. Well we better elect him because he's flipping the social dynamic and this is all shamanism at work. Okay so I got my most ragey still here for Jonathan Pujo's psychotechnology. So let's hear Jonathan break it down. First of all I have to say that Alex Jones seems to be someone who has a very good intuition about things and he doesn't seem to have the right language to express them. Now he has very good intuition about things. That's important for the shaman because the shaman works intuitively. They're picking up intuitive signals so they've employed psychotechnology to pick up intuitive signals. So they've employed psychotechnology to pick up intuitive signals and what basically Jonathan is saying is that Alex Jones the dude is intuitive. Donald Trump the dude is intuitive. We reward intuitive people who are employing different psychotechnologies in a shamanistic way because they slightly tinker the mesh network and they do something a little bit different and you can be rewarded with status and with gold but Jonathan's got some differences with Alex Jones in his psychotechnology. He also seems to be someone who has a very good intuition about things and he doesn't seem to have the right language to express them. He also seems to be caught in what I would call a kind of materialism which means that his symbolic intuition is always pointed towards a kind of materialist explanation and that is actually the case about a lot of conspiracy theory. If you look at a lot of conspiracy theory they tend to see the symbolic structures or symbolism or if they see certain symbols appear. See now they're paying attention to the patterns and they're intuitively seeing the patterns and this is speaking to them and some of it is coming from their consciousness congress and coming out their mouth through their conscious Instead of seeing those symbols as pointing to principles or pointing to patterns of reality they tend to see them as only pointing towards let's say specific historical events or specific historical structures and so I'll give you an example that is very that happened to me not too long ago I was visiting a church nearby a Catholic church and in the church in one of the arches of the of the roof of the ceiling there was a an all-seeing eye you know a triangle with an eye inside and there was a man there we were being given a tour by a tour guide and there was a man who looked at the tour guide and he said oh you know that that means that this was built by by the Illuminati and so you know I should laugh you know a lot of people a lot of people see it that way um but Jonathan's point again is we have a bias in our worldview even in the patterns that we're seeing and how we're finding them even shamans have worldviews and and this is why it's having different shamans from different worldviews well that helps the diversity because then we're looking at different patterns and this is again part of the reason why people instinctively kind of bend towards religious pluralism because in a sense they're hedging their bets they're hedging their bets on the worldview scene and and this is why let's say a more monolithic religious culture let's say like western europe when they learn about when the british go over to india they start listening to indians and figuring out their culture then suddenly there's a fascination with the foreigner and there's a suspicion underneath that wow all that christian stuff that's like that's like old hat that's like tried and failed i'm gonna i'm gonna go look at at hinduism and i'm gonna look at buddhism and i'm gonna look at these i'm gonna look at shamanism from south america because what i'm going to do is i want to i got my little shamanistic impulse within me and i want to enhance my patterns and so i think ah new patterns now we're into jordan peterson's order chaos mapped territory and unknown territory all right so even shamans have their worldview the worldview of the shaman will offer the palette of metaphorical images with which to express the patterns and so for alex jones you've got space aliens governmental powers financial institutions sometimes demon languages etc because they are on the menu in the majority culture america now remember the shaman has to they can't be too far from the culture that they are serving and living off of the culture that has elevated them and rewarded them with food and money and status and privilege they can't get too far away from that because well then they're not going to be able to talk to it it's got to be intelligible it's got to be colonizable it's got to be something that the virus has to be tuned enough for the right species so that the idea can go viral infiltrate the mesh network and start getting repeated and this is why to one degree or another the when these social networks kicked alex jones off in some ways they elevated his status now he's more of an outsider and so to that degree he's he's for for certain people yes he's going to be over the pale look that one up for other people he's going to be more desirable because well if he if they're kicking him off he must really be right this is of course the nature of conspiracy theory the more unbelievable the more believable the more you see a pattern that says powerful people are holding him down he must be dangerous well in order to be let's say a virus i was talking to a friend and there's right now there's a virus going through chickens in california and it's a newcastle disease it's a very serious virus and and state veterinarians are working very hard to try to combat newcastle disease but you know what the veterinarians are not afraid of newcastle disease why it doesn't affect people it only affects birds so what we are afraid of are those viruses that are in birds and can be transmitted to people that's what we're afraid of so when we see alex jones being put away what do we say he must have a dangerous virus maybe it's a right virus forbidden fruit i want to get me some of that virus maybe alex jones is the true shaman that is telling us the hidden truth behind the world well what should you learn from alex jones it means now what's interesting about alex jones's ranting is now remember his ranting is a psychotechnology when alex jones rants he's going into the flow state when the social cohesion breaks down you can imagine it as you have a society that has a center that has a common memory that has a common identity that has you know a common leadership all of this is what creates an actual society is that we are attached to a center or to several centers which which are you know acting together okay now once that starts to break down we start to move towards the periphery the periphery is the place where multiplicity starts to affirm itself and starts to break down and then when that happens i don't think you meant breakdown what what is the result what is the result of that breakdown in order two things one is a a desire for tyranny a desire to create something which will which will regain control over the control that's been lost and you can hear that in the conspiracy theory about the notion of a one-world government the idea of you know a secret elite which is trying to control our our society our culture is trying to control us and so you see in the conspiracy theory a normal understanding of what happens when societal structures break down when the center starts to to stop holding then one of the reaction is to overcompensate okay so if society is functioning properly the hidden powers and the powers up front are the same and when the government speaks the truth everyone believes it because the government spoke the truth now obviously what happened in vietnam in the 70s was a breakdown of that and after after nixon the people the american people need to know their their their president is not a crook all right well then he resigns and then they bring in jerald ford a man with you know from grand rapids michigan home of the christian reform church of north america a man with impeccable credentials much loved broadly entrusted by both sides of the aisle he needs that he needs that in order to pardon nixon because that's going to cash in a lot of political chips but that's not enough afterwards they look for a humble peanut farmer from plains georgia who is who leads bible study at his at his church he's a he's a democrat from a southern state who is a and then what's in time magazine he's a born-again christian all right if you've been watching my other videos when i'm mapping what's going on in the 20th century between god number one and god number two it's very important that chuck colson and jimmy carter are born again this shows the continued migration over to the rise and importance of god number two now it'll be in the wake of the 9 11 that the four horsemen of new atheism rise up and for the most part attack god number two and that's why it's important that now the reflex action where it's swinging back is embodied by jordan peterson who is revivifying god number one and if you want to see my videos about god number one and god number two they're on my channel but i make so many videos it'll be hard for you to find i'm sorry that's the way it is i'll make more videos about god number one and god number two but god number one is basically the god that's built into the world and this is the god that jordan peterson is finding and and even though people don't know it consciously god is more believable even god as an idea and a governing thought via jordan peterson because that's god number one versus god number two which is the relational god who hears you when you pray it's the seeing it's the guy that's it's the guy that's very much the god that very much has personality and so oh in some ways it's it's it's elohim versus yaweh in some ways it's the god of the old testament versus the god of the new testament all right and so those dynamics are are at work in there now what happens when the the structure that is visible when when everyone in their shamanistic impulses begins to believe that the structure that is visible is corrupt they will begin looking for a power behind it to make sense in order to predict the future so that's when you have uh q anon that's when you have conspiracy theories that's when alex jones comes in and says you what you know the real reason of to make sense of all this craziness in washington well there's a conspiracy and that conspiracy there's there's a real power behind the scenes the power up front that's not the real power they're not really in charge there's someone behind pulling the strings okay so the hiddenness is important and and so then you have as jonathan was about to say when that breaks down there's a dual impulse one is tyranny a need to gain control the other is chaos a need to just just give yourself to intuition now now both of those are reasonable impulses to corruption because corruption means well things are out of control and the systems are going to be working against that which the systems ought to serve but what happens then is okay so we have to nail it down or we have to let it go wild well look at obama no drama obama no scandals doing hit during his administration control but also he's black so a little bit of shamanism going in there there's very rarely pure archetypes involved here what are what you have are multiple archetypes that are coming on to each other so you have obama who is no drama obama all control and then you have donald trump no control i mean the white house they're full of leaks they have no control donald trump himself is going to go to north korea and fix this thing it's all intuitive it's it's not structural who knows who knows whether what he's saying is true or not it's all chaos so we went from order chaos boom boom right away because very quickly we said the the visible structures are not the real structures we have to look behind the scenes at the real structures well who's going to tell you who's the real structure behind the scene who's the real power behind the sheen the shaman that's what his job is john and the book of revelation revelation is the english translation of the greek word apocalypse and what apocalyptic literature is the unveiling of the power behind what you see going on in front of you it's the unveiling of the sun that is only seen and disrupted by the movement of the shadows on the cave wall in plato's allegory revelation that's divine revelation okay oops now correlation and cause so we see things happening and we say something is causing this stuff but but we've lost faith in the visible and so now we're looking at the invisible we continue to have big problems with knowing causes and multi-variable systems well what caused barack obama to be elected well what caused donald trump to be elected well what's causing global climate change or what's causing people who are out there screaming and going crazy about having to take on dramatic costs in order to fight climate change these are complicated multi-variable systems and situations and we as human beings partly because of this amazing capacity of consciousness consciousness is very monofocal why are there so many dualisms right and wrong a and b right and left well we love dualisms because they're simple and we can manage that in our conscious mind you get beyond two to three or four well maybe you can hold a seven a seven digit number in your mind but you get out to nine and it gets a lot harder our consciousness is limited it has limited bandwidth so we reduce things into a b simple black right a b we do that because we can manage that well our intuitions the right brain now we're into ian mcgillchrist the master and his emissary our intuitions our intuitions pick up the patterns and tell our left brain to go looking for causes so when you look at the split brain studies something happens over in the one hemisphere and you ask the left brain to tell us what happened and they'll make up a story and and they'll completely believe the story that's its job it's to find a cause for an event that happened all right so the right brain is intuitive but the right brain is is pretty runs in a fairly parallel fashion so it's picking up intuitively all these signals and the left brain is kind of spitting it out my mouth right now that's what's happening and and if you tell the left brain to go looking for something it will always find it and and that's why alex jones if you sit down and say alex weather in sacramento in february has been abnormally cold oh alex jones will give you a reason for it it'll be intuitive and it might involve all kinds of things you never thought of that's what the shaman does the right brain sends you out looking for something the left brain will find something so scientific process again listen to vervecky on this the scientific process tries to enhance the accuracy by limiting variables now pay attention here remember many of these very complex situations are multi-variable how many variables are there in the election of a president huge number of variables it's because the number of variables is equal to the number of voters is equal to the number of issues times the number of voters it's an enormous multivariable variable problem that we try to bring all the way down into a binary trump or hillary okay that's what we do and we have to do it because the world is too complex and we have to simplify it so the scientific process tries to enhance our accuracy by limiting variables well let's say we have a team of really smart scientists and they come up with all kinds of what what are what are the variables involved in electing donald trump to president of the united states let's say they come up with a list of 10 we already know 10 is way too small let's say they come up with seven well there's way more variables than seven but seven is still too big we get it all the way down to one well it was the russians or it was it was the it was the culture war that it was because hillary left her her her stance on abortion that say we want says we want to abortion to be safe legal and rare well then she became all the way woke on abortion so then all these all these pro life democrats said nope not voting for her we reduce it down to one why because there's only one variable no because that's what we can live with that's what individuals can live with so then you have lots of individuals with their variable that gets into the mesh network and boom boom boom boom boom boom boom we're all this chatter over the mesh network we're all trying to get into sync and we're trying to work out this so then we're playing games in order to how we're trying to process how to figure out which variable was it was it the russians or was it hillary did trump win the election did the russians win the election or did hillary lose the election what was it well we need to know because we're leaning forward and we want to know what's going to happen in the next election but remember it's a multi-variable problem so we've reduced it to one the left side has reduced it to one and now it's putting that one out over the network and the network's trying to get in sync so that we can cooperate in order to out compete our adversaries and our rivals and then the shamans are out there and they're saying you know what it was it was the aliens it was it was it was the deep state that tried to that tried to get hillary elected but other more powerful players made sure that donald trump got elected that was the cause now switching gears the other big story of this week was the painful split of methodism there are a number of bishops who are looking the other way as churches were ordaining and and and the bishops were putting gay and lesbian priests and and pastors in certain churches and pastors in certain churches and this is tearing up the united methodist church just like it tore up the presbyterian church of the usa like it tore up the episcopalians so now you have episcopalians and anglicans and now you have you know the evangelical presbyterian church the echo segment of the presbyterians the presbyterian church of america all of these splits well why do you have these splits in churches you have these splits in churches because you used to have something underneath that brought uniformity that allowed a monolithic institution and the people around it the question you always have to ask is what's the monolith now what we see happening right now and in churches in north america is you have a division between older forms of christianity and this new progressive liberationism and that's my word for it progressive liberationism basically says that what the what the the moral path of of it comes out of expressive individualism robert bella it comes out habits of the heart you can read robert bella's book it comes out of it comes it's it's what's in american culture and so your church remember your church in a sense is supposed to have some kind of shamanic so shamanic power to give alternate patterns of knowledge to its members to out compete the other members remember all of these tribes are all nested you have yourself your your consciousness congress you have your nuclear your maybe you and your spouse you have you and your spouse and your kids you then you add the cousins then you add the grandparents and then you add the friends and then you add the neighbors and then you add your neighborhood and then you add your city and then you add your state then you add your country and then you have your you have people who are pasty white and dutch then you have all dutch you have all white people and so on and so forth and and i mean there's just multiple variables that go out this is this is jordan peterson when he talks about piaget this equilibrated state and you have the people you have your ancestors and you have the people who you're going to be ancestors too and you're connected to all of these people and all these people are in all kinds of different tribes and so your church is supposed to be a shamanistic thing to you and you talk to the pastor and this pastor is supposed to give you alternate patterns so that you can in fact improve your life and what you do actually is you listen to the pattern you sift through all the stuff that the you listen to the pastor and you sift through all the stuff that the pastor says and something rings relevance realization again john vervecky something rings and you say wow pastor that's revelation and as a pastor you commonly have the situation where after the service someone will say pastor that that video really changed my life and i'll say what changed what that video that's the youtube thing pastor that sermon really changed my life i said what changed your life what did i say in the sermon that really moved you and then they'll tell me and about half the time i didn't say that and about a quarter of the time i would never have said that but something i said changed a pattern in them gave them a new way of thinking at least gave them it seemed relevant gave them the hope at improving their life and now they're going to apply it to their life maybe and improve their life there's the basic process so why well if you're if you're participating in churches that are going through this working through the questions of what is sex what is marriage what is a human being what are the patterns in our life that bring us to flourish what are the patterns that god has divinely given us notice how many times i gotta be careful the way i say this notice how many times notice the way the bible is often used in these conversations and that will give you a that will give you a good insight into what patterns are being promoted in the different mesh networks now these things often boil down to who we allow into leadership okay because if you have a a gay or lesbian clergy leading they embody the monolith around which the community is circling and the shamanistic antenna as it were that will be putting out and they'll say look by virtue of who i am i am embodying what is central to our message that we're trying to get out via our mesh networks and so that's why these church fights always boil down to well will you allow gay clergy why what's so special about clergy the clergy embodies the values of the network and in some sense then the the clergy is giving a privileged position to speak into the mesh network church leadership is representative is representative in worship what what worship is in christian churches for those of you who don't know is a drama that represents the relational dynamics between god and the world that's what worship is and and different churches have different liturgies by which they attempt to represent the story of the world in their liturgy all right that's what happens in churches and the clergy the leader has well it's it's called ordination that they then become christ in a sense for the rest of the church and they then get to speak into the mesh network but they also embody what's at the heart of the church and this is why a lot of the fights in churches over the last 50 years have been leadership can a woman be a leader does a woman by virtue of her her sex can that embody the archetype of what the church is about but pay attention that's not the only church drama going on uh frederick martel came out with a blistering book about in the closet of the vatican and i first came across this in in andrew sullivan's piece on the vatican's gay elite and i read that and i thought wow and andrew sullivan said i believe it well then you go over to rodrear and rodrear says oh there's some of them out there but it's probably not quite what what frederick martel says and so what that means is okay now this is in the mesh network frederick martel has has brought in a pattern and is putting it via the book out into the mesh network and all of the little gatekeepers are processing it and andrew sullivan says yeah that's what's going on in the vatican and rodrear says ah there's some of that going on but i don't think anywhere to the degree that that martel says but they're all processing it within the complexity of everything that's going on and then drear looks at a review by james allison and and they're giving a footnote and then he being a gay man decides to do some gay splaining to those of us who are straight this is where my gay splaining is often difficult for straight people to understand by comparison with the issue of first-person truthfulness concerning being gay the issue of continence is for most clergy gay men i should look that word up nuggatory oh let's just go over to my browser oh if there are only a machine that could nuggatory of no nuggatory of no value or importance a nuggatory or pointless observation worthless of no value no importance unimportant trivial inconsequential of no consequence pay attention to the words valueless trifling trivial insignificant meaningless a nuggatory or pointless observation useless or futile okay let's go back by comparison with the issue of first-person truthfulness concerning being gay that's very important identifying being truthful about it well speak the truth or at least don't lie it's important rule the issue of continence what do you mean continence what your what your body is doing is for most clerical gay men nuggatory in the first place despite the endless moralistic hullabaloo which surrounds them that's churchy stuff sexual acts between consenting adult members of the same sex ah there's the norm right there sexual acts between consenting consenting adult members of the same sex are about as inconsequential read jonathan hight on the left in the right's moral universe inconsequential as a human activity can be they harm no one and produce neither babies nor any noticeable physiological or intellectual alteration in those participating that's a little hard to believe because for the most part we're all driven to the part of what drives us to do things is is we are our desires and our drives are meaningful in us but let's let's give them the point there's no noticeable difference between a monsignor who has friend has a friend with benefits and a monsignor whose friend comes without benefits furthermore if father x goes on holiday each year with his friend brian can anyone say whether or not they've had sex there's no pregnancy involved you know father brian isn't going to show up pregnant more to the point who on earth would care well there's a lot of people who seem to care why do they seem to care the matter has no discernible consequence now here's the here's the issue god number one or god number two no discernible consequence in what realm in the story verse if you listen to the end of the first vancouver talk between jordan peterson and sam harris and my videos where i've dealt with that you've got god number one and god number two jordan peterson sit downs opens his computer reads out his axiomatic ideas of what he says all of this we call god and this is built in this is the god who selects this is the god who selection isn't random often especially once you get to human reproduction it's full of minds all of those minds come together and in a sense become god well what do you mean by god and that's why everyone keeps asking him what do you mean by god he just told you what he meant by god well but i didn't understand well why not well because of how consciousness works and how language works and how we reduce things and simplify things and make things like we can understand them simple and so we reduce it down to a little three-letter word and that god has a representation and of course the hebra's quite famously god says don't take anything in creation and use that as a representation for me and notice how that comes into that conversation between jordan peterson and sam harris right there because jordan peterson goes through his axiomatic god number one and sam harris says that isn't god that that explained to me how a god could care whether or not you masturbate well i'd say masturbation about is is is in fact less consequential than um the the priestly friends with benefits wouldn't you say because you're not even involving another person and then it goes from there go ahead and watch vancouver 2 it starts about three quarters of the way through the video they're getting to the end of time the end of their time and their their conspiracy superior paul said end of time maybe that means maybe that means we're in the latter days yeah we're in the latter days we've been in the latter days since the first century story governs matter through agents seeking meaning if the priests weren't seeking meaning with each other they wouldn't be doing with each other what they're doing if there wasn't any meaning in the story with respect to priestly behavior churches wouldn't try to govern the behavior of priests story governs matter through agents seeking meaning the gaysplainer can assert that priestly friends with benefits is inconsequential but the gay ally must maintain zeal until the lack of affirmation is banished from the earth that everything be done in earth as it is in heaven at some point you're going to have an heavenly axiom and you're going to try to promote that heavenly axiom as a shaman into the mesh network nadia boltsweber has become a very famous has become a very famous shaman and she's been a very famous has become a very famous lutheran priest and she's all tatted up she's quite tall and she's a good writer and she writes lots of books well she's not a part of the united methodist church what does she care what the united methodist church does wouldn't it wouldn't it wouldn't it make sense if she was a true lutheran tribalist for her to say well hey let's have the methodist church make missteps so that the lutheran church can prevail over their enemies that would make sense if she were a lutheran tribalist but what tribe is she a part of and what god does she serve there is god and then there is the church ah the church is corrupt the less we conflate the two the better hmm she's a potential conspiracy theorist she's sort of like alex jones she's a shaman she's very much a shaman look at how out of the ordinary she is as a lutheran priest look at look at the kinds of things she says and does and the church that she establishes she's very shamanistic she's very out of the ordinary and she leverages this power in order to speak into the mesh network the church may reject god's children but god never does she's speaking to my queer siblings i'm so sorry you are glorious there's so much built into this tweet story governs matter through agents seeking meaning what church is nadia boltsweber trying to create it's not the lutheran church that lutheranism and methodism are inconsequential to what's at the center of the community and what they're going around what should out what should we learn from alex jones listen to jonathan peugeot again it means now what's interesting about alex jones's ranting again psychotechnology is is when the social cohesion breaks down the social cohesion in the lutheran church the united methodist church the president kieran church the thing the thing behind and the thing up front are no longer the same it's breaking down you can imagine it as you have a society that has a center that has a common memory that now that that center says well in one story it says now you've got scott adams two screens in a way in one story it says what priests do with certain parts you can shake a priest's hand in some cultures you don't even even want to touch the shaman touch is a very big deal in in some cultures you can touch the priest well you can shake a priest's hand you might even be able to give him a hug well that's pretty important and that's a relatively new thing in churches richard mao quite famously said i don't i don't i don't preach in bed and i don't kiss in church in other words he kisses in bed and he he preaches in church but he won't he won't reverse the two well suddenly hugging became a very important thing in church it came into our culture before it was more a handshake well what's the difference between a hand and a penis well a lot why what's the difference between hand and an elbow that's some if someone shakes out in the dominican republic if someone you would put out your hand and they had dirty hands they'd put out their arm and you'd shake their arm every cultures have their own thing well our head is presentable our hands are presentable some cultures you won't see a lady's you won't see a lady's ankles some cultures you won't see a lady's underarm pits breasts are off limits in cult some cultures not off limits in other cultures some cultures if you see a pregnant woman you're allowed to put your hand on her belly other cultures that would be that could even be illegal we we have a lot of different associations with different body parts and what we do with those body parts are important if i stick my finger in in your eye well that's usually even even the saying has a connotation but within the story what priests do because they're representative with certain body parts is a world of important now what would be interesting to ask james allison would be uh does does the same go for married people now you might say well honey um i didn't commit adultery because i was involved with another man with my penis and that was inconsequential the other man wasn't a woman so therefore it's no different than shaking hands it's nougatory uh i don't think any wife is going to buy that unless they have a different story about monogamy and marriage and all of that see again story governs and there's a there's a center that is governing the story and it's out there in the mesh network and there's a certain amount of social inertia and the shamans are coming in disturbing the social inertia in order to give a competitive advantage to the society and so then if you look at adam friended's channel his belief that if a society has a bad stuff in its mesh network it loses wars against other societies i think there's some truth to that but the problem with his argument is it doesn't really scale that easily and and it also has issues with time but anyway but now pay attention to what happened in both the roman catholic church and the united methodist church this week what both churches did was the same thing even though almost everybody cheers oh good the roman catholic church is is tightening down is clamping down on pedophile priests because we're all in agreement that the church is going to be the only one that's going to be the only one down on pedophile priests because we're all in agreement that priests should not be should not be violating and doing sexual things with children we're all in agreement with that left and right but the united methodists well if you look at the proposal that passed what they basically did was remove the wiggle room that bishops had exercised to allow gay united methodist clergy that's those are the decisions they made so in other words in terms of jonathan peugeot's tyranny idea well yeah it's breaking down and so you either give yourself to chaos well i'm going to leave church and i'm going to do whatever i want and i think that's going to help my psychotechnology so maybe you become an atheist or you tighten up i'm going to go to a particularly tyrannical church there used to be a lot more freedom for bishops and that freedom for bishops meant oh this pedophile priest you know he's really a good guy he's got a little problem maybe you should just go have a friends with benefits than with brian instead of touching boys okay so but we'll we'll keep it quiet it's the same impulse you're either going to tyranny or chaos and now how does this cut differently in political ways well politically people are cheering the roman catholic church tightening down at least those on the left and those on the right politically those on the left are mourning the united methodist church tightening down in order to apply the current things in their mesh network and in a sense exile certain shamans while the right is saying finally we're going to restore some order in the church exposing the hidden that's what shamans do that's what alex jones does now whether or not you think he's a really good shaman in terms of whether he whether he really gets at things conspiracy theories say that the visible structure is not governing so either you double down on the visible structure which is what both the roman catholic church and the united methodist church did or you leave and go off into chaos and then here's the difficulty with progressive liberationism a key element of progressive liberation liberationism says that the and this is again this is very archetypal that that the new life is always beyond the frontier okay well what's beyond the frontier what's the line at the frontier the line of the frontier is no so well now we're affirming priests that are in same committed same-sex relationships okay but what about priests that are polyamorous well i don't know well are you blocking priests that are polyamorous well that's bigotry you have to liberate the priests that are polyamorous so you liberate the priests that are polyamorous and then people say well we're no longer going to police someone's sexuality in our church oh but i bet you are because even nadia bolts weber with her new book she put out right now basically says no animals and no children those are the boundaries the difficulty that you have with progressive liberationism is it keeps progressing and that's why it doesn't actually well it keeps swinging is what it does because people reach a frontier and then the shamans say your progressive liberationism is bringing too much disorder i'm getting intuitive vibes that we need to clamp down so then they draw a line what's really missing again is this thing behind this if you ever watch steve martin's movie leap of faith one of my favorite movies this the genuine article as steve martin says well what's the genuine article it's when the priest voluntarily willingly decides he wants to live a certain life now rodrear's story is very interesting because he was he's raised roman catholic and he and his wife decided to be the kinds of conservative catholics that didn't practice artificial birth control and he went to his priest for guidance and his priest rolled his eyes and said oh one of them and so what rodrear did was join the orthodox church well all of these things are on a spectrum all of these mesh networks are firing all of these shamans are acting alex jones has his power because he's a shaman it offers revelation into what is really happening we're always seeking the genus the genuine article at the core we're always seeking guess what god the thing that's moving it's it's it's god number one that's what jordan peterson lays out with sam harris and brent weinstein can get it sam's no sam's not going to budge not going to not going to accept jordan peterson's shamanism if you have the secret knowledge you can overcome read the book of revelation it's all about overcomers but in the book of revelation john has visions psychotechnology he's having all these visions fantastic things and what he's saying to these seven churches of asia minor who are all struggling and all have all kinds of problems in them he's saying if you overcome you will inherit the earth and at the end of the first century that was a crazy idea that christians would inherit the earth what inheriting the earth mean it meant well what was the earth it was the roman empire well a couple hundred years later they inherited the earth why did the book of revelation get in the bible why did nate silver get on tv there are stories and principalities so god number one all this built-in stuff all of the patterns all of figuring it out that which selects the intuitive but here's the thing as individuals we are stories that is what a personality is that is what the soul is when you think about what christians imagine does not end with our death well it's actually quite true and we we see it all the time well if i die my children remember me the story that is me in a very limited fashion lives on through my children and that's why we say he isn't gone you're carrying him in your heart that language communicates the fact that the dead person is a story and part of them hasn't diminished now the question is after all of the families forget does that is that person then dead well maybe if they wrote a book yeah but then books are forgotten and then you have the greek version of well eternal life is doing something of renown so that the story gets repeated and repeated and repeated and you live through rather forever through the story but of course christianity one ups that and says actually the thing that is you which is your story will once again be re-embodied and in that new embodiment the story continues you will no longer be a dead story or a story that is susceptible to the agent of others your story will live on your story gets another chapter and chapters after that when we've been there 10 000 years bright shining as the sun we've no less days to sing god's praise than when it first begun that's all encoded language and and john newton the shaman who was the slave trader wrote it as societies we also have bodies the body politic and we have principalities and again listen to peugeot's stuff on that or some of my stuff on that there's this there's uncle sam there's john bull that's why the president represents the country and why right now in a in a country that's kind of 50 50 there's consternation and we swing back and forth we have the order of obama and we have the chaos of trump and we're swinging back and forth this is what we're doing but there's principalities and powers in this the stories tell us what that private things what private things are good and what are not independent report finds allegations against willow creek founder bill hybels credible we care we want to police bill hybels behavior or at least we want getting back to the first part of james allison's sentence we want the language and the story to we want what's up front and what's behind to be there that's what we desire it's called revelation we want to know the true power we want to see god stories govern but narratives are complex in many ways what the united methodists had to face was that the the woke coalition that said racism and lgbt rights are partners in liberation together and we have to listen to the marginalized voices that have been marginalized and repressed by by colonialism well it was all the african bishops that swung the vote for the traditional position well you might say oh but it was it was european colonialism that had that had colonized these african bishops so that evil strain comes through the african bishops and now back into the true church the true white church the true white church in america it's the new colonialism that's what the african bishops are feeling african united methodists won't trade bible for dollars well it was the bible that got colonized on them well it was jewish sexuality that got colonized on the roman empire because in some funny ways what the what the the liberationist side of the united methodist church is looking something like the pre-christian practices of the roman empire sort of maybe maybe not maybe that's unfair story and personal agent story will keep winning why because we are stories and we live together with stories and story is the protocol of the mesh network we don't actually have again a mesh network what is the mesh network it's the riders on the elephants telling stories back and forth and via the stories we are colonizing each other and we are framing it and we keep telling new stories and we keep framing the stories and we take keep taking history and tell it in a different way that pertains to us and the shaman comes down from the mountain and he tells a story and he gives laws and he does all of this thing in order for the tribe to compete stories keep winning and they will keep winning so when jordan peterson is talking to sam harris jordan peterson is just right and if you listen to the video i made this week early about the distribute the distributist about at feminism for everyone well we found something that won feminism and now we need feminism to mean intersectional intersectional feminism so that feminism wins the day it's polytheism to monotheism and liberation and progressive liberationism that's what's going on we keep looking for consolidate we keep looking for consolidating personal causes behind the events or a conspiracy we want to know the true powers we want to see behind the veil we want to see god the impulse to listen to alex jones is the desire to see god and we know that somehow because we see the corruption up front that hidden powers are running things and so via our culture we listen to alex jones in a materialistic way and we say ah alex show us god you are our star we will follow you we will keep rewarding the shamans so i should really put the beginning video at the end alex jones is a shaman society is changing the old poles are no longer holding migration is happening we're looking for shamans we're rewarding them with status and with money and with attention they're becoming stars that we follow this stuff doesn't change