https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JyT2av9enq8

 Great, well why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself, Alex? Okay, I'm 24, gonna be 25 next month, and I graduated from Cal about a year and a half ago now, 2017, and since then I've been hanging out in Berkeley trying to launch a website with some friends from school, but more relevant to this conversation, I've been getting more interested in Christianity again. I was raised Roman Catholic, I went to Catholic school up through 12th grade, so I know that perspective very well, and I kind of fell away from the faith in high school. I was a new atheist fanboy for a few years, really liked Daniel Dennett, but a few experiences I had in college, some of which involved psychedelics, made me start taking all this God stuff more seriously, and I kind of didn't know where to turn, and Jordan Peterson was one of the influences who helped steer me towards Christianity, definitely, and you yourself have helped me explore the faith in a lot more depth than I ever did, and I'm very grateful to you for that. Thank you, I appreciate that. Thank you. But so what I really want to talk about is something that happened to me just the past few months. It was in October, I was walking across campus, in fact I was on my way to the pot shop, and that might have had something to do with it, but these people approached me and were like, Hey, are you Christian or Catholic? And I said, well yeah, I was raised Catholic and I fell away from the faith, but I've kind of been asking a lot more questions about this sort of thing, and they invited me to their on-campus Bible study. So I went for a few weeks and it was interesting, and then they were like, hey, do you want to move on to our full class? It's like a six-month course. We teach it in our own office off campus, and it'll just be two hours twice a week, and I was like, okay, I haven't got anything really going on then. So I show up to this Bible study, I start going for a few weeks, and they're teaching stuff that basically agrees with what I learned in Catholic school, but the way they approach studying the Bible puts me off a bit. I felt like the group took a very atomized look at a lot of different verses. It was almost like they were like they only ever did word studies. One thing that stood out to me was there's a line in Jeremiah when Jeremiah is describing how unfaithful Israel is, and he says the land is chaos and confusion, but it's an explicit allusion to Genesis 1. They tried to make that connection and say, well, if Jeremiah used those words talking about an earth that already existed with people on it, maybe those same words in Genesis were used to talk about an earth that already existed with people, and the story of the creation of Adam is God sending down his first pastor to lead the beasts of the field, which are people without God's word. They introduced this all really slowly, gradually. Yeah, the whole interpretation they had of Genesis really threw me for a loop. I hadn't heard that one before. I'd learned about how to interpret Genesis symbolically the way the Catholics do, and where Adam and Eve aren't historical figures. They're allegories for processes that took a longer period of time, but they were trying to teach, well, Cain got his wife from somewhere and Cain was afraid someone would kill him, so there had to be other people, but Adam and Eve were literal individuals who had Cain and Abel trying to reconcile the literal and the metaphorical in a strange way. Because the text is so sparse, and these questions about who did Cain marry, who did Cain feel threatened by, these questions have been around before the Christian era, into the Jew, I mean, they're obviously there in this, those blank spaces are obviously there. So what usually happens is different groups fill them in in different ways with different backstories. That particular backstory I hadn't heard before. You know, there's a lot about this Bible study group that in retrospect seems really cult-like, but they really tried to kind of undermine everyone's trust in any other version of Christianity out there. Like, we have the correct interpretation of the Bible, you know, your Catholic school filled your head full of lies. So do you know anything about the, it'd be interesting to find, I'd be curious to start asking them questions about, you know, who's, who organized this group? Who's providing the space? Who's, you know, what kind of books do you read? So, I mean, religion, it's a hard thing for people who are not into religion to understand. I mean, it is the nerdiest, most vast, diverse plane out there in terms of interpretations, in terms of traditions. So it's not, I'm not at all surprised, not at all surprised by the story you tell me. campuses are campuses for many religious traditions, including my own. They are high priority targets in a sense, because people in their early 20s are, you know, open. Right. Yeah, we're looking for groups to join. Sure, sure. Looking to make friends, looking for groups to join, looking to learn stuff. So well, there you have it. It's not a bad place to work. Yeah, yeah. But then also, once you, once you, once you get a hold of something, that's just the way life works. Once you get a hold of something, there will be not that. And so if you're really excited about this, you're going to naturally be kind of opposed to not that. Right. Unless you say, well, I'm not, I'm never opposed to not that. But then, then you're opposed to, you know, going in too many directions. That's right, too many directions. So it's just the way life is. So and when, when you, when I bump into that, it's like, oh, okay, well, those are your, those are your filters. You have gun people, you have mushroom people, you have political people, you have religious people, you have people who are interested in all kinds of things. And once you're, once you're really big into something, there's going to be, there's going to be a not that that you're going to tell people, oh, don't do that. Right, right. Because this. Yeah. Yeah, and like I, you know, I started out wanting to trust this group because, you know, I was learning good stuff about the Bible. I was making friends and I kind of went along with maybe a lot more than I should have. But I felt like most of the, most of the arguments I was getting into were like really theologically because they, they denied the Trinity, for example, and maybe it was a cult. It was, it's, I mean, it's categorized as a cult. It's an organization called Shin Chan Ji. They're based in South Korea. I was able to look them up and kind of found out their end game as it were. Oh, yeah. When I was just, when I was just in it, they were like, oh, we're just a non-denominational Bible study. You know, we're, you know, I should have questioned why they had branches in, they're in Berkeley, they're in San Francisco, they're in Sacramento, they're in Davis, they're in Dixon. They have a lot of chapters around Northern California. Interesting. I should have asked more questions about the broad organization that sponsors them. The non-denominational thing is funny too, because I bump into that a lot. People are like, I want to go to a non-denominational church. It's like, oh, so you want to go to, you want to go eat food that you have no idea where it's come from or who's behind it. Okay. I prefer to go into the restaurant in California. See that big A on the outside that says, oh, the health inspector's been here. That's probably a good thing. Yeah. Say what you will about the Catholics. We've got thousands of years of archives you can look at. That's right. At least, you know, everybody knows their dirt, except of course the conspiracy theorists who think they really know their dirt. So no, that's true. Yeah. That's true. Well, that's it. I'm not surprised by anything you've told me. And again, campuses are, you know, people get into these things and they get into it for very sociological reasons. I know one evangelical youth ministry that a big piece of their outreach strategy was find the best looking, coolest kids in high school. And if you can get them to be Christian, you know, you'll get a whole group after them. It's you know, have the have the hot girls in your church and the boys. That's people. I'm lucky I never fell for any of that. There was a girl or two in that group that I might have had my eye on. It just breaks my heart, Paul, because they're they're all such nice people in that group. And they the people I talked to, they seem genuinely curious, wanting to learn more about their faith. And I had a much deeper background in Christianity than most of the people in the group. And so I, you know, I kind of think of my my Catholic education as being like a vaccine against the really more out there interpretations of scripture. And so there was, you know, I had enough of an understanding of the Bible from a different perspective that I could say, a few of the things you're saying here don't really add up. And I wasn't the most popular guy in the group. No, that won't make it resistant. Resisting the indoctrination will not make you popular. In fact, the group is designed exactly the other way. Right. As long as you keep as long as you keep acting like you're enjoying the food, they'll keep giving it to you. But, you know, when I went to school, like, especially high school, the people who taught us about the Catholic faith had this conviction that what we believe is true, therefore it can stand up to any challenge. And so we were never really discouraged from asking questions and trying to to really wrestle with these ideas. And I think that's that's a big difference between a cult and a church is that a good church should say, you know, we're about the truth here. We're about discovery. You can be honest about your doubts. You can challenge the ideas that are being prevented or presented and we will we will go back and forth. It doesn't it doesn't somehow. I mean, by definition, cults try to undermine your agency. Right. And and a healthy situation will tend to say we we're confident enough in our we're confident enough in what we're working on that that we think you'll we think we think at least whether or not you buy into the whole thing, you know, maybe we'll earn your respect and then also go to the additional step that even if you don't believe like we do, we're still, you know, interested in being friends and talking and exploring and learning from each other. And that's I think that's become a deep part of the Western Enlightenment context that, you know, we're we're, you know, hopefully we're not going to kill each other over some of these differences. Right. It underlines the whole confidence in free speech that we have. Yeah. Like if if you have the truth, then it can defend itself in an open marketplace. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that's and that's, you know, sometimes sometimes you can be people can be hard on the enlightened bit, but on the enlightenment. But that is that is one of the gifts that it gave to the West. And I think that's been one of its one of the reasons it's been so potent in terms of people around the world. People around the world want to live in a place where they are free to hold whatever idea they want to hold. My wife was just watching a Netflix on flat earthers the other day, and that was that was very interesting. I didn't I've known a few flat earthers, but none of none of the YouTube flat earthers. It's like, oh, I make YouTube videos too. Isn't this interesting? But at the same time, we can let's talk about it. Let's explore it. And you can be a flat earther, be a flat earther. Right. We'll talk about it. Uh huh. Yeah. Ultimately, it's not that important what shape the earth is. Yeah. Well, it depends on what you're doing. Right. Fair enough. If you're getting into a rocket, I think you're probably going to want some pretty good, some pretty some. Heck, if you're getting into a steam. Your thing is pointed. Yeah. You know, at least a rocket, you know, is not going to fall off the edge. Yeah, that's true. It will go up. Well, you don't want to hit the firmament because you know, bang and then get, get bounced bounce down. Depends how much space there really is up there. So yeah. Yeah. Oh, very interesting. Was it was that mostly what you wanted to share or? Um, yeah, I guess I guess I just wanted to talk about my experiences and the way I don't know the way I kind of let myself fall into this group because I felt like I needed a community. Yeah. I'm, I'm kind of afraid to go to one of the Catholic churches around here because what if I hate it and never want to go back? Well you hate the little group and don't want to go back. So what's wrong with that? Would that be the scariest thing to happen? Yeah, I think we'll see with the little group. They came to me. I was just walking across campus and they were like, hey, do you want to come to this Bible study? And so in, in a way I was like, oh, this, this is a sign from God. I almost didn't want to admit to myself that something that important could be going on. But part of me felt like this, this Bible study is really where I'm meant because I could have stayed home that night, but I had to go out and get myself a joint. I was out there that night and someone came to me. And what am I supposed to think about something like that? Yeah. Well, and you know, in many ways, I mean, especially on a campus, you know, in Berkeley, there are, there are so many, there are so many Christian groups, Roman Catholic and Protestant and Orthodox. There are so many legitimate Christian groups that would be happier. That'd be so happy if you walked in the door and said, I'm just looking for Christians to talk about, to have a Bible study with or talk about God with. I mean, they're, they'd be, they'd be thrilled to have you. In fact, if we, if you know, if we decide to post this video, people will line up in the comment section and send me email and say, get, you know, send, send Alex this because we'd love to have him visit our Bible study. That's, I mean, it's a, it's a buyer's market for, for this kind of thing. Yeah. And, and I, and most groups understand too, at least the ones who aren't cults, most groups, if you go a few times and you just say, this wasn't really what I'm looking for. Yeah, they'll be a little disappointed, but they'll wish you well. And, and, and, you know, so, you know, maybe offer another group. I mean, people come to my church and if they say, well, pastor, you know, this really isn't what I'm looking for. I'm not going to curse at them. I'm going to say, well, what are you looking for? Maybe I can help you find a place that, that you can grow and flourish in because most, most Christians, at least in this time and space have a, have a desire that people, they recognize that people are going to do, are going to, there's fit involved with this kind of thing. And, and obviously if you're a Christian, you'll do much better if you're within a community and if the community fits you. So if, if in your case, you've got a lot of background in Roman Catholicism, you know, you could start there, but you know, you could look at, you could look at other groups too. I've got people in my church that were baptized Roman Catholic and our church, our church fits them. Other people leave the Christian form church and go to the Roman Catholic church. So it's, it's a pretty live market here in America. So I would encourage you to, you know, maybe instead of waiting for somebody to pick you up on the way to get some pot, maybe, maybe do a little bit of internet research and, and do a little surfing or ask around and say, you know, is, is there a group? And, you know, even if you would say, start with a priest or someone over in, in the Catholic church and say, I'm really looking for a Bible study. Do you know what kind of study, what kind of things there are? My guess that in, you know, shoot in the Berkeley area, there's got to be tons of stuff going on. Yeah. Yeah. You know, have a, have a, have a selection process a little different than the one you, the one you did. And, and, and look for something because there will be, your, your instinct is right. You will grow, you will grow with the, within the context of a community, the dynamic interaction and what you're looking for to have a freedom of exploration, to be able to, to affirm what you've learned growing up from, from, from your Catholic upbringing and, and, and the points that, that you, you know, you'd really like to stabilize it, but also then to have the freedom to explore some of the other points and say, I taught that, you know, I was taught this and I'm not really sure about this. And I wonder about this. And a good group will afford you the kind of freedom to explore and then hopefully be helpful in that exploration. Uh huh. So I would encourage you to, to look around a little bit and see what you can find. And yeah, I know, I know people I can talk to around here. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's just a question of motivation. This might be the kick in the spiritual pants that I, I've got, I have friends, you know, pots been around for a long time and I have friends who have smoked a lot of pot in their past. And many of them, many of them quit because they began to discover that pot sap their motivation. So if you want more motivation, usually it's do less pot. And yeah, yeah, that's a good point. It was easy to get by as a college student without motivation. I just thought this is how life is going to be. At least I'm figuring this out at 24. Well, that's, that's well, I hope you did okay as a college student. Yeah, I did fine. I got skills. I'm building a website. You know, hopefully I can have a career from that. Well, good. Well, I loved your story. Your story, your story, your story certainly brought a smile to my face. And I'm glad I can share it. Got a few, got a few minutes left. Any, anything else you wanted to talk about? I, I don't know. You personally, do you know of any good churches in Berkeley? I have some friends who go to this one grace point. I believe they're non denomination. It's pretty big. It's mostly Asian. Don't know that much about. Yeah. So there are, you know, there's some Christian reform churches in the Bay Area, but they're not particularly close to Berkeley. A good friend, got a bunch of good friends or a couple of good friends. My friend Mark pastors at CRC in Alameda. My friend Larry pastors CRC in, I can't, I think of. Hayward, that's a little bit south. Alameda is across the bridge. So nothing real, real close. Okay. Churches, you know, finding it, finding a church that really fits can be a little complicated and daunting. Usually, usually people, this is something that there's so many layers to this. One, of course, is a fit. Let's say you're raised Roman Catholic. You want something that's not, you know, something that's intelligible, something that's helpful. But churches are really, we had a congregational meeting yesterday in our little church and just kind of a standard run through some questions to get people to talk about what they like about the church, what could be better, how can we make it better, so on and so forth. And just listening to people process that churches are communities. They are, you build strong, deep relationships. Now, it's a little bit different in a college town because often with college students, people are, they're going to be there for four or six years or something, and then they're gone. And so that's sort of hard on churches. So then you wind up with all these youth ministries, intervarsity, campus crusade, these kind of things, which are geared to it. But when I was in college, I went to the campus church for a while because it was Christian college. And then I got, every week I went to a regular church that was a little ways away from campus once I had a friend who had a car. And I went to that church all through seminary, too. So about relationships in that church, churches are all about the relationships. Right. But you do want something that obviously is going to fit you in terms of your doctrine and all of those things. You don't want to go off into some cult because that actually, finally, the relationships in a cult will also go poorly if it's not built on the right foundation. So there should be. I don't know how I feel about the Roman Catholic Church as an institution or as a set of doctrines. But it's something I'd like to get a broader perspective on. There should be. Yeah. And I would say, you know, you could, you know, both of the if you look at Christian Reformed Church in the Bay Area, you'll find the Hayward Christ Community Hayward, which is the Christian Reformed Church, you find Alameda CRC and Pastor Mark over at Alameda and Pastor Larry and Pastor Sue over at over in Hayward. I mean, both of them would be happy to sit down and go to coffee with you and, you know, they might they might know something, but they're not they're not campus churches. They're a little bit. They're a little ways away from you. Right. And again, if we post if we post this video, my guess is that I'll get some emails that said, Paul, send this to Alex. Because and you probably have a menu of three or four three or four places that'll say, oh, you know, contact me. Talk to me. But generally speaking, the one on one relationship, boy, if you if you can get if you can get have have lunch or coffee with a pastor and be able to ask your questions and that'll that'll get you nicely. That'll get you nicely into the flow. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Really, I feel like I want a mentor. Yeah. And and I'm not in that position a lot. I'm generally very self reliant. I definitely I have that temptation toward the kind of hyper intellectual arrogance that Peterson's always warning about. I feel like that's my biggest obstacle to to fitting myself into communities in a healthy way. There will be some churches that will have some pretty intentional discipleship programs that will sort of pair you up one on one with usually Christians who have a little bit of experience and a little bit of knowledge. But even that that's always, you know, finding the right relationship isn't necessarily easy. But in time, those kinds of relationships are so helpful. The pastor at Madison Square in Grand Rapids, Dave Bealan, was when I was in seminary, you know, he was he was that for me. And he'd take us to the he'd take us to the Catholic retreat center. And we'd, you know, have have quiet there. And we did book studies. And, you know, I learned obviously I learned a ton from my father, who was a pastor. But I also learned a lot from Dave Bealan. And the and so he was a good mentor to me. But again, most of this stuff tends to follow a little bit of persistence in terms of finding a community that seems promising, being a little persistent. People sometimes say, well, how do I get into church? Well, show up every week. Well, that'll you'll get noticed. And and then go to the pastor or an elder or someone or a youth pastor or someone and say, hey, I I want to learn more. I mean, for a lot of pastors, we don't get enough of that. And when that happens, it's like, oh, yeah, OK, well, call me next week. And here's my number. And let's sit down and let's talk and let's let's begin the conversation. And yeah, it's a teacher at heart. You're such a teacher. It's wonderful. So I hope that helps. And I hope you're I hope you're able to I hope you're able to find something. And like I said, you can you can look up the Christian Form Church in Alameda and the one in Hayward. And I like Alameda. I go down to the beach there sometimes. Well, there you go. You can you can start with Mark. Mark's you know, Mark's a young pastor. He's been in Alameda a few years. I've actually been Mark's mentor in terms of the Christian Form Church because they usually pair young pastors with older pastors. So I've been Mark's mentor and I've been in the Alameda CRC for, you know, I've done some consulting with them. So they're they're wonderful people. And, you know, again, might be a might be a good place to start. And you'd walk in the door and, you know, they'd be happy to have you. So it's the way it goes. All right. Well, well, thanks for the advice. Thanks so much for hearing me out. You're very welcome. And and and God bless your search. So I will I will I'll end this recording and I'll send it to you and you can decide what you'd like to do with it. I decided now you have my full permission to post it. OK, OK. I will probably post it this week or next. All right. Sounds good. OK. Take care. Thanks. You too. Bye bye.