https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1P1YibuqpqE

 Here we go. Hi, this is Paul. This is Ted. Ted was at the conference. Ted wanted to talk. So let's start with you, Ted. Yeah, I was at the conference. I'm now in Arkansas, which is where I live. And this is really fun. I, you know, I listened to a lot of Paul. I probably heard two or three hundred hours minimum of your voice. So there's the weird, you know, there's the weird asymmetry there, but it is fun. Yeah, I feel like I'm breaking the fourth wall. And, you know, she knows like that, too. And and now, you know, we get to have some one on one conversation. So Paul, thanks so much for your time. Did you grow up in Arkansas? Yeah, so I am pretty deep Arkansas roots on my dad's side. I think my grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's father was the first one in Arkansas. Wow. So we've got all sorts of other people that came in from different places. But yeah, and then I grew up. So I grew up in Arkansas my whole life. I moved to the town that I'm in now when I was a year and a half old back to my the house that my mother grew up in, actually. And then we just lived across town from there now that I'm married. So, yeah, I love Arkansas. I've been around a lot of places and I don't have any intention of leaving. That's great. That's great. Well, where your where your parents Christians? Yes, so my parents were Christians. They raised us as Christians. We were sort of I grew up in a evangelical non denominational lots of it's like like Baptist and a coastal mix. That's just like very common around here. I don't know about in other places, but very common around here. And yeah, from the get go, my brother and I were baptized in a local river by my dad when I was like six years old, I think so. Was your dad a pastor? No, no, he wasn't. So yes, priesthood of all believers things. So when, when my wife and I converted to Catholicism, I got conditionally baptized just to make sure. Dad, did you say father, son and Holy Spirit when you baptized us? Do you remember? Was there a form? Exactly. So yeah, no, the priest said, you know, it's nothing against any of that. We're going to go ahead and do a conditional one. And the words are, you know, in Latin, if you be not baptized, then it's like, okay, that's, you know, that's fine. We'll go ahead and get it covered. But yeah, we, we, we were very, let's say consciously Christian. We, you know, went to church every Sunday, grew up going, spending a lot of time in a very small youth group. It was a very, very small church that has kind of always been growing up. That was my background, you know, never more than 100 people there. Very informal family like kind of stuff. That's what I grew up in. Okay, go to public school? No, well, okay. Homeschooled and then the last two years of high school, the University of Arkansas runs a boarding school south of here, about two hours south of here. And so technically it's public, but you have to apply to get in. So it was, it was the two opposite. Oh, you're breaking up again. If you will talk with you. All right. And you're back now. Well, I'm back. So the thing recording is back on. Yeah, let me just, yeah, let me just shut everything else down on my computer to, great. Yeah. If you want to. Yeah, so the boarding school was interesting because it was, I mean, it was basically the opposite. It was a residential boarding school. They took, you know, they had about 150 students in each class. And, you know, environmentally, it was the complete opposite. It was a whole bunch of peers. It was the sort of math and science focus. And so a lot of kids who considered themselves to be sort of on the cutting edge of the intellectual world. It's weird to look back on that. I mean, looking back on the time is weird in a lot of ways. One of them is, you know, if I had known, like, I could have seen sort of the critical race theory stuff bubbling up there already back in this. Oh, nine, ten, eleven. I mean, having conversation weird, weird sort of conversations like students asserting, you know, there's well, there's multiple kinds of truth, not in the sense of for vacu's for peas, but in the sense of, you know, I think it'd be true for one person and not for another person on basic propositional statements. Also weird conversations about how, you know, I was definitely racist because I was white. And, you know, like when you're a kid, it's really easy to, at least for me, it was really easy to shrug that stuff off and think, wow, those people are crazy and not think that, you know, the world is going to be staring down that barrel a decade later. So, yeah, I had a really interesting mix. I like both of them. I wouldn't send my children to that school, but I, how do I talk about that? You're pretty, I'm sure you've read the Chronicles of Narnia well enough to know them pretty well. So that part at the end of the horse and his boy when Shasta's having the conversation with Aslan, I think that's a really interesting mix. Aslan was walking beside him. One was they talk about Sun, but he waits the other horse in a grand way. And then he lets Vanenoria go behind him. And then he lets Dr. Orten's teenager go over to the side. off in the night and then you realize, you know, Avalon was walking beside him. My experience for a lot of my time in boarding school was exactly that, that I was just sort of bumbling along and being blindly protected, which was, you know, it's not a great strategy, but a wonderful thing to receive. The other thing at that time was I had a friend that my close friend out of high school really spurred my interest in learning and particularly in like high level conversation. And so that was one of the things that came out of my high school experience was this friend who I was able to have really great conversations with for hours and hours and hours with, and we sort of did this, you know, informal kind of debate thing. You know, one of us would take the other position and we just, I mean, to use language now, I mean, you're totally running intentional opponent processing on every possible thing we could think of. You know, it didn't matter if we agreed at the beginning, we're going to start out on opposite ends and see if we could see where we could work things out. So yeah, I, it was a really interesting experience. It was, it was in an old a hundred year old hospital. And so it had some kind of weird vibe, vibes and feelings to it. I loved it, walking past the closets that they like do not enter asbestos zone. And it was just a weird place. It was a really weird place. It was an old, the town that it's in is an old resort town where like the gangsters would come and hang out during the prohibition. It was like they're no fire zone and they'd, so there's all these like decrepit bath houses from gorgeous 1920s architecture and, you know, weird people walk in the streets there and like a wax museum downtown and none of us had cars. So we just went out of the school, fooled around and saw the weird abandoned hotels and stuff. It was a lot of fun. Oh, cool. So college. So I went, I went up to university of Arkansas after that. And which is your Arkansas through and through. Yeah, it, it, it turned out that way. I, I really like being near home, which is funny because even in high school, no, I don't. It's well, I just, it's funny because kind of starting after my second, my second to last year after my junior of high school, I ended up spending a lot of time overseas. So after the wifi is killing me. There we go. I'm back on it was, I don't know. Maybe it, maybe it's, maybe it's the fact that it's got to make it all the way over to Sacramento. Usually the wifi is great in here. It's funny because back in 2018, a lot of people had set 2017 early days. A lot of people had trouble with wifi after the pandemic. A lot of people's wifi got better and it's amazing how few glitches there are. Yes. Zoom. I understand zoom went through a little bit of hell in the first part of 2020. And they're like, we had this niche product that no one wanted. And all of a sudden they were like the backbone of society. So no, I was going to say I got, I got the opportunity to go down to central America two summers to Costa Rica to study Spanish. And then in college, I spent a semester in Cusco, Peru. I spent a summer in southern England. Do you, are you familiar with Pranta Schaeffer and the Labrie Institute? Yep. A bit. Yeah. Okay. So I spent a summer in college at their English branch there and just got to travel around a little bit more. So I, that, even though I was living in Arkansas, I really ended up getting to see a lot of the world, which is, which was really lovely and, you know, work on my Spanish. So it's fun that, you know, you spent some, spent some time at the art and even after college, I'd spent some, I came back down to Lima and was kind of living halfway in Lima, halfway in Arkansas for a couple of years. So what did you study in college? I did, I did, well, that's funny, right? Because it's like, what was my degree program? My degree program was in biology and Spanish. I, in terms of what impacted my life afterwards, there's all the books that I read when I had a whole bunch of free time because I was in college and had no attachment. Oh, that's interesting. Yeah, yeah, I, I cranked through, I cranked through a lot of books. You know, I had my Kindle, I had Project Gutenberg, and I had, you know, periods between classes and a lot of classics. That's when I first started reading older, older books that had been intimidating to me. I read The Odyssey because I listened to Josh Garrel's Sowing Ulysses and thought I'd like to know about The Odyssey and got halfway through and realized, wow, it turns out I'm actually enjoying this. This is really weird. Yeah, but then, and so my sophomore year, I picked up John Ciardi's translation of The Divine Comedy and read that. And that was, that was very impactful. I don't think I realized how impactful it was at the time. I mean, it's, you know, it's something that I come back to all the time now. That was really big. I just, you know, to interpolate in the question, my, it was really interesting. You know, high school was the first time that I was really faced with a plurality of ideas about how you could, how you could frame the world, what, you know, how you could think about the metaphysical framework for your life. I had, I had one teacher, particularly my first year there, where I had a whole bunch of classes and he was, I mean, he was like a, again, it's really funny how all this stuff is like recapitulated in the conversations that you're having. So he was, he thought that LSD was this incredibly powerful tool that had been, you know, humanity had discovered or had been given to humanity and was sort of out of that American California Buddhism, California university type thing. He was a wonderful teacher. I mean, he was a fabulous biology teacher. I had, I took several courses with him and really enjoyed that, but that was the first time that I, you know, really confronting the stuff that I grew up is just sort of baseline assumption. And so you, I would have thought that that'd be like my major crisis of faith would be in high school. And I, and I did really have to start working through that. But it ended up being like my first year of college, actually, that was like, that was where I really grappled with that stuff. And it ended up actually being GK Chesterton's orthodoxy. That was kind of the thing that, that started to settle a lot of questions and, you know, looking back on it now, I think I could draw a through line that the thing that I was wrestling with was trying to figure out how to integrate the fact that I knew that there was immaterial reality and that it was important. And the fact that I was continually awash in an insistence of just this flat material ontology that this is enough, you know, it's the just, well, that's just this, it's, you know, Aristotelian language, that's just the efficient cause and the material cause. You don't need anything else. That's all you need. And yeah, running in my work, after a couple minutes full conversation involves in Merk, Rigi catches orthodoxy. And so I, I pick it up and I think the wifi is switching out again. Yeah. Darn wifi. When I see that blank stare on your face, I know it's not me. I'm trusting that it's the internet. Yeah, it's the, it's the, it's, uh oh, he's frozen. Do I pause it? Do I let it run? So, everyone that listens to this, please forgive me. I didn't mean to do this to you. All the people, they're going to look at their phone to see if they're getting a call because it all stopped. Well, there's this one service that people are playing around with that. It kind of buffers everything and makes sell the transition smooth. But again, for the most part, for the last few years, zoom's been rock solid and really haven't had much issue. Everybody's got better broadband, et cetera, et cetera. So, so Chesterton, so Chesterton, you made your way to Catholicism. How did that happen? Yeah, that's a, that's an interesting one. Um, again, so one of my favorite books and period is the book of Job. And, and I understand that there's a guy named Jess in this little corner that I haven't talked to yet who really loves Job. And I'd love to have some conversations with about, about that if he wants to, but he will, he'll find me one way or another. The thing that I love about Job is that it, you know, you've got these two little narrative fragments at the beginning of the end and then this massive quadrilogue of pentalog actually of what does it all mean? And, you know, there's, there's all this delicious irony of the fact that it's going to be resolved at the end of the book. And then you have, and so the way that it just shows you everything else takes its meaning from the future in a real, in a real sense. And so I can look back on my story and I can say, oh yeah, see, this is how I ended up in Catholicism, X, Y, Z, but I shouldn't, I did not, I did not see it coming. Um, I have, let's, let's say even, even when I was in college, I think I was really wrestling with interpretive problems. Um, and the fact that I looked around and I saw a lot of other people who are also very smart coming to very different conclusions about scripture. And I, and, and it wasn't, and I didn't, I didn't want to get in arguments with people about it. I wanted to figure out how there's a way that we could, um, let's say exist in some, some sort of unity. And I, and I think I, I think I, I looked at, church authority seems like it'd be nice. I mean, cause I, I, in terms of like ecclesiology and liturgy, I grew up on the rag and fringe, you know, where of course it's there, but it's, you know, none of it's acknowledged and none of it's developed and it's as, it's as flat as possible because that's the, like, that's the idea. So, but I mean, you can already, you can already tell, right? I was like, divine comedy in college, G.K. Chesterton's orthodoxy that summer that I was in the Brea film that was, um, George Manley Hopkins poetry, you know, growing up, Tolkien alongside Lewis was a mainstay. And so, you know, that, that stuff was, that stuff was working on me for sure. Um, I'll give you the really short, the really short answer to it's kind of the two things that really dislodged all the stuff. One was that fast forward to 2019, we're about to have our second child and I, uh, I had a couple of Mormon missionaries that came over and sweet young guys. And I thought, well, you know, how am I going to turn down a couple of earnest young men who want to talk about God? Come on. Like who, who am I if I'm going to say, no, we're not going to talk about any of this. And so we, we got after it. And I think we probably talked two hours once a week for four or five months. Like we talked a lot. Wow. And yeah, yeah. And it was, you know, it, it, it had at times where it was more productive and less productive. And, you know, they, the Mormon, the, the, the LDS does it, they do their thing and they, they manage their missionaries in certain ways, but we still ended up getting to have some really, really good conversation. But one of the things that I ran up against was this assertion of the, the corruption of the church after the death of the apostles. And that that wasn't reestablished until, you know, Joseph Smith has his vision in the 1800s. And, and, you know, they keep it, kept asserting that, you know, this is the reestablishment of the true church. And I thought, ah, man, that just doesn't, that doesn't fit. And, and, you know, they, they have a lot of very different understanding about the, say, who Christ is, right? They're not, it's not trying to ... They also have a very different understanding about, I'm just going to roll with it. They all have a very different understanding about the role of Christ's sacrifice in redemption. So I think they tend to land much more in terms of Christ is a great example that we're all supposed to follow. That being said, the idea that you have, even at that low level of Christ coming and dying and doing the work, right, that's, that's at the center of the story, and then saying, yeah, for, you know, for 1800 years, 1750 years, we're fine just letting, you know, history roll and the church fall into corruption and God's going to just, you know, it's totally a right to use your language, totally erratic. There's no agency. He's like, totally ends up for the whole thing. And let's all this superstition and nonsense develop. And that just seemed like a performative contradiction. I couldn't work with that. And, but then because of the way my brain works, I started thinking, well, okay, hold on a second. But I basically do the same thing with a thousand years of church history. And because, you know, I can, obviously, like I was good with the canonization of the New Testament, you know, those church councils, I'm good with up to that until, but then you get like late 400s, early 500s. And I thought, well, hold on all this stuff about the mother of God and about all this other, you know, the church, the church hierarchy and things like that. I can't, no, no, no, something's going weird, going wrong there. But then, you know, you get to the reformation and good, we're back on track. And that, that hadn't got in my head. And I couldn't, I didn't know what to do with that. So that kind of my conversations with the Mormons ended in around December. And then we had this double, I had a sort of double whammy for myself. One was our daughter was born and she was really, really sick. And so she ended up in the neonatal intensive care unit. And then I also got a book from my parents by a Thomistic microbiologist named Daniel Thoma. And on, he's basically presenting the Aristotelian Thomistic framework as a, as a superior interpretive model for the scientific data we've generated so far as against the flat materialistic ontology. And the way that like Christianity and my love for biology had played out before this, there's a lot of people handing me creation science magazines in a very well-intentioned, I mean, they really like were concerned for me. They wanted me to figure out how to put this stuff together. And I just, it didn't, it wasn't doing anything for me. And so to come across this very mature, very well thought out integration of those two fields, of those two, of those two sets of ideas was really, really powerful. And particularly one of the things that it did was, and this is, you know, while we're walking through this sickness of our daughter was I realized I had gotten to this place where I thought we have, you know, children are good, families are good, communities are good and so on. And we do this from the bottom up so that we can have, say, learning and science and flourishing civilization. And from them reading Daniel Thoma, this is the first time that I've been introduced to the concept of, of deification or theosis. He, he actually pulls a lot from, from the Eastern, Eastern writings as well, which is, was interesting. He's talking about how both, he's got the Aristotelian four causes in there, right? And so the final, the final end of man is to be united to God and that the material universe finds its perfection in man united to God. And I had the whole thing flip upside down for me. And all of a sudden I realized that all those things are good, but the most important thing is, you know, that individual soul being united to God. Like that, all the other stuff finds its fulfillment, the good societies, the good civilization, the good art, the good learning, all that finds its fulfillment and orienting people towards God and letting them be united to him. And, you know, when you see, let's say being in the environment of a neonatal intensive care unit and seeing the massive resources that are an effort and care that are put into saving these just like completely helpless people. You can see why that would work on me on, you know, on multiple levels at once. And so, so what happened was we came out of that and that was right. So that was, we were trying to get her out of the NICU when all the pandemic restrictions started happening. And so that was crazy. And, and we started having, so some of her issues were respiratory. And so we were, you know, we're trying to navigate all this stuff. We thought, all right, we're just going to, we're going to take 10 steps back because our priority is her. And, you know, I don't know what's going on, but we're not, we're not going to risk it. And so, so we started with my big family who was in town on Sundays. We'd come together and we prayed that the wait, no, no. Okay. You prayed the, there we go. There we go. I know it was, it was a very dramatic pause. We got together with our family when we prayed the, the great, the, the great litany from the Anglican book of common prayer. So we're, it was, all right, well, we're going to, we want to do something. We want to do something, you know, of substance. And, you know, I didn't really have any sacramental thought in mind at that point. And it was great. And so, but what the, like the other thing that that did to me was, you know, first of all, we're saying the exact same words every time. And I'd had, you know, I'd, there was a summer where I went to an international intercultural, or sorry, Presbyterian church. That was when I was in England. That's either pretty formal liturgy. There's a summer that I went to an Episcopal, a really theologically solid Episcopal church. That was very liturgical. So it wasn't like my first exposure to it, but I mean, that was the only thing. And so we're praying it over and over and over. And the, it made me realize sort of in a similar way that what we were doing when we were coming together was not, not just about, I need to like get filled up or be instructed, but like, we're coming here to do work. And the work is to ask for God to preserve the universe, basically. Right. Any of those litanies you're going through, not, not the, say, not the litanies in some of the Catholic litanies, you know, right to the Blessed Virgin Mary, that's, you know, going through titles, but like the great litany, the litany at the beginning of the divine liturgy of St. John Cosostome, right? You're just like going through, okay, it's like, well, please protect us from hailstorms. Please protect us from thunder, from war, from famine, from sickness, you know, the people who are in trouble because of X and Y and Z and, you know, the leaders and the widower, the widows. And realizing that we were showing up not just because of something that was getting out of the boot, because we actually had something we were, we were called on, we were called on to be doing. And, and so those are kind of the threads that are running together. And then I ran into you and Peugeot from Peterson. And that was when, that was when everything started kind of falling out in my life with that stuff. And you talk, I hear you frequently reference how interesting it is to you that orthodoxy holds so much appeal to young men in America. And I can give you some of the answer to that because, because, I mean, that's the direction I wanted to go. Like I didn't want to become Catholic. I wanted to become orthodox for various reasons. But the main one is, is like, it was, it felt like all the parts that I was, I wanted in Catholicism without it being like same old Catholicism. And I didn't have to figure out what I thought about the Pope. And so it ends up being, it ends up being this, this, this sort of intermediate thing. And what, I mean, the short answer is without going into the details, what happened is, I started going to services in an orthodox church and started like really working, wrestling through those ideas. And then particularly my wife's prompting, when I was also looking at the claims of the Catholic church, that stuff was not that far away from me anymore. I had moved way further than I thought and had gotten comfortable with a lot of things that I didn't, that made it a lot easier to look over and look at the Catholic church and say, Hey, that I, I can under, I can understand that. And the, the problem with all of that is that like, you know, it's such a, it's a frame problem. You know, you're, you're basically saying, I'm going to put myself under someone else's frame. Yeah. Essentially. And I don't have a good answer for how to walk through any of that. I just know that I ended up, you know, I could walk through all the specifics, but so many of those things are, well, if you accept the Catholic frame on things and yeah, it works out great. But if you don't accept the frame, then you're kind of sitting over in, in, in that, you know, back in the place where you see that as say unnecessary or unhelpful or, or downright wrong. So that was, I mean, that's sort of the threads, you know, the bulletin book, thread. There's the, there's the, I had a really hard time saying no to St. Thomas Aquinas after, you know, actually encountering what he was talking about. So. Oh, let me ask you a question. So for a lot of the people who go to orthodoxy, they tell me that the liturgy, the church experience for them, that sort of really sells them. When I talked to a lot of people who sort of either went to Catholicism or returned to Catholicism, a lot of what I often hear is Aquinas, I don't usually hear a lot about the, the liturgy and the mass and, and what's happening and what's happening during the mass for Catholics. That's, that's a really interesting dichotomy because of course you can get Bishop Baron on YouTube, you can read Aquinas in books. I mean, part of what's interesting is that I don't hear, I don't hear people say, well, you know, I went to, I went to mass and the homily was just so much Thomas Aquinas, I was rude, I had to say, you never hear that from the Catholics. And I seldom hear that I went to the mass and the liturgy was wow. And, and this was incredible. Sometimes I hear about the mass itself, but, and, and there have been a number of people that have decided to go back to Rome or go to Rome. I mean, because I don't want to give, you know, I don't want to, you know, I don't want to give the Orthodox all, because all the attention, because the truth is some people have gone Orthodox curious or full Orthodoxy. Some people, a number of people have sort of returned back to their ecclesiastical roots that are all over the place. Many of the returnees who started in Rome returned to Rome and a few have gone from Protestantism to Rome. But again, when they talk about it with Rome, they'll often talk about the philosophy, the theology, the integralism, they'll talk about all those things, but I never hear, I just really love going to mass. So that that's funny, because that actually is, how do I put this on its face? I mean, I completely understand that. And like, I remember listening three, three years ago, Benedict Sheehan, I think is a contemporary Orthodox composer that I came across because of Pagio. And I remember listening to his recording of his composition, the Divine Liturgy, and being just crying. Like I felt so homesick, you know, speaking of quest for a spiritual home, it's like no idea what's going on. And I'm just in my house listening to it. So we go to, and I don't know how deep into the weeds you are at all on the stuff inside the Catholic Church on liturgy, but we go to the Fraternity of a Parish of the Fraternity of St. Peter. And so it's like all the approval from the Vatican Order of Priests that celebrates the the Tridentine Mass according to the you know, the 1963 missile, basically. And you know, that word missile, when I read, you know, Vatican, you know, Vatican documents, I hear missile, I just I just cannot help but think about my SS ILE. But anyway, you know, that you know, there's there's some similarities there. I haven't seen any of them thrown the missiles have not yet become missiles. But um, no. So I want another thing that happened is I ended up connecting with this guy, who's a good friend of mine now who does who does homescale butchering. So his basically his thing in life is that he is he is re he's doing reinventio with homescale butchering. And he's a he is a he is a he and his family attend the traditional mass. And so I went, I went there's a monastery about three hours from here, it's a wonderful traditional Benedictine monastery. The first time I ever went to the old mass was with him there. And it was face of Christ the King, priest is the high altar way in the distance, you kind of need binoculars, because he's at the high altar. And then you've got all the monks, and then all the other people who have come on, you know, this side of the altar rail. And then you know, and there I'm in the back, and there's like four six foot three guys in front of me. And so like, I can see like some instance coming up and, you know, and of course, I can't understand anything at all. And I don't have a missile either. But, and so in that sense, when I compared it to say, like going to the Antiochian Orthodox services, it was not I didn't connect with it. At the time, it was I was a bit it was November, I was freezing cold, and like my back was teasing up. But it stuck with me, really stuck with me. And so then, you know, I think it's Christmas, the next time we made it to like, into a low mass. And the thing about the thing about the Latin right, as as we have it is it isn't I mean, the high mass like a sun mass is beautiful. In fact, it's the most beautiful thing that I know of. And like, we have four young children, and my wife and I both sing in choir every Sunday, because like, it's that important to us. And when we first started going, I was I was working somewhere where like, a lot of there's a lot of ambient noise and like, nasty rap music. And then we'd go to even before we're in the church. We've been dealing with the proper in Gregorian chant. And it was like, I I can't I couldn't imagine I know I just I just wait a little bit. I couldn't I mean, the contrast is I mean, the contrast itself was enough to just pull me over. It was like I had gone. I you know, I think about the screw tape letters. I think it's a screw tape letters where Lewis describes hell is the place where everything is noise. It's the kingdom of noise. And where and heaven is the place where everything that's not music is silent. And, and so yeah, there's a there's a great degree of like, having to actually develop the faculties to appreciate the math, which just like, I'll say it is not what our world is oriented towards, because it takes discipline. And so so it wasn't an immediate attraction to me at all, by any means. On the other hand. Wow. It I mean, like, it just starts working on you and it starts working on you on levels that I that I don't understand. And, you know, comparing this with other people, it's like, you just your household becomes more ordered, which is really interesting. Like, I feel like our kids behave differently, they're absolutely still children. But like, so the baseline of child life is the same, but I feel like they're coming up these peaks that they wouldn't come to otherwise in terms of, say, reverence or seriousness or obedience. I mean, so all that to say, yeah, my sensibility is definitely why I think, as do a lot of other people, and I don't understand it with the Eastern stuff. And it would have been really hard to become Catholic if I had that had meant Roman Catholic, if that had meant saying all that Eastern stuff is nonsense and wrong. It's not it's, you know, Rome definitely recognizes that all the Eastern rites are legitimate. And there's Eastern Catholic churches. And if there's a Byzantine Catholic church and driving distance, we'd be going there a lot. Because it's really beautiful. And there's it and clearly it's meeting some hunger that young people are feeling right now. So, so that's all. Yeah, good. You mentioned your wife does this with you. Was she raised Catholic? Or should did she take this journey with you? Or how did that work? Because because again, a lot of people I talked to, the dudes taking his journey to orthodoxy and the wife is like, what's going on here? So there's a funny story with that was the first time, which I told my wife that I was going to do this. I said, Hey, I'd really like to go to Vesper service. She said, that's fine. Because she knew we've been talking through all this. But I went to the Vesper service, and I sat down with Father Joseph. And the first question he asked me was, does your wife know you're here? So yeah, she, boy, it wasn't fun for us. She was a lot more reluctant to go on this. And what and I don't know if this has come through. One of the things that I like really tried to emphasize on this on all this was that I at no point did we feel like we were running away from anything, or trying to escape something, you know, like, our the hardest thing, on an emotional level, the hardest thing about becoming Catholic was leaving the church that I had grown up in. And I had and continue to have a close relationship with our pastor there. And I love him. And I deeply respect him. And a lot of the reasons that we're Catholic is because of things that he instilled in me. And so, yeah, so she did not feel the same impetus. And part of that's just because, you know, our shared our different backgrounds before, before we were married, and just and just temperamental differences, too. But the interesting thing was that I was really like, I want to become Orthodox. And she said, you're not. If you're if we're going to do the whole thing, and take pull our family out of its Protestant roots and go somewhere else, you don't get to do that without looking at the Catholic Church and what it's saying. And she wasn't raised Catholic. No, in fact, her father was her father decided not to be Catholic long before she came around. So she she grew up in a Northeastern, like, black, black gospel type church. So not not that at all, actually quite close to where you grew up. Jersey City. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that's where she came from and had, I think, no, no thought or interest that that's where we needed to go. And so she spent a lot of time patiently listening to me wrestling through this stuff. And what's interesting is that when we we both kind of gritted our teeth and said, we were pretty sure this is what we've got to do. And then as soon as we did that, it was just like, you snap your fingers and you froze. I know exactly. I have to give the Wi Fi credit for being dramatic. It was it was great. And we started we started walking down this path and realized, yeah, this is like, we're we're just seeing we're seeing really wonderful stuff. And and you know, so we we started we started going to mass regularly about a year ago. We entered the church last August. So I know how you feel about honeymoon. You can check with me in five years and see if it's still doing the same stuff for us. You never know. You never know. Some people, some people stick with it. Some people phase out of it. So I won't I won't criticize either way. Well, I'm I'll say I'm pretty sure I'm pretty sure this is where we need to be. I just mean in terms of, you know, for your own relevance realization, I'm not trying to I'm not trying to say that we feel the same way after 10 years. But, you know, you feel free to feel free to see how happy we are about all of it in in five or 10 years. So I wouldn't want you quitting just because you weren't happy with it either. I mean, that's sort of a consumerist mode. I mean, when you make a commitment to a church and a tradition, hopefully, you know, hopefully, it's not it's not at the level of a marriage. But it's, you know, it's an important commitment. So I think I think we're just talking across purposes. Absolutely. No, I yes, I know I commitment is profoundly important, mostly because I know how. Yeah, just on a lot of small ways in my own life, I can see how much damage comes from not following some commitments. And so like, yeah, I want one of the things that's interesting, I think this came out of that same period with her with her second child realizing that we grew when I was kind of coming into adulthood, the sort of model for personhood, for personality, you know, individuality is maybe let's say individuality, that's a left loaded term was the sort of preferential and experiential model. I like doing these things. These are the things that I've done. These are the things that have happened to me. That's who I am. And then realizing that actually, what was way more important was what are the promises that I've made? And what are the commitments that I have? That has that tells me way more about who I am than anything else. And honestly, that also just, I think is a big anxiety reducer for young people. It should be I would recommend looking at yourself that way. Because that stuff is a lot less fluid. And it's a lot more concrete. And as much as you're trying to say, what am I doing like today and tomorrow? Not, oh, what kind of a person am I am? What kind of person? What would that kind of person want to do with their time? It's like, no, where do my obligations, my obligations lie? And how can I fulfill those? Well, yeah. I, because I've got this hard out, I've only got about another 12 minutes. So I don't want to take all the time. And I don't know if there's anything you wanted to get to or wanted ask me or wanted to talk to me about. So go for it. Sure. Yeah. Well, I wanted to come back if you're willing to. And I know I kind of, I kind of bothered you about this at the conference. But I did want to come back and talk about the connection between family and home a little bit more, if you're up for that kind of coming out of the conference. I just, yeah, I, it's, it struck me as interesting, you know, my, and in my life, home and family have been so tied up together. And, you know, that comes out of, I came out of a pretty big, I have four siblings and really, really solid family. And there's a lot of continuity there. And I kind of went out of that into fairly early on in my life, starting my own, you know, a family in which I'm the husband of the father of. And so I don't know, I, I'm trying to, I'd be curious to know what you think. I actually went back and listened to that session that you and the other speakers had when you're talking about family. And I get there's this balance there and that like a lot of people there, well, just a lot of people, period come out of really broken and damaged homes. And so that's a reality. That's just a reality. Most of my closest friends also come out of really, really bad home situations. And the ones that are married, I like, I see them working through that and trying to not do that again for their families. Actually, there's lovely hearing Catherine talking about her husband, Amen, and sort of all that. We're going to be the generation that ends this thing. And on the other hand, I mean, listening to John Verbecki talk about him and is it sorry, sorry, sorry. Listening to them, listening to him again, there it is. There it is. It's dramatic. Him talk about, about the difference in sort of their approach to life and what the gifts that she was given out of her family. And so when I think about that, I think, okay, well, I'm interested, we should all be interested in the redemption of the world. Right. And, and, and I think there's a perennial question of where do you, if you're going to do that, where do you put your time and energy? And it was just, it was interesting to me to see that all on stage because clearly, right. John Verbecki, Dr. Verbecki is still getting the blessing from her family, raising her well, right. And so are their children and so on. And so I'm curious, how, well, not maybe I would like to cast like a positive view of that and say, okay, I understand that there's all this brokenness, but like, if you really want to leverage your wife to bringing goodness into this world. And this is what Verbecki said. This is why he cheered when he said it is you really can't do better than trying to raise people well. Yeah. See. And, and it's just like, Emma was on right before you, who's a cradle Catholic. And she said it was out of that group, out of the Catholic corner that the chairs went up when Verbecki said that both these randos conversations, you both come from families with five kids. And it's really rather interesting to a little similarities. Anyway, keep going. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I just, it's really like, that just really struck me. And so maybe, maybe one thing I could add to that then is from my own personal experience, which is that there is, I think oftentimes there's seen as a conflict between say, putting the time and energy into raising a family versus say all the other things that you could do that would be good. But when you, when you get things oriented the right way, when you've got the top thing at the top, all that stuff, nest ends up nesting together. And so sort of to tie all that together, you know, when the times recently, when I've been helping walking with friends through struggles, I see that my capacity to help them is coming directly out of my experience as a husband and a father. And the patience, the little bit of patience and a little bit of wisdom that I have to give them is coming right out of that. And so maybe, maybe there's a lot to be said for the fact that we shouldn't, we need, we need to get rid of this sort of zero sum game idea of our time and say, well, I need to, you know, I need to figure this stuff out, or I need to put all my time and effort into these things. And instead realizing that the whole project of raising, like say raising a family, actually makes you the kind of person that can go on and do those other things. I mean, I, I mean, Paul, I think you're a great example of this, right? Like this isn't the thing that you set out to do at all. Like you, you, you've done the whole thing. And yet like people come to you because I would, I would, I would not hesitate to say that, that you're able to have a much greater positive impact in people's life because you are a father and you raise children. Paul I'm sure that's true. Paul And so, so it's true. Paul Yeah. Anyway, yeah. Paul It's, it's so at a conference like this, and having done all the Randall's conversations I have, your parents are still together. Paul Yeah. Paul Yeah. There are many people in this little corner who are coming out of wreckage and they're looking for solace. They're looking for firm ground and there are, there are a lot of inconvenient truths that people who come out of a really disrupted home recognize, which is like, again, I just spoke with Emma a little earlier today and you and Emma too came out of a wonderful family, had a terrific mother and parents were just totally down with getting the children what they needed and that was there. And, and Verveki is right, there are few things more impactful than you can do in this world than raising your children well. I mean, that's just, that's just an enormously powerful thing because that raising your children well gives children a remarkable platform from which to launch out into the world and bless the world. It's an enormously powerful thing. It's also the case that anyone who has been the beneficiary of such a platform has received so much that they are in no way responsible for, but will be blessed by for their entire life. That another remarkable thing. And once you sort of are able to articulate that and show that to people, those who have not had it suddenly recognize it's super hard for them to in some ways, patch up because they will be dealing with insecurities, with traumas, not all of them, it's not just arithmetic. And then there's this dynamic that you get into where on one hand, you shouldn't have to not recognize the truth of everything we said before about the blessings of a terrific family and the platform from which you launch from into the world. You can't not say that because you know that there are people in the room that feel that lack very strongly in their life. Now, it's also the case that there are people that have had a wonderful platform that have completely screwed it up. I mean, the world is just huge this way. And so it's always difficult to talk about it because on one hand, what you really want to do is encourage in the way that say, Philip encourages the Ethiopian eunuch via Jesus appropriation of the book of Isaiah, that in Christ, there's a tremendous future for you. I see this all the time in the conversations in churches. So in the Christian firm church was very family oriented denomination. And then we had people coming to a church like Living Stones who were coming from families where there was a lot of disruption and chaos. And so then they always have the question, is it better to be raised in a Christian home? And sometimes people raised in a Christian home look at some of let's say negative things that happened and they're like, and then other people who were not raised in a Christian home look at them like, you've got to be kidding. You know, your parents weren't alcoholics. They devoted the vast majority of their income to the benefit of the family. You never worried for clothing on your back or food in the refrigerator or a school to go to or love and attention from your parents. If you had any idea of the catastrophe that I grew up in, you wouldn't feel in any way deprived by the wonderful platform that you were given through no merit of your own. So it's just such a massive thing in people's lives that when you begin to talk about it, especially on a stage, it's a lot of it is reading the room and figuring out. And so often what you do is you know that there are plenty of people in the audience that have had a wonderful upbringing and it's like, I'm not really going to worry about them because the truth is, you know, all of these benefits. But for those other people in the room whose home life has been a catastrophe, I really want to say something to encourage them that even though your home life was a catastrophe, Christ can turn that around. And you hear that and you know, Chad, the alcoholic has articulated this in many cases. He'll say, you know, on one hand, it sucks being an alcoholic. It really sucks. And the struggles I had growing up, they really suck because I'm always bumping into them. But the redemptive element that has come into my life through AA, through the church, now suddenly there's you can in that sense, in someone who comes to Christ out of the devastation of a disrupted home, there's a certain glory shines in a special way. Yeah. Yeah. That for those who had the wonderful platform, it's like a first your life is blessed. Look at what you've been given. But this and this person's life, the brilliance of Christ's redemption has a special luster. So well, that yeah, I mean, it's the 99 sheep in the one. That's right. And it's, it's the sinful woman and Luke seven. Yep. You know, it's, it's all that and I, I know we're about to be out of time. I, but that struck me is so got some family roots in Germany. And so one of the places that I went to in college with my family was southern Germany and was right out of Peru. And so we're down in the very end of the Bavarian Alps. I mean, it's just flawless, just absolutely flawless. Unbelievable. Everything. Everything. Everything is put together. Everything is put together. And then and you look at it, you're like, but that's the place that like, World War Two, World War One and two, and then, and then like, it's a godless country pretty much now. And like, you go to the Reagan's Berg Cathedral and you're, you're, you're picking your jaw off the floor because of how astonishingly beautiful it is. And it's like, mostly, you know, it's like, okay. So I mean, I, this came up so much of the conference, TSL, you know, we're all dreaming of systems that are so good and so perfect that no one has to be good. It's like, there isn't. And, and so I, absolutely, I reckon, you know, I recognize without a doubt, you know, I mean, this is, and that's kind of the power of raising children to some degree is you can do everything. And then there's still people, they're still individuals, you can't, you can't strap them down. And, but there's got to be something in there between saying, between saying, we can't make it so good that nothing ever goes wrong. And saying, Look, I know, I know that all you've ever seen in your life is crap. But like, trust me, if you walk this out, like, amen, you know, like, amen's parents, if you walk this out, and you say, this is the thing we're doing, we're going to end the garbage, even if it kills us, we're going to end the garbage in this generation. It's like, you just have no idea what that can do. You have no idea what that can do and what God can do through that. And so I listen, I hear you, the people who have had great families, they don't need encouragement to know that good families are good. Most of them. Most of them. There's a few, but most of them, most of them don't need them. Most of them, but the people who haven't, you know, you've never seen that when all you can think of is, oh, it's just like, why would you want that? It's just a terrible thing. It's just a, you know, it's just a burden that to realize that, you know, because that's, I mean, I think ultimately, that's the invitation to the world given in terms of finding a spiritual home, right? Is that we have, it's not just a place, right? Yes, there's a heavenly Jerusalem, but like, it's to be Christ's brothers and sisters, and to be sons of God the Father, like that, that's what we're welcomed into. It's that, it's the divine family. So. It's true. That's true. The world is so big, even the good parts. Yeah, can't say it all. And even the bad parts. Can't plumb the depths. No, it's true. It's true. Well, I'm sorry I gotta run, Ted. This has been fun. You're gonna let me share this on the channel, right? All right, good, good, good. Yeah, I always gotta ask at the end, because I don't wanna assume, otherwise I can send it to you and you can look at it with your wife and you get back at me, but I didn't hear anything in here that I thought, ah, he's gonna say, oh, I don't know if I wanna say that to the internet, which is always fair, but just always gotta check. Yeah, no, and that's, you know, part of the fun for this for me was just knowing that people would watch this, you know, it's a public thing and it's great chatting with you and talking about this stuff, you know, I, but I'm happy to do this, to just talk about this stuff that I'm more than happy for other people to hear from and maybe they'll pick something relevant out of. And I hope you managed to, I know you're thinking about putting together a conference or something down in Arkansas, so I hope you manage to do that. And one of the things I do want is to encourage and support people to do some of these conferences in lots of different places. I can't, I probably can't make them all, but I certainly want them to flourish, so. Well, if you wanna come down when we get this together, we'd be happy to have you, but we don't need you. So enjoy being a non-necessity. All right. That is a wonderful thing to be a non-necessity, trust me. All right, Teddy. Take care. Bye-bye.