https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A0_gM9PBMaA

 protocol. So Emily, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Why don't you begin? Um, let's see. Well, I'm from Michigan. I'm living in Grand Rapids. I graduated, I got married this past year. I graduated from a small art school in Grand Rapids in 2016. So that was during the election and that was the the Jordan Peterson podcast with Joe Rogan, the first one. Okay, well congratulations on the on the marriage. Thank you. Yeah, that was really great. So we got married this past year. I work, I've worked at a bunch of different small farms right now. I'm working at a small farm that does flowers for like floral, like cup flowers, weddings. They host weddings, that kind of thing. So I work outside and I'm doing snow plowing right now because you know there's not much snow growing anything right now. So yeah, I just talked to someone who flew into California yesterday and he said winter just won't let go in Grand Rapids this year. It's bad. Everyone's getting to the breaking point. Everyone's like when is this gonna end? Um, yeah we've had enough of it but it looks like it'll be, it's supposed to be gone soon but we'll see. This is Michigan so yeah. Yeah, that's true. Yeah, so um yeah so that's that's kind of the So you first heard about Jordan Peterson on Joe Rogan? I did. Yeah, I've been listening to Joe Rogan for a long time since like the 300s and you know off and on being interested in different guests but right away you know he clicked Jordan Peterson clicked right away. And it was I think I was already reading Jung a lot so that had some some to do with it but obviously just interested in all the different aspects of what he's getting at. But um his basis is so Jungian. It just it just clicked right away and it was nice to have someone who's alive who's explaining these things because you can read Jung but to hear someone um describe the different myths and talk about it was really cool. I didn't heard anybody, any academics talking about Jungian things. It's always more of a new agey kind of topic which is really weird when you actually read his collected work. Well maybe it's not that weird but he's in between. No you're exactly right. I remember when Jordan Peterson did an interview with Jonathan Haidt and Jonathan Haidt exclaiming and you're a Jungian as if covering you know you're someone who works in the academy who takes Jung seriously which seems to be a definite minority in the psychological field. Yeah which is odd to me but um but I guess I haven't delved that far into psychology. So for me I guess I'm really high in openness so it all kind of clicked right away. He's talking about symbols and dreams and metaphors and it just made sense right away. So when I started reading that I dove in pretty hard and been reading that ever since just on repeat. Kind of like how you said you read C.S. Lewis over and over again. I'm just still processing these ideas trying to get a better understanding of it. Now also from the email you sent me you went into a bit of your past. I don't know if that's something you care to talk about or not because it seems germane to the conversation. It does. I've been thinking about that about how much personal information to give away but um let's see I came from a more I guess it's evangelical sort of fundamentalism. I wouldn't have ever called it that when I was growing up. You know we just said we were Christians and I thought everyone who was a Christian thought that way. I didn't know otherwise. So um we never attended church regularly. Oh really? No which was is weird for most people but I my my family was actually odd and my dad was always saying you don't have to go to church every Sunday to be a Christian. That's not what makes you a Christian. So I never had like the bad church experience that when I talked to a lot of people they they seemed to have. So I read the Bible a lot when I was a kid and I had this sort of framework that was really I guess materialistic in the end but I didn't know it at the time and it was really confusing. I was constantly trying to mesh science and the Bible together and try to figure out how that could work. Yeah. And then um. But it's alone interesting that you grew up in a very fundamentalist upbringing that didn't involve much church. That's weird. I know that's like a it's a weird thing so I'm sure it's not that weird. Not that weird but when I talk to other people and we share experiences and I'm I don't run into a lot of people who have the same the same upbringing or especially not in church. I went to a couple summer camps and things like that like Bible summer camp or whatever but that was pretty much the extent. But we talked about it a fair bit and I read the Bible a lot and I had you know my Jesus videos that I put in when I was little and I was you know reborn every weekend when I put my video in and I'd say the you know say the whatever it is again the declaration but um. But then let's see I went away to college and my parents had just gotten divorced before that so it was kind of destabilizing time for me where I was just very confused about um like what am I doing what am I supposed to be doing what am I supposed to be looking for like just kind of go along with what everyone else is doing. So I went away to college and um I picked up this book the evolution of God by Robert Wright. So I was just looking for something I was like I need to know more things. I was it was um because I couldn't really function in that framework anymore the sort of um the materialistic literal reading of the Bible but it was it was very that was a huge point of tension. So I picked up this book and um it kind of I guess that was kind of the jumping off point although I haven't reread it or anything since but he starts off by talking about shamanism and um like tribal gods and then he gets more into um moving from polytheism to mono-monotheism and then um sort of the jump like when Christianity started and what kind of influenced all of that and he leaves it fairly open-ended kind of saying because he's he's not a Christian it's a like secular book and I say it has a more biological material approach to it which I'd never really encountered trying to mix the two things where it makes sense and you're like oh well so God has evolved throughout um history the idea of God and how we look at it. I'd never you know heard anything like that before so that blew me away and kind of opened up all these other ideas. Um so let's see what did I get into after that I went all over the place because I was just looking for what could fill in that gap that void of like what is what am I doing what is what is what's going on in the world um and so I went through um I made like a list of of the progression but I was reading a lot about like early church history um and like the apocryphal texts and Gnosticism and they were all it's funny now because I hear you reference a lot of Christian writers and a lot of like apologetics and things like that I never touched any of that except for CS Lewis because I just wasn't in the church community I wasn't around other people who were reading that so it was more people looking in from the outside which was interesting to me. I really um liked that so I spent most of my time reading uh I had like I have like the Nag Hammadi text and the Dead Sea Scrolls and I was reading through all that and just trying to figure it out and went to like Eastern philosophy trying to like maybe maybe I could be a Buddhist um maybe I could I listened to Alan Watts a lot he was really great because he kind of mediated between Eastern and Western philosophy and kind of broke that down that was um interesting. Then I went more towards like mysticism and esotericism yeah and that and the sort of more like occult but not not not really occult but like the secret the hidden sort of side of things that was what interested me because I started to realize it was more of an inward journey than like an outward um literal understanding I guess is how I was trying I was like okay I'm gonna take it internally instead of trying to put it outside I guess um so I got just kind of I was just reading about any kind of different religion I could or different philosophies different ways of looking at things um and I was interested in psychedelics um interested in like like I said like gnosticism and things like that so it so I felt like I wasn't a Christian anymore I was like well I don't believe what I used to so therefore I can't be a Christian because I'm not on the same team right it was like a team you know it was like one side or the other right there's um so that was I was really uncomfortable with that and I didn't I wasn't comfortable with like having to answer these historical questions so like was Jesus a real person did he really it's like I don't I don't know but that's not really what was important I guess in the end it's interesting in your case that your teams are virtual because your your Christian team growing up you didn't actually you weren't actually in a church that would be more like a real team with real living people but they were kind of virtual teams and so then the next the next team you were on was also kind of virtual these are pretty much going on in your head so right trying to categorize myself um I guess and yeah yeah so that I could be like okay this is what I think so therefore I can follow this path and move forward because drowning in my own life I wasn't I had no goals I didn't know what I wanted to do I had like these vague feelings that I just it wasn't it was it was kind of a bad time so um so yeah they were virtual teams for sure I guess it it was almost more like political it was like conservative versus people who like science or something like that you know what I mean yeah yeah which was weird because we also tried to look at the bible and and see it through that scientific lens um like like um finding giant bones in the desert from the time when there were giants or um like the I think it's in what is it is Elijah or Ezekiel but the wheel the spinning wheels and I remember talking to my dad about that and we were like it's a spaceship God's an alien you know just just um really seeing it through that lens so but it didn't it didn't all mesh it like couldn't make it it just wasn't it wasn't right and I could tell but I didn't really know why so then I started okay so I guess oh psychedelics come into it at some point I'm sure um so I tried acid several times and I just re-listened to the to the to the video that you talked about are these beings real you know should we be doing this what are we really messing with and kind of there's so much interest now in like the therapy and the clinical aspects which is really cool but it is um it's weird to talk about them that way because it's such a powerful experience subjectively it's strange to kind of put it in that scientific one so I tried I tried acid a couple times and I had some really powerful you know experiences like like everyone does with it just kind of hit me and it sort of burst through almost I guess now I would say it burst through that materialistic wall a bit because um not a bit it was it was just it was transformative I suppose and just the way that I looked at things um and so Jonathan and Peugeot and I'm like this guy knows what's going on that's kind of the way that I'm formulating things now but I'm still working it out because I've got leftover from how I grew up and how I understand things and kind of taking that apart and where I'm at now and just trying to get to the get to the bottom of things so um so the discussions about like god one and two have been really great um and then the flow states and the shaman stuff has been really interesting because there's just I feel like there's a lot there that um we just don't we don't understand um let's see so so I so the first well yeah one one trip I felt like so when you talk about god number one we talk about god in the world god in nature um I felt like I saw that there's like you're just blessed it was so much information when you're in that state and um just patterns like I'm I don't know if this I don't know if this is for everyone I know people see different types of things sort of but maybe just the highness um high and openness aspect um I saw patterns like everywhere I watched actually watch was watching planet earth um and life if you've seen that show and just that um the patterns in nature were so clear to me I'd never seen anything like it it was just I was sat staring at it and I said it was like seeing the imprint of a divine imprint right into nature and it it doesn't it doesn't look like matter makes things first it's stuff it's the pattern matter is mapped onto the pattern is what it looked like this pattern was just everywhere I mean it was in everything and I don't know how else to describe it besides that so that was that was interesting um for sure and then at another at another point I sort of had this um like the person that I would call me myself I was it was gone there was no material world anymore so I don't know exactly how to classify that I don't know what what to think about that but I I um when I kind of came out of that I remember I just cried because I was like everything is real this is really happening this is this is very real and this is not just right here um I think it was it was like it's like a light I guess like white golden just somewhere else you know I wasn't just in my body anymore and it was like a feeling like I came home to a place that I had never been it was just a very um profound feeling and that really solidified for me I was like okay this path that I'm sort of like meandering down I really need to take it seriously because this is this is um this is real stuff this is really going on whereas I think before it was sort of separated um you've got like kind of the mind body split and I was in my mind a lot but I wasn't really here living it out all the time so I think that's what that's what it really did for me but at the same time I guess it was um it's a scary thing for people to just be uh experimenting with randomly all the time so so I don't know that I can just like recommend that for everyone but it was it was um definitely one of the most profound probably the most profound thing that's ever happened to me at this point um so that kind of kicked me in the game you also wrote that you had some bad experiences with it too yes I did I did so which is what's behind the statement you just gave right ready to recommend it to to everyone right yeah and and seeing other people doing it too and hearing what other people have to say so I had some bad experiences too I I tried to replicate the good experience that I had by doing it again because I was just chasing that chasing that thing yeah and um and I just I had um this feeling like I fell in a hole like a black hole it was so deep that I was never gonna be able to get out of it it was very it was also very real I mean um when you talk about like maybe hell or your own personal health it was it was very uh terrifying and um beyond my control like I have no you know it wasn't where like I could just sit there and be like okay just take a few deep breaths it's fine it was it was um I was on a ride you know I was I was not driving that boat so that was um something else but um so what did the experiences do in terms of longer term change you said that they kind of broke you out of a materialist frame um it's I'm still trying to articulate that I think but there's a just experiencing it um subjectively in that way as it as an experience of seeing like for instance seeing the pattern that I saw is particularly in water I think it was that sort of Fibonacci sort of spiraling pattern thing um rather than reading about it you know I'd read about sacred geometry and you know the golden ratio and all that but it didn't have an impact it was just an idea but kind of experiencing it like I don't know broke broke down this wall and and we could add that you you are an artist and you did send me some some images of some samples and they're very they're very beautiful they're very patterned um yeah yeah so that's really interesting I started drawing differently immediately afterward actually that was that was one thing so um before I was um doing things more in a um it was kind of the way I was taught but more in a real a very realistic manner so we were we're looking at photos and just kind of copying and we're combining different photos and things right um because I got my degree in illustration so it's about you know you're just constructing a narrative usually quickly for some for something and uh after that I I it it became structural suddenly um which is something that Jonathan Pagel talks about and I was doing before I understood that that was kind of uh what that meant so the first thing I drew was this this mountain um with the sun kind of like bursting over it maybe and then there's there's water underneath and like a geometric structure I was kind of looking back I was it just kind of like happened I just drew it but afterward I was it's a structure of probably like um the consciousness or the mind or just the reality in some way so there's like heavens there's chaos there's um material that's um I always do it geometrically but it's uh the just the particles the the singular pieces of matter that are heavy and um dark red um and then there's the things up top which are more ambiguous and uh unitive I think usually so now when I draw things it's usually structural it's more symbolic and I'm doing that on purpose now more but when I first started drawing things after that it was different and it was just kind of um that was probably the biggest thing that I noticed as far as long-term change besides just the things that I was interested in now the way I was looking at interpreting things yeah so that so how many years ago was this that that you I think it was 2015 so maybe four four years ago something I was like a little bit before Peterson and yeah yep so I was um yeah so I wasn't really I didn't really know what I was doing I'm just kind of doing it and I was like this makes sense this is the way I should do things and then the drawings that I did after that were um I would say like psychological states or like mythical psychological states that included this structure usually like a top and a bottom like an above and a below and um would be very symmetrical which was not how I was drawing before I just couldn't help it after that though I was like this is what needs to this is what I need to get out so um it gave me a clear direction with what I was trying to express that I didn't have before before I was just kind of grasping at little like feelings not little feelings but feelings I just didn't know what I was grasping at but then because I was able to look at things um more internal internally instead of externally I think too that helped so that changed the way I was creating things for sure no it's very interesting and and uh I mean your your artwork is very beautiful and if you have a if you have any of it online and if we do share this I mean I'd certainly be happy to post a link so that people could find your art that's right yeah that'd be great I just have an instagram right now and I have I do have an online store I just okay um got prints available I got a printer and I can make prints now so I'm trying to work my way up into actually sharing snow plowing yeah between snow plowing and yep greenhouse stuff I'm trying to squeeze this in so I'm working on Cain and Abel right now okay um because I decided to go I kind of wanted to follow Peterson's biblical series yeah and do um not one for each but for one of the major stories so I'm working on Cain and Abel right now okay okay wow wow wow so so then you found Peterson and what kind of changes did Peterson bring in terms of your your thought or your art or your life oh wow well I mean so much right he just um I've been latched onto that ever since I've been following all of that it he he um his worldview was really interesting but his get your life together sort of uh mode was it was helpful for me because I was getting out of school the election was going on so I mean I don't know if it was like this it was it was kind of a crazy time for kind of everyone but I especially felt like this um I could like the external feeling for just making me I felt like everybody's going a little crazy at that time right before they I mean just and in art school too art students are notoriously um left just and and you know that's not that it was just at that particular time that was really hard especially coming from a more conservative um Christian family where I I was like I'm not talking about this with anyone I'm not just gonna keep my head down and yeah yeah get through this so that was it was helpful to hear from Peterson where I was like oh I'm not I'm not crazy I'm not the only person who kind of thinks like this or values these things that was helpful um and then just to just getting my life in order and trying to take more responsibility um don't lie more than what does he say more than or at least don't tell the truth I mean don't tell the truth or at least don't lie at least don't lie yeah so just his his rules were helpful or his um his just like just get up and do it like take responsibility for your life go get a job go be responsible you know it was it was a good thing to hear because it no one's really talking about that um where you actually want to listen which is um an odd thing um because you can hear you can hear different self-help people say this or that but it didn't it it doesn't have an effect I don't think most of the time at least not like I've seen with Peterson um which has been just apparently a lot of people are needing that so yeah so yeah it was yeah it kicked me into gear a little bit um as far as getting it together especially getting out of school and not knowing what to do because you know there's not a nine to five for having a fine arts degree generally so you know I was like what what am I gonna do I was working at a um a perennial nursery and you know just uh sweating in the sun and just dirty every day and my family was like what are you doing why like what why don't you go try to work for hallmark and I was like I I can't I can't do it you know I just can't um I I could never really see myself as like working for other people with the art I just couldn't so I was like I'm gonna go work do manual labor because that is I felt like it was good for me I don't know if your art on hallmark cards would help their sales but I buy it it's really cool but hallmark exactly I was like I don't think that's my thing and you know or why don't you do children's books I'm like I don't really know what to say to kids like that's not uh that was not the thing I was trying to get across so well and it's it's helpful I mean I know Grand Rapids because I lived in Grand Rapids a bunch of my life and it's the center of my you know what you know the Christian Reformed Church because it's a major presence in Grand Rapids so and but Grand Rapids has changed quite a bit in the last in the last 10 15 20 years too it's that's what they say it's a much it's a much hipper town than it was back when I was going to school yeah and certainly back when my parents were going to school so but at the same time you can't help but you if you're living in Grand Rapids there's a fair there's a fairly deep pool of rather kitschy fundamentalist Christian yeah there really is um it's it's strong here so yeah so my family's from over here so it's just it's just in the it's just in the culture yep yep and it has changed you know we've got our craft breweries and our little shops with funny names but it's I think it's still the underlayers is that kind of Dutch conservative industrious um you know which yeah which I don't mind I like it here but it is there's a weird weird um thing that we've got going on now yeah yeah yeah yeah so you got out of school and uh you didn't you didn't make a million dollars by selling your art and you're working in nurseries getting your hands dirty which I think is also a part of this because you're connecting you're connecting to something very when you're doing gardening you're connecting to something deeply real and a lot of increasingly a lot of our population is working in jobs that are working off the cultural overlayer and aren't really don't really get their hands dirty so it's very interesting to me that you are working in nurseries and you are I mean even plowing snow the your life is the weather shaped by the rhythms of the earth rather than necessarily just the flows of culture right and um that's the way that I like it um it's and it's not everyone's cup of tea because I get to hear about that a lot you know like why do you want to do that you know my hands are always dirty and my you know I'm always sunburned or I have a farmer's hand most of the time but that's um it's just so much more rewarding and I couldn't imagine going to a store in office every day um I couldn't do it so and I like to be busy and I like to to be tired at the end of the day too and to be outside so um yeah I'm about tired of snow piling though to be honest yeah well that went I've I've I've lived through many winters in Grand Rapids and I very much know the feeling of when will it be over yeah yeah so we're just hibernating those north of those quite a bit north of Grand Rapids won't have a lot of um sympathy for you no which is fine it hasn't really been too bad I'm just ready to get outside again yeah yeah yeah but the manual labor does leave me a lot of time to listen to podcasts and audiobooks and um so I get my fill of this content daily just you know if anything's bouncing around my head so so yeah I just it's almost like I I've been trying to articulate some of it in these past couple weeks just trying to like prepare maybe what I might want to talk about but it's just it's everywhere all over yeah so I I understand that that's how I feel when I sit down to make a video I want to talk about everything well yeah words don't work that way but you do usually have like six topics in your titles that that's right it's it's by ADHD is no I know I'm I'm about the same so I I get it but um yeah so let's see what's what is we've covered your life in about half our time so but right yeah so what's on your list um well I'm kind of interested to hear what you might have to say about young and maybe talking about some of those ideas because he seems to come in and out of the conversation but I'm not really hearing him being talked about that much um in this little sphere of people who are discussing or maybe I'm just not listening to the right people but I know rebel wisdom has talked about a bit they're really into that into like the shadow you know it seems to be like essentially what they're interested in they're not as interested in the other parts I don't think right um because maybe they're interested in um get just also like self-help kind of I mean not self-help but working through your issues kind of thing um but they kind of leave out a lot of young even though they do take the shadow shadow idea um comes up a lot um yeah and then Peterson really hasn't even talked about young too much I mean he'll bring him in and out but he's he seems to be he's such a foundation for him and um but he's so he's kind of slipping into the conversation he's not really there yet I think I think young in the I think in a lot of ways young and Peterson are very parallel in terms of in terms of a lot of things but young obviously um you know beginning of the you know early mid 20th century that's when he lived and had his impacts yeah there's there's also very much for there's there's very much an anti-young there's very much an anti-young element out there there's also very devoted Jungians yeah that are out there and I know a good number of them are frustrated with me and some of them has just stopped listening to me and they that's and part of it is I have you know I'm a I'm a Calvinist and you growing up in Grand Rapids know what Dutch Calvinists are right my father's family immigrated to western Michigan when they came at the end of the 19th century so there's some there's some pretty deep biases and and concerns around young that that usually usually gives me pause at the same time I've read some young in this journey this journey has exploded my book list and so and and a lot of these guys especially young young is to penetrate no that's why I'm most I'm just reading him on loop it's just every time I pick it up it's something new so so he's he's not easy to penetrate I have I have a real appreciation for so when I was looking in my video about one Paul Maxwell made an association between Peterson and Boltman in terms of Rudolf Boltman who was another mid 20th century but he was a theologian a German theologian and so Boltman and Jung are kind of in the same or they're swimming in the same waters and I think Peterson is is Jung and not Boltman in terms of the the assumptions behind mythology I think Boltman is really I mean Jung is really helpful in terms of in terms of demythologizing modernity that's that's really where he's helpful and and the the power that Peterson has to demythologize modernity is Jungian but Jung is just Jung gets so esoteric so quickly yet so many of Jung's impulses you know I can I can far better when I first heard alchemy on the scene I thought what the heck right but now I understand why alchemy right and I have a better understanding why the gnosticism so I'm I'm continuing to this is dangerous stuff for me as a crc pastor which you understand you know I I have I have a greater appreciation for aspects of Jung's work but some of my some of my hesitance about Jung have also grown they've kind of grown together as my resolution of him increases okay that's interesting so it's I'm your point is I think exactly right that Jung probably hasn't had as high a profile in the Peterson story as he deserves but I think part of that is just simply how esoteric and odd Jung is and very odd and not you know in some ways trying to read Jung is trying to read people describing their psychedelic experiences it's um yeah he goes so deep so often and it's um I usually have to reread a page twice and I underline everything and have to you know because it because otherwise I just can't tear it apart I mean some of it's um some books are easier than others but yeah um one book that I would say um the red book the reader's edition if you're gonna try to read Jung but you don't want to like go too far in or you don't have a lot of time is really interesting because it's a story and it's a dialogue and it's it's so full of images I mean it's like a dream um and you can kind of get a lot of his concepts out of that without having to read a huge essay that he wrote that was meant for um other psychiatrists or other you know uh doctors because it's it's um just the story the narrative of it is is makes it way more interesting um it's very dreamlike so and that was some of my I mean part of what really struck me when I was reading the it's not really an autobiography it's sort of an autobiography of his the what what really what really caught hold of me that I thought was deeply correct was his observation that the story outside and the story inside that that the the the boundary between those two stories is vital and as a pastor you know so early on when you begin when you're in seminary let's say Calvin seminary in Grand Rapids Michigan they very quickly warn you you're not a psychologist don't do psychology do do pastoral do you know do pastoral care well what is pastoral care and and actually that's not an easy thing to articulate and my best answer to that is what pastors do is is help people with the story outside and the story inside but with pastors there are usually three stories you've got the story of the bible with within the christian tradition and you've got the story outside the person the story inside the person so what pastors are actually doing are working these three stories together and Jung's observation about people again this is demythologizing the the the implicit mythology of materialism and and Jung goes even further and that also really struck me from those books where his interchanges with Freud his deep frustration with Freud's materialism and and this gets into what for Jung is often referred to as you did before as the occult now right there when you say that word as you well know you trigger yeah right right and the black tide of occultism that's right terrifying it's not somewhere you want to go right but not in my opinion not without reason because what christians what christians often develop over time especially with enough experiences like you're a pastor is that you have a deep respect for the realities of different words trigger different people in different ways so i'm trying to work on that you might call it the the personified evil the demonic that's it that's a hugely complex that's a hugely complex realm that christianity in many ways simplified and packaged and because that's very much built in so i'm going through the i've been going through the gospel of mark in my sermons gospel of mark begins with one exorcism after another right yeah and so figuring out how to negotiate those terms from a highly secular western context is really challenging it isn't challenging for haitians it isn't challenging for africans or or many many other people in the world but in our context and and so that's where it's difficult and so in our context jung creates a doorway into that demythologizing secularism that so now when it comes to peterson i think part of the reason peterson hasn't spoken enough about jung or hasn't really forefronted him that much is because of where most of his conversations are lying i mean when he's talking to sam harris yeah get into young with sam harris right yeah that would probably go very well yeah i guess i do forget that he's in that weird gray area where it's like he most people don't want to it's just when i think about his ideas they're just so there's so much going on and i just feel like no one's talking about it but i guess that i do forget about that part of it he's got like a he's kind of marked he's tainted well and and look at i mean again read the passages in jung's autobiography where this chapter on freud was deeply fascinating yeah because jung has this jung has this sense of you know something's about to happen and he has the courage to speak on it now if you're if you're hanging out with pentecostal christians that's not unusual at all and and so my experience over the course of my life has been frozen chosen dutch reformed you know very unfrozen pentecostals you know haitian christians who are thrashing around in the waters of baptism so i you know i'm i can i can i can talk materialist i can talk i can talk all these different languages but exactly figuring out how all these worlds meet so that chapter with jung and freud that's a that's an important chapter and peterson peterson is more young yeah he does seem he to me he seems like a continuation of jung's work almost or what jung was trying to get across almost he peterson seems to be carrying the torch to me um i know there's a couple other people that are kind of his basis of you know everything that he talks about but um he somehow he seems to be picking up that torch from from young and i think because young did talk about the myth of christianity and that we have to live in it and it has to continue it's not just dead where we are it has to keep going you have to keep um keep going with it um did he say he said something about christians are very concerned about preserving what they already have with no thought of making making it roomier or adding rooms basically adding on to the to the myth or continuing to live it out um it's really helpful to also understand jung in his time you know jung is jung is basically a contemporary of cs lewis a little bit later than rudolph steiner if you if you begin to understand what's happening religiously in europe at that time there's a lot going on and so on one hand you have the height of really the height the height of sam harris's tribe was you know was basically came just before world war one you know sam really hasn't gotten the memo yet but that's really the height of sam harris's tribe was was after world war one or right before world war one you had you know so a number of other people in this conversation are often you know owen barfield who was a very good friend of cs lewis who was a theosophist and you'll find theosophy in continued to be promoted in walldorf schools and so so there's another element and and that isn't that is by no means disconnected from jung even though i don't hear theosophists and jung talking a lot with each other they're very much coming out of the same yeah yep um trying to figure something out after the it's just the material materialistic approach seemed to break everyone down somehow or it's the dissonance there was a cognitive dissonance there was something that had to be solved or figured out at that time that's right yeah there's a lot going on at that time yeah and and so so then when you say let's say compare peterson and young well look peterson peterson lives as a puritan and talks like a youngian interesting lives in a lives as a puritan how many wives has jordan peterson had just the one is just the one and they met very young yeah he's very he's a very traditional kind of guy that's right with which is which is interesting because he's also that high openness and he says he's i mean we've just had this yeah he's i mean compare that to young's private life right where she was supposed to have had affairs all the time i think and um it seems like it was with everyone that he worked with who did it like all these women he was working with they were all mistresses is what i i haven't looked into it too much because i don't want to like ruin i don't need to know you know um too much about it but yeah he was he he had um kind of a sketchy life and he did a lot of things that weren't included in that um biography autobiography he was working for the american government looking at nazis and i mean he was he was up to all kinds of stuff it's more of a straight and narrow path i suppose yeah and so and so the as as christian ministers know because the church the church makes demands on its clergy's private lives as the roman catholic church is you know continuing to try to work through these these aspects of life if you take just someone's teaching okay well that's that's a piece of them but actually how they're living their life the hypocrisy is involved so peterson peterson is peterson is peterson he's just as young as he was he was born to a certain family was raised in a certain time he's he's the inputs of his time and his age have all been part of what goes not only into his personal life but into his message and so i think all of these all of these kinds of things are all these kinds of things are fair game part you know part of the big you know part of the big divide that's that's continuing to been worked through and this is part of jew versus the rest of the world part of you know abrahamic religions now versus the rest of the world is the idea of whether or not the the christian god is at the top of a hierarchy or one among many whether the christian story is at the top of a hierarchy or one among many and so those issues and and and so in the mid 20th century in the you know as as christendom really reached its height at the you know towards the end of the modern period many such as the theosophists and yung and the spiritualists were were arguing that oh christianity is one among many you know you have the colonial the colonial presence in india which again opened up the eastern world so then so i mean there's there's whole lots of things going on so when you deal when you live in a place like grand rapids where you've got a considerable number of people for whom the uh the privilege of the christian story over other spiritual stories is a very live thing well there's going to be some tensions yeah yeah definitely um and that built into your story too definitely yeah and i was kind of yeah there was that time i was like exploring the other the other options um for religious ways of doing things but um ultimately it was kind of that i was i realized that this is what my family was christian everyone before them was christian i live in a christian area i like it's it's our whole culture is built around this thing and then they kind of just toss it aside and say well i'm going to be a buddhist now like well i still have all the same problems and all the same uh moral issues that are trying to be worked out and the underlying structure you can't just get rid of it i mean because it's part of is it it's part of the elephant i guess that's right and you have to just deal with the elephant that you have instead of making up a new one which is what a lot of people want to do um i had a i had a i had a professor in school that um was teaching a buddhism class and he had dropped out of seminary he had gone to some school here and then dropped out because he couldn't it just it wasn't making sense to him anymore he was fundamentalist before that and listening to him talk about buddhism really made me realize i'm like oh this this isn't um he was translating all of his old christian problems onto buddhism and just kind of like venting that out and and it was it was just so obvious i'm like oh you're you have the same problems you're just um transferring it to a to a more mystical um new thing and that kind of just like well no we need to i need to stick within the framework that is built into me um already and that makes sense i mean it makes sense to me as a structure um as a philosophy so like that's why i christian over other things for me all right and with peterson this has been a big piece of this too because if you watch him for example with rebel wisdom everyone keeps wondering well why jordan do you keep talking christianity why not more other things and he does that a little bit but you at some point you do have to face the the demands of hierarchy that if you start lining you say so let's let's practice egalitarianism in our spiritual life and we're going to say well all gods are the same well at some point you that works if you have a very low resolution view of them but you start digging into them and you realize oh they're making different demands they're making different claims these these differences actually have structure and they matter and i mean that's it's the constant it's the constant dynamic between between the horizontal or dyslexia between the the horizontal and the vertical where oh they're all the same yeah but this is different so so better worse and boom pretty soon you got your hierarchy stacking up so and ultimately you have to pick a thing with which you will function and which has meaning which i don't think is arbitrary so you can't just make one up i remember having a talk with someone where i was very i was like i don't know what to do i've had all these experiences and now i don't know how to how to integrate it and process it and they're like well why don't you just kind of make up make up a new thing that works for you and i was like that's that's exactly it i can't i can't just make one up it had it has to be real um which is kind of when i was tripping and i was like this is this is real somehow it it really kicked in i was like no this is not um it's not just you know fun stories or you know things like that it's like this is part of reality this is built right into it so yeah and and you have to i mean this is part of peterson's point too living in this world demands you make decisions right those decisions whether implicitly or explicitly are all built on these kinds of commitments that you have and not only commitments that you've made but also commitments that have been made for you by previous generations and it's built into the architecture it's built into the layout of the city it's built into the economy it's even built into your genetics yeah and so with all of that you have to make decisions it's amazing we can make any decisions at all and probably the only way we make them is because we're mindless of them but they're there they're there yeah yep so um yeah it is it so yeah then you have to wade through the chaos and finally say like this is this is something solid um i was just listening to jonathan pedro on rebel wisdom and they were having the same discussion where i think is david was like but why do we have to go back to christianity like he wants to you know kind of invent like a new thing it's like oh but but um what about that's your roots that's where you come from that's where we are i mean not just you but you're the whole culture i mean you read the classics it's all influenced by the bi i mean you just can't get away from it no um so um and christianity and so here's the here's the revenge of the pagan christianity has its own roots and and to not fully understand those roots and so you know part of what what has happened in the last two centuries is that archaeologists biblical scholarship discovery of ancient texts reveals the complex world out of which you know the bible arises so and jordan peterson goes into the complex biological roots perhaps or or evolutionary roots of the bible so yeah and and usually what happens is these things are trotted out and used for typical thing of historicism trotted out and used for you know weaponized for whatever battle we want to fight against whatever current enemy we have but those the the more you know about the past the harder it is to make those you know make those simplistic weapons so yeah just a couple of minutes so if there's i wish we had more time because this has been great um it went pretty quick actually it went very quick yeah so any last things you want to get in there and i will what i'll do is i'll send this to you and you and your husband can review it and decide no do i want to share this or not because i understand mistakes involved in that so um not anything that i can think of off the off of that to throw in there that probably wouldn't go on for another 20 minutes or so so um yeah i guess maybe i'll send you a like a link to to see like my artwork or something like that might be interesting for people who are interested in that sort of thing um and uh yeah thanks for making the time for me i was really excited really excited to talk to you it's weird that you're talking back like i listen to you almost every day but to talk to you is pretty pretty well i'm i'm again i'm people say well i wish you had 100,000 subscribers i really wish i don't because i can do this and this is delightful so yeah this is an interesting thing you've got going on so so i will i will i will say goodbye to you and i'll say hello to the next person yep all right sounds good nice to meet you that was nice to meet you too bye bye