https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CdstezOjspA

 So this is okay and job and I talked before so go ahead job Yeah, so poor you were saying about all the atheists you keep in the church dungeon What I like is that Jordan Peterson was living in his son's basement and I just imagined his son having to rescue him from the Underground that's what I that's what I've been thinking about since the January Q&A. Oh I didn't see that one. That's the first time I hear it, but that's that's interesting Yeah, well, well Peterson had a bunch of interviews and he's in this weird place. It's like it's not a hotel room It's not his office Where is he and then the Q&A he mentioned that he's having some remodeling done at his home so he's in his he's in his son's garage and The cat was rolling something upstairs on the floor and it was bothering him And so I thought yeah, he's his son has to rescue him from the underground. I just thought that right. Yeah, that was too much fun So we so job we talked before and but what do you want to talk about today? now first off, I'm going to ask a question and I'm doing that for the good of other people who watch these videos. I And other people need to know what the baptism book is about and we can't see it anymore So this is green baptism book you have Yeah, it's in your bookcase to the right of you. It's behind that white book It says baptism there we go see I've been wondering about that forever Baptism in the New Testament It's by an author Gr Beasley Murray. He was a New Testament scholar He was a Baptist and so he didn't believe in infant baptism But he he has this is a really nice study of baptism in the New Testament and goes through Basically the background of baptism what it's about I read this I don't know maybe 10 15 years ago antecedents of Christian baptism Foundations of Christian baptism emergence of Christian baptism the acts of the Apostles development of Christian baptism and the apostolic witness It's just all New Testament theology stuff Sounds like a lot more to baptism than I knew about. Yeah, but now I have now I have closure now I've always we can like all that book and then you had put a book in front of it like No, I need some a slob. My office is not in order now. This is a book of I want to talk to I I recorded a conversation with an Orthodox with an Orthodox priest who actually Was was in a CRC for a while with this man Len van der Zee who's a friend of mine So I'm gonna do a conversation with Len because he wrote this this book which really kind of Opened my eyes to sacramentalism Recovering the sacraments for evangelical worship Christ Christ baptism in the Lord's Supper and And so when Len was out here in Sacramento, he was Covering for another pastor friend of mine in one of our church plants But he's he's a really he's a really good guy and he wrote this book So that's so I I mentioned this book and I just threw it up here. So that's why I covered the baptism book. So It would be an interesting sub-series like Paul's bookshelf and then you discuss what you learned from that book It's you have loads of here and I bet they're like this Ecclesiastes and Ephesians and Well, this is a Don't want to go I know I all these videos. Oh, I can't wait. So so so this is a fun one Heaven is a place on earth. This is by someone who's in Grand Rapids, I think Why everything you do matters to God this is more of a see books have all these different levels baptism That's an academic book. This is much more of a Anybody can read this book. They call that middle brow GK Beal is a very interesting guy. He's he's he's conservative reformed and he does a lot of biblical Theology we become what we worship great title and and goes through I've got a number of books by GK Beal. I really like him as a scholar. I'm telling you man You got a series on your hands. Oh We got words at fudge Paul's books So, yeah, I'm just selfish and I like I like what you're doing It was actually at some point. So since we first started It was actually at some point so since we first talked it became such a thing that when I would play one of your videos that Ag Mallory would say oh, yeah, we haven't heard Paul in a while like you became such a voice in our house and we both watched our your videos and your sermons and Yeah, and then we discussed the video. It's like, oh, yeah We should discuss this with with Paul and then we forget because there's all this stuff we want to discuss So I figure I would call this video So I figure I would call this video Reese's Pieces to Jesus And and because Mallory said that I should watch ET and I don't want to watch ET. I don't think it's a very interesting movie But apparently there's Reese's Pieces and they're being lured to get ET somewhere fine But I would watch his videos and then it Just doesn't make sense to me and I try to discuss with Mallory and Paul saying these things and then like okay morality, uh-huh and and and this philosophy, uh-huh Yeah, and then this and this and suddenly Jesus and glory like whoa. Whoa. Whoa, you can't just suddenly throw Jesus up here Like right I can't get there and then you know, Esther O'Reilly is of course like I front low Jesus wherever Like okay, that's kind of different I'll stay right here and I like some DM messages and She's really she doesn't bullshit no, she doesn't she won't say the word either And I oh right. I mean I follow her on Twitter and it's also because on a lot of things I don't agree with her, but I like seeing them. Okay, why don't I agree? Maybe she has a point It's kind of rule nine applied, you know, like maybe she doesn't know something maybe I haven't thought about this well enough So, yeah Esther is Esther is super smart. See so I know a little bit, you know Esther is super smart She's very evangelical She's quite young too. So she you know, she's still very much in progress But she's she's working up her hierarchy and she's a good writer and she's yeah He's she's a polymath in a lot of ways. She's very interesting person So but but but she but she strikes some people I mean Julian's had a lot of interesting, you know back and forth with her too and it's it's it's fun. It's fun Yeah, and she'll say, you know evolution You know my my 30 year old atheism is like there is no designer at work look at this, you know clearly There's like wait a second. I'm just as convinced of fine. I like kind of being in this space of not knowing That's why I mean you told me to read C.S. Lewis see C.S. Lewis pisses me off and I'm gonna really oh Yeah, because I want to hear about this. Oh, right. So I started out with Surprised by joy. Yeah, I Listen to the entire I need to I'm sorry pastor. I listen to your entire damn thing and And suddenly it's like oh and then I realized Jesus was Lord You can't just suddenly How did you get there and he doesn't explain he binds about this childhood in this terrible baggy trousers Boarding school and then suddenly Jesus because of a conversation with Tolkien like how does that work? You need to explain that Maybe you you explain it to me a Christianity so I start listening him to me Christianity and he starts out with the moral law and You and then what he does a lot is you'll say something and then I'll go in my head Aha, but you didn't think what X and Y and then you continue those of you We thought I forget about X and Y actually it's this damn it Lewis stop laying these traps So ah Man, yeah, that's that's mere Christianity is interesting because he gets these ideas like I hadn't considered this Like it doesn't convince me but it allows me to think about it in different contexts so then for me a Christianity I went to What's the one about men without chests abolition of man very good chapter 3 was like Chapter 3 was interesting because I'm into robotics and AI and it's just like yeah. Yeah, when do we oh man What was another book? The one about hell oh The great great divorce that one was and Mary and I we just listen we go to sign language class and we drive there and then we listen to Lewis and we discuss it and And we're both going like Lewis has something about and we're going through miracles and Lewis will have said something like Obviously, you know something something about reason and then we both go and then he goes on to well, actually It's logically defensible like this Stop doing that Lewis you're poking at my axioms No, I mean I like kind of being sarcastic about this stuff but the guy is such a way with words It's I don't agree with him, but he's an amazing writer. Yeah Yeah, and it is a brilliant guy so I'm not we're not done with miracles yet, but but the great divorce was just really interesting from my Storytelling point of view and of course your recent video where you Expanded on some of the doodles the Lewis doodles was very interesting in that regard. Oh, yeah I forgot that I went through that book and It's a crazy thing about Lewis is that you can With some people and some authors if you reread them there's no point to it you read them once and you're done With Lewis you can keep rereading him because you keep learning more every time you go through it I've probably read been I've probably gone through miracles five or six times and every time I go through it it's like another layer comes off and Not a lot of authors are like that but Lewis is Tolkien's like that too every time I go through the Lord of the Rings Well, well, let me let me let me rephrase that Fiction can be more like that often than than just prose nonfiction Essays, which is what Lewis does because an essay is usually just kind of it's out here in front and fiction Because it's a story and because it's a representation always has layers and because when we look at that representation We're bringing things to that representation too There's a very dynamic interplay between us and fiction that there isn't necessarily between us and prose but Lewis's prose and essays They keep going deeper. He's These he's a really he's a really complex guy It's I he's clearly thought to a depth about this that I Don't know man, my 13 year old atheism is getting walloped but it's just yeah That's what that's how he grew up walloping his 13 year old atheist. That's what you're reading And then probably look at a biography of Lewis's Because the biographies open up a lot more and and my favorite biography of Lewis is is Alan Jacobs the Narnian It's not the most recent but that's my favorite biography of Lewis because he And there's an abridged audiobook of that, but my favorite biography of Lewis is the Narnian because he goes into He goes into Mento so Mento was Lewis's So Lewis went to World War one Lewis's childhood was a disaster because his mother died and his father was cold and didn't know how to raise him Incentive TV's horrible boarding schools and you get that and surprised by joy Well, you don't get in surprised by joy is the adult Lewis because Lewis doesn't talk about that because Lewis doesn't want to talk about that so so basically Lewis goes to World War one and Lewis was never an athlete. He was not a jock at all He didn't he was missing a joint in his thumb, which is just really weird but he goes into World War one and he makes a pact with one of his buddies that if If I die you take it you take care of my family and if you die I take care of your family so he goes into World War one and his buddy dies and Lewis gets injured and then he basically waits out the rest of the war in a hospital. So the war doesn't kill him but then this this guy had a divorced mother and a sister and Lewis now Lewis doesn't talk about this, but I think the evidence is plainly clear Lewis isn't a Christian at this time. He basically starts a He basically starts a sexual affair with the guy's mother that goes on for a long time and so he and the guy's mother basically lived together and and Lewis was also in just like some it's there's some evidence Lewis was into like kinky sex and So sadomasochism and this kind of stuff. I know I know I know Who'd have thought St. Louis, but so read the Narnian so so there's all these layers of you know and But then Lewis but at the set so he's living a double life on one hand he's living with this woman on the other hand, he's in Oxford Don and He's trying to make his way as a career he's trying to be a poet but he's not a very good poet and and that isn't really going and then he and Then he's you know, he strikes up this relationship with Tolkien and Dyson and Barfield and Eventually Charles Williams. I mean all these people be in Oxford and he becomes a Christian Well, what's he gonna do with this relationship with this woman now this woman's old enough to be his mother So there's some psychological things in there another really good book if I have it here a Really good book by a Harvard professor that compares Lewis and Freud if you want I can look up the title for that Lewis and Freud that's a that's a really interesting book. So a Harvard a Harvard psychology professor Basically held a course where he can play it. He compared CS Lewis with Sigmund Freud Let me pull up the That's Here it is I'll share the screen so you can see it. I'll pull up the Hope the cover. Okay, it's Very sure screen Okay, the question the question of God by Armand Nikolai How about a title huh Yeah CS Lewis Lewis and Sigmund Freud debate God loves sex and the meaning of life Toronto Press So he was this guy taught at this guy taught at Harvard and he did a whole course which became a very popular course in Comparing Freud and Lewis and it's a really interesting comparison So so basically Lewis. So now Lewis has a relationship with this woman. That's his mother's age and it's been a sexual relationship and They've kind of raised this guy's younger sister. And so she's kind of like a daughter to Lewis and Now Lewis becomes a Christian. Well, what should he do? Well, he continued he took care of this woman until she died and Lewis's brother was furious at him for this Lewis's colleagues couldn't figure out what the heck it is because this woman became old and And she had dementia and she was fast and and so Lewis would have to clean up after her little dogs that kept That kept shitting in the houses and the house and I mean it was just this disaster And and you get the you get the impression that Lewis is living in hell Taking care of this woman and everyone's like why are you taking care of this woman? Well on one hand he could cut he had a cover story that well this was He had a promise. So okay, but really just send her some money But then he but no he takes care of her and you know Lewis has some of his own twistedness, too another recent book that I read Lewis's The one the woman who would become Lewis's wife Joy David, man. I talked about that in some videos a little bit I'll pull the I'll pull the cover of see if they could have the cover of that. Yeah, so I'll share the screen hang on Oops, no this one Joy Joy poet seeker the woman who captivated CS Lewis I really like this biography because it wasn't hagiography a lot of times with Lewis People so many people have become Christians because of Lewis once they become Christians through him They honor him as a saint and then they want to treat his wife as a saint This woman was no saint this this was a fascinating book. This woman was a Marxist. She was an atheist She even after her conversion she got into Scientology she was petty. She was brilliant She I mean, this is a fascinating biography and you really get a much a very interesting picture of Lewis from Through this book because this woman herself had a very interesting life. She was a mess but very interesting life and she basically Stalked CS Lewis and captured him. It's like the question. What if a stalker wins? That's the story I mean, it's just it's just crazy this stuff. So There's so much out there makes you want to read it. Yeah. Yeah, that's it's it's wild stuff I mean life true life is so much more crazy Than we think and the thing is what we do to each other is we all mask the craziness We mask the sins see that's that's part of the nice thing about talking to people who aren't Christian because non-christians Won't mask their their sin as much Well now that society is getting all moral They're playing other games but that they won't mask the sins that within a Christian community would would have you lose status Okay, but but real life is really crazy and when people actually let you in to see what this is what being a pastor is like because People will come and tell pastors what they won't tell their wives because they can't and and That's you need people to you know, that's why we have therapists therapists are basically in some ways modern versions of pastors I Guess but they have a different air Yeah Their work if they're giving you Freud or something else you go to a pastor it's trying to give you God But God is a lot weirder See that's something yeah, I mean God is a lot weird to tell me about it No, so I Can't get a word in without all your laughter No, no, it's fine this it's I'll laugh silently. I'm just joking. It's a laugh on the inside laughing is healthy to say I I've been basically since all the Harris and your videos and Peterson stuff have just kind of been trying to find morality bedrock Now height has interesting ideas about it. It turns out David you meant interesting ideas about it Of course the Greeks had and everything but I was running at some point I went for a run and I was kind of thinking about this and like okay So why are you running kind of let's do this sucker to soak it like Socrates. Why am I running? Well, I need to be in shape Okay, so why do I need to be in shape? Why do anything? You know, if if nothing matters, why do anything? Yeah, I'm out for a run isn't leaving nice weather. So I'm running why I need to be in shape. Why well because what if there's a fire? Okay, what if there's a fire? Well, I'm I might need to help people. Well, why do you need to help people? Oh because you're five. Okay. Why are you a firefighter? Well because someone needs to be and I I wanted to do something for the village that I went into so okay So you wanted to do something for the village why I don't know. I wanted to get to meet people Why okay, so you get into this this whole of why do anything? Well, because I think being responsible in cases a fire is a good thing. Okay, so this is idea of good now We're getting somewhere. So you're running because in the end it's all to get to some high thing Show which of you feel they were this sort of stuff So and okay, so so I Work in digital accessibility, which means that I try to make sure that websites and tools are Available for people with disabilities. Well, why? Well, I might have a disability someday. That's not the same thing I've seen people use shitty apps, you know and and I've seen how frustrating it is And I see how I know how easy it is to make stuff accessible if you know how to do it Okay, but I don't know I could I could do anything wide that okay Because it's a good thing to make something something will work for something else Cool so, okay. I have some all that tells me is that I have some sort of source of Conscience or morality wherever that is. Where does that come from? I don't know Lewis is interesting ideas about where reason comes from at this point. I don't know anything I've only come to the conclusion that I don't know anything, which is a good start But there's too much out there. I I don't have ever More I don't have a very high education. I Mean I do it I didn't study philosophy or anything like that So I found I was trying to find out what what humanism had to say about morality and I found this interesting thing I don't read it where somebody basically asked that sort of question. I'll send you the link later It says what is the foundation for morals and atheism because I was trying to figure that out. Thank you. Clearly. I'm an atheist Oh, so where do my morals come from? And what is Peterson's position refuting it And they basically go in okay How do we get to two for two morals here and somebody says careful there and they deleted their account because sucks I don't know who wrote it careful there if you abandon immature religion in favor of atheism And then you start looking for a foundation of morality. You might wind up in mature religion like boom That's what this is And They say I mean they say a lot of stuff But they say all sisters of morality have something in it for you as a child in traditional religion You learn it if you're good you go to heaven and if you're bad to go to hell Good and bad can be defined differently depending on the religion from obeying all the rules to accepting Jesus And from behaving badly to lacking faith in Jesus, but in every case there's a way you are to behave the way you are not to behave and Then they go into well, you know at some point your 13 year old atheism is just gonna be not enough. You're gonna If you want to properly investigate why you hold certain ideas Then that's not gonna be enough because it doesn't say anything about that. It only says well There's likely not a God. It doesn't say anything else. So It's a whole thing. I'll send you the link. You'll like reading it and I'm reading that like oh no This is just only getting worse right, but I'm just gonna watch Hitchens and And And I so I did find Bart Ehrman who I didn't know and his ideas are interesting because he basically says So Jesus existed pretty obviously that he existed but he was an apocalyptic prophet get nailed to a cross for being a seditionist and Well, they made something up because clearly I mean it must have been part of the plan if he got crucified and you know My rational part of the mind goes. Yep, that makes sense. Yep, and then anti-right goes They wouldn't make that up. That wasn't part of that culture fuck I Don't see I'm still in the I don't know anything at this point. It could be God could exist whatever but the whole Jesus thing. I can't sorry. I mean I Can't get there man. It's just it's too far away. It's just I can I can approach it I can approach it psychologically like Jesus and the city of God climb the hill Carry responsibility carry that cross bucko and do the thing Fight the fire because somebody needs to and those people aren't gonna do it, but you can do it But but the fact that like Jesus was the son of God and he died for my sins or whatever that means that just that's Too much because that's original sin and that conflicts way too much with some core ideas. I hold about punishing people eternally for finite sin and all that sort of human morality and God goes uh-huh, and I know he does but So, I don't know. It's Herman makes good points But then I say hey Esther. What do you think of Herman? It's just like like, okay So maybe Irman's wrong and then anti-rights just making really good points about the resurrection like well Wrong about any of this and my mind is like since when are we doubting that any of this was not just made up like I'm not Okay. So here's a note. I made in my notes to discuss it Paul Paul none of this was supposed to happen You see I was supposed I was supposed to be an atheist nihilist and Try to live a life and eventually die without suffering or at least as little suffering as I could manage And then why would I be a firefighter because this it's pretty risky but fine whatever I Didn't expect to really get past 30 anyway, because what's the point of anything? And now it's just like well, I can do anything and there's all these books I can read and there's no negative voice in my head for like almost three quarters of a year now and I can just I Can just think without being distracted by Intrusive thoughts and like well wait, this life is really nice. I'd like way more of this wait, can I keep this for like another 40 years, please because this is just amazing and Yeah, I don't know man. It's just all I get is more questions and And and I've been going to church for maybe since November and So so there's interesting because I go to church and first you kind of hope that nobody recognizes you feels like a fucking fraud man I'm sorry for all the swearing there needs to be a warning on this video because I'm just speaking from the heart at this point So first time we go to church and like alright this seems okay, nobody's looking at me funny I'm not combusting I'm good and they go to second week and like Well Week two I'm still not being suspected. All right, but then people start noticing you like hey, we've seen you you're around Do you like the church? Like well, I don't know and I don't know we have a really good new pastor and He he gives really good sermons kind of like kind of your style not as not as not as Not as not as not as Emotive because that's the Dutch don't do that But it's there's jokes and their psycho psychology and a bit of poking and that's good Look I Eventually asked myself this question. I said job. You're a fucking hypocrite Would you go to a Buddhist Zen temple if there was one down the street? Oh, yeah, that's cool Okay, would you go to some other like self-improvement group we could have discussed this about philosophy Yeah, would you go to Jordan piece a meetup group? Sure I would So yeah, but they want to give me bread and wine in there and it's weird and that's childhood and I Wouldn't do that after I was 18 because I didn't have to I mean that's that's I'm assuming it's connected somehow, you know and and the people have been nothing but nice and And oh, you know, we like that you're here and you know, it's the congregation is fairly old so they like to see a young person but I Don't know and people have been asking my wife and I like, you know, would you like to come have dinner with us? No strings attached. No pressure which active come members of the church. No pressure They're being very nice about it. And to me it's like I was talking to everybody This is this is becoming really dangerous what if what if there's no way back, you know Like what if I can't escape this anymore? What if I'm being pulled too far in like I can still see my nice safe Atheism over there. That's really nice like that's that's my truths and I know how the world works and And then now that I I have you know, no longer that nihilistic outlook Maybe I can combine them to some form of nice pink rescue monism But this is also really nice And then buddy from the fire department says why don't you come to to Bible Club? Bible Club. Yeah. Yeah, we discussed parts of the Bible in depth. Oh, that sounds interesting so then we're talking about the the the sermon on the mound and and Then people like well these atheists they don't believe in nothing and I was like, excuse me. That's not true. And They're like this Nate just in the room. Well sort of I'm not know I don't know it's So I Don't know Paul. It's just been weird. It's really weird. That's that's it's been Reese's Pieces and it's just Reese's Pieces to weirdness more So I was gonna ask you and I'm gonna be rude about it. I'm just gonna be really direct about it Would be Dutch if you wouldn't What's got to you? Or who or how does that work? You want me to put this into words That's How So and in one of that see I've had a whole bunch of conversations this week that I'm going to post but I try not to post more than once a day so they're gonna trickle out and And Well See and it's it's so hard to talk about because well God is because you can say well God is everything But that's not quite right because he isn't everything because there's a lot of stuff that isn't God because it isn't good but he's he's the sum of all joys he's the he's And this is what so say it's how I'm gonna I'm hoping to talk to James Lindsay He was one of the the hoax paper writers because in his talk with with Peterson You know He noted that he got into this because he was working because he wanted he was working on the question he lives in the Bible Belt in the United States and he was working on the question of of What when people say God what do they mean and I love that question? because It's a great question So when Peter so I was also listening and I was thinking about I haven't had time to make videos this week so I've just been posting conversations because I have those in the can and and So the so sitch and and Adam from think club from the think club channel, they did a they did a a livestream talking about Owen Benjamin and And Shoot where's I going with this so so So they're told so Owen Benjamin is just freaking out and he's he's just hates Jordan Peterson now because he used to love him he's just spurned and and so Owen Benjamin's just all upset that Jordan Peterson won't say I believe God exists and He's all upset by that, but I understand exactly why Peterson gives the answer. He's giving And when I say I understand why it's not that I can will necessarily be able to articulate that to everyone's satisfaction but I know how Peterson feels and why he says it because if you if you see enough if you have a deep enough understanding of I'm gonna say of who God is more than what God is because in a sense Between human beings when we say what God is instead of who God is we actually demote God But if you have a sense of who God is Believe is too thin a word. Of course, I believe But it's more that I mean because you're talking a little bit of go and you know, you can't get to Jesus Well, here's the crazy thing You don't you don't get to go to Jesus. He comes to you This is CS Lewis. This is CS Lewis on pantheism pantheism the problem with pantheism is God is out there and You know you you're you've been going down you've been going down though You've been into the looking glass and you've been going down the rabbit hole and you think well I could stop this anytime I want but the truth is you can't you came here honestly of your own volition Sorta, but I'm starting to realize that it's frightening man. Yeah, it should be frightening Yeah, this wasn't supposed to happen Paul. No You thought right? And so that that mature that that immature Christian to atheism to mature religion, you know, yeah, there's really something to that because This was the worst thing and this was worker a Coworker mine is Eastern Orthodox or Ukrainian Orthodox lots of like ritual in there. It's amazing like Protestant seems boring No, we were having a discussion and I said well You know, we talked about what do you believe or do I believe and said well, maybe maybe I'm a Christian agnostic Does that work like because I seem to behave from a certain way and maybe I don't know I can prove anything at this point So who knows so you're saying God to you is ineffable Ineffable is too distant I Can't take you large Too large. Yes when you walk into have you been to that you haven't been the Grand Canyon in the United States. Have you? No, no, that's no no, it's too high up I need to be below she level man, I can't breathe up there Well Canyon or Yosemite or one of these places like this it's you can't get your mind around it because it's too large and You realize house you can have the same effect by going away from city lights and looking up into the sky at the stars And you realize how tiny you are and and this David in the Psalms Articulates this he says, you know, he says to God what is what is man? What what are human beings that you should think about us because when we get out there in nature even we begin to realize Oh, man, we're small and Life is strange and we we this when you're going along thinking you're in control. You're just naive Hmm Man it's just I Was telling Mallory like this this none of this is like I need to get back there, you know because this is going way too fast and and She say well, you where do you want to go back and I was think to myself Yeah, where do I want to go? we want to go back to my nihilism and my my my shitty thoughts all day long and just Hoping that that you know, I wouldn't suffer too much until I died. Oh, I want to go back there Do I know I know you don't you want to be perfectly here and and it's good and you're you're you're thinking through things and that's fine And it's it's been better than it ever was and it's been so for almost a year and it's just been like is that bad No, it's not. What are you afraid of? I don't know. It's a pride thing It's like you're not supposed to be that way. You're supposed to be different Okay Fine. Well, I've lost already I remember I remember when I I remember when I fell in love with my my wife and you know, it was You know, I you know, you're trying to manage that. So I remember at one point just you know, I Just I just said to her. I mean, what do we have and what do you want? I mean it was like that point in it's a wonderful life when when when George Bailey realizes that he's you know He wants to go. He's got a plan. He's gonna go out in life. He's gonna travel He's gonna do all this stuff, but there's the savings and loan and there's this this hometown girl and and and you know and it's like You yeah, you're not you don't you don't Organize life in a sense Western civilization has been set up to maintain the illusion That you can control your life and deliver the outcomes you want it's an illusion and It's an illusion that's dispelled by cancer by mental illness by recessions by car accidents by death by birth by falling in love by all kinds of things So no, you're just you're just seeing more clearly That that's a very good. I think yeah, that seems a very good description. It's like, okay, there's all this stuff here Yeah, and I never saw that all that stuff was there and there's all these books I'm reading and I'm going through one of those courses on audible You're doing a one about philosophy and religion in the West and I'm going through one about values through history and it takes you and Aristotle and and Even quote C. S Lewis in the first chapter like why is Lewis and my philosophy course fine. I get it Get out Clive No more of you Yeah, can't I do get stay up? Yeah. No, uh Yeah, so the list of stuff to discuss with Paul keeps changing Finds from a bit of God another great C. S Lewis quote if you want to stay an atheist You'd better be real careful about what you read. Hey, that's his quote because he lived it. He read everything He was voracious. He read Everything from the ancient world nearly everything from the ancient classical period in its original language and he remembered it all He used to play a game with the people kids with you know, so kids students would come to his office He was a tutor and you know He'd play games with them and he'd he'd turn his back and they'd pull a book off his shelf and they'd read Something to him and he would tell them what book what page? What's the context? What's the meaning? I can't do that It was that kind of mind And so he said if you want to stay in your nice little atheist world imagining that Yeah, but you better not do any reading just stick with and you'd better stick to a certain part of netflix Yeah, i'm my preacher uh advice the series ad kingdom and empire and it's what acts it was good Uh, seriously, I mean like a year ago I wouldn't even have like i'm not gonna watch it sort of a literature series, uh I don't know how long we have Another 15 minutes then I got someone I got I got this big a list. I still need to work through Well, we'll talk again Yeah Uh, there's a couple of things I wanted to read um I've i'm interested in in the idea of ethics and machine ethics and uh, how because ai is starting to uh Be more and more of a subject and i'm interested in assistive technology intelligent care robots So I bought this book. It's called robot ethics and it's a bunch of papers and essays on the subject And one of them is compassionate ai and selfless robots a buddhist approach Which It's really good. Um, but one of the chapters I found was Uh, it's all about all these types of beings 5.3 would it be ethical to create a suffering being? And one of the classical ethical questions that arise out of buddhist metaphysics is whether it is ethical to have children Since life is intrinsically unsatisfactory On the one hand like most religions buddhism does not argue for an obligation to have children and upholds the childless life Of the renunciate as the most praiseworthy Just as contemporary social sciences found that having children generally makes adults less happy Buddhism views the life of the householder But this goes on but then they say the creation of machine Minds puts humans in the ethical position of being the parents of machine children Metzinger has argued that it would be unethical to create an artificial mind until we are certain that we will create a being That is not permanently trapped in suffering ignorance or bliss or some other undesirable mental state In other words metzinger argues that it would be unethical to create self-aware beings who did not possess something similar To the human capacity for learning and growth and it goes on when i'm thinking about this like Uh-oh, I see where this is going This is creation and this is responsible creation and how do you create something that has free will and of course these aren't new questions When i'm reading about them in the in the Like we don't even know what consciousness is and we expect to create something like that Here's another book the machine question by david gunkle. It's a critical perspective first chapter like derrida and shizhek and like wait, wait a second but It's about what lots of high dagger what's being uh, should a machine have logos? Uh, what is personhood? uh animal rights singer comes back into it and i'm reading these books and it's just i've never thought about these things and Religion doesn't seem so stupid now, does it? That's that's a pops up in my head You thought you were so smart, didn't you? Like I didn't know it damn thing So, okay I've fallen down my mountain I know there's an abyss down there. There's a nice little path here. That seems safe I keep falling down the mountain if I keep climbing so I don't know And then climbing up the mountain and exposing yourself to new information That's sacrifice. That's risk. That's potential pain. That's rolling down. That's that's having your your existing thoughts reanalyzed I don't know. It's just It's fun, but it's crazy Oh and I went to see Jordan Peterson, oh that was all right there was in Amsterdam and there's only one picketer The weather was really bad I I want to shake the hand of that one picketer it's like You go, you know, you just nobody but you you were your side Nobody but you you were your side No, they handed out pre-printed flyers. So Dave Rubin was like look these dutch people. They are really organized Look at this nice 10-point flyer so They you know, they they put in effort they took responsibility. That's good And I gotta say the evening it was just lots of couples lots of young folk old folk right behind me were a famous comedian and A famous author like I got one of his books on my shelf whoa, these people are here and well, uh Rubin was just making jokes about Amsterdam and about not remembering anything from the times he was there before but Peterson was just he talked about meaning and raising a child and how to teach a child and and how to improve and that improvement is suffering and pain and and He was making lots of jokes, but he was also serious But at some point he was he was just he was having such a good mood I was just the whole Everyone was having fun. Everyone was enjoying it Nothing but smiles It was really nice to be there. I mean they You've heard it all before like yeah, it's just Peterson, but he was having he was having a really good time and it was nice to see because You know, you see the interview says to deal with and he's tired off and i'm glad he enjoyed Amsterdam Yeah There's a book I want to read sorry i'm just on a roll and I have 10 minutes going There's a book by ann forst Uh that you might want to read And it is god in the machine Uh God in the machine what robots teach us about humanity and god a provocative look at the theological implications of artificial intelligence and what it says about our humanity and All this stuff here And I go I don't have time to read high dagger So, yeah, uh Oh good jeez did you get Go ahead keep talking i'm just ordering it Uh Did you get a chance to uh, I don't have time to read it But it'll sit on my pile of unread books and at one point it'll be oh I gotta read something about this Oh, here it is. And then i'll read it. That's how it that's how it goes Oh, yeah, I have this nice big pile. It's the endless pile of stuff. I need to read. That's a good thing to have It's a sign of a busy mind, I guess um I don't know and an and an unorganized life, I suppose Yeah I didn't although the books you I mean the stuff you held up that was interesting too. That's the problem. Everything's just so So darn interesting. I know If if you're going to read any of these the machine question is absolutely amazing You would love that the sort of philosophy that's in there. It's about moral agency moral patience What makes something moral and and? Uh, it's just way too difficult and then you realize oh, yeah people have thought about this before They just wrote it down differently That doesn't mean that I can't just use humanism for that, but that doesn't seem to be the entire thing. I'm I don't know I haven't figured all this out yet. I there's too much information That's that's the thing. There's way too much information So, uh It was really weird to see gene style. It's like gene style on my polvendor clay. What's this? and It's kind of that site. I mean, you know, tell me more about that site It oh talk to me a little bit about it But I don't know if I can just go talk about hand style man there. They're kind of a kind of a shock blog provocative That was my sense But they also they have a history of poking poking at stuff that people don't like people to be poked Like you shouldn't bring that up so they they're kind of a trickster is as peterson would say they're a trickster blog because they They're a bit of the underbelly, but they also poke at stuff, but they eventually were bought by a kind of a right-wing media group conservative media group and They changed they they I don't think but I hardly visit the website but I think they are not really what they used to be they used to be like this small independent blog and we're gonna you know Overthrow the the order and create some chaos and reanalyze things so they need to be there But it was really interesting to see because I just look at this video like instead of a style flag But that was a really good video about about gladiator and archetypes and your analysis of it it's just this stuff goes everywhere and Yeah It's it's been it's been really it's been really weird Three quarters But like yeah, i'm still doing way better than than I ever did so That's good. That's good. I It's really nice not to be depressed. Yeah, you probably knew that but it really is nice. Yeah. Yeah, it's not nice to be depressed and it's it's it's I never realized how bad that was and how high I saw it as the normal until I realized that oh This is also a state of being that exists. Oh And now there's just all this stuff I get to do and um Okay, so if church helps with this why not go Going to a bible club helps with this. Why not do that if reading religious books helps Like what are you so afraid of it's not hurting you You That's the continuous thing what's the problem here it's all pride that's the That's the one thing it's like ah, you don't want to be seen as a christian Yeah, because i'm not a christian. No, you sure? Yeah, because I don't accept jesus I think pretty sure I don't I mean, I know we only have five seven minutes. Okay seven minutes. I'm gonna take this full seven minutes I mean, how do you how do you No, seriously paul. How do you get to jesus? How does that work? How do you integrate that because my my preacher said you're not gonna get there rationally stop trying Is you're gonna come in through another door? like Here, okay. So so read the gospels And look at how people get to jesus so nicodemus comes john chapter gospel of john chapter 3 nicodemus comes in the middle of the night And he's he hasn't bought this whole thing But so he comes at night so nobody else sees him And he's got questions for him There's there's the woman who's sick and she's got an issue of blood and she She works her way through the crowd just to grab his garment and jesus says who touched me And yeah crazy thing and it's this episode what do you mean who touched you we're all like this, you know, and and jesus like Ah, no Someone was someone wanted someone wanted to get a hand their hand on me So that's why it's a weird thing because to give the arminians their due the And I said before I mean jesus comes for you but in a sense In the gospels people sneak to grab on to him and actually I hope this afternoon to have some time to do a video because I want to talk a lot about the first chapter of mark the gospel of mark because It's this crazy scene and it's I can't get it all in a 20 minute sermon And I got to get it out of me. So i'll probably do a video this afternoon on it, but You you're you're doing the right thing keep doing what you're doing But it's but read the gospel Yeah, it's terrifying it should be but look at frodo, you know gandalf comes to frodo's house and And frodo's like or bilbo bilbo's like I don't want any stinking adventures and then the dwarves come it's like freaking dwarves and And then here we're gonna take you with us as a thief. I'm not a burglar He wakes up the next morning and he runs. Well, why does why does bilbo run to catch gandalf and the dwarves? But what do you want to do live in your stinking house your whole freaking life and Never fight trolls and be hungry and have adventures yeah, I don't know man, I mean it seems way too nice out here and Yeah Yeah, it's really weird to have all this now Yeah My brother asked me my older brother asked me So, yeah, he's starting to become a church person like damn it Like yeah, let's not talk about that He's like, oh what would duck could say? I don't know All right. All right. I get it Yeah All right. So the friend the we're in the last four minutes. Uh, so I gotta do my shout outs. Okay, do your shout outs Tell john van donk I said clear Tell freddy I said hi, I hope he's doing well Freddy's freddy's not been doing well. It's I I think he's gonna come out of it. But he's he's he's not been doing well, but I think he's gonna come out of it Yeah, well, it's tough But I hey john van donk He might come and visit you you never know because he gets to the netherlands fairly regularly and He'll look you up. That's that's the kind of guy john van donk is he'll come to your door. He's like gandalf Oh, I'd have a chat with him. I love his attitude. He's just yeah That 45 minute video you you guys had it was hilarious. I was laughing my ass off. It was really good uh Yeah, we only got through like half Of the list well, we'll talk again just sign up again and and we'll we'll talk again We shouldn't wait so long between talks, but you know, my sister died. Hopefully my other If my other sister heard me say that she'd be mortified. What do you mean? You hope I don't die It's like yeah, I was very rude of lori to die. So But I I got to massachusetts after my sister died. I looked at my other sister said what lori did to us was very rude Don't be rude. So Hopefully I won't have that again. But yeah. Yeah Well, if you had that power Yeah, I don't Thanks for a delightful conversation paul is like, oh how am I gonna talk for 19 minutes, but yeah, it's been fun uh Talk to you again soon. Good to see mallory and yeah, we'll talk we'll talk again soon. Keep doing what you're doing And we'll take care paul. Okay. Bye. Bye