https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=p7y6SR-_ibU

 Just let me know if something's weird to audio. I don't have headphones on or anything. So far so good. It usually works pretty well. We don't usually have trouble with it. Why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? So we've never met or spoken before to my knowledge. So yeah, no, we haven't. I first want to thank you because what you're doing is awesome. And especially like your church side of things, like your sermons are really good. You have yourself on media, you have on data too. He's kind of going through a tough spot and your sermons seem to like help re-energize and kind of re-digorate him. So good, good. But I'm a public school teacher and an artist. And I actually found out about you through Jonathan Paget. I think the first one to listen to was your robots, human skin robots. That was, I think, the first one. I made my dad listen to it and he's like, oh, listen to this guy. Yeah, so I just listened to your stuff and it's really good. So thanks for that. But I teach, I've been a Christian pretty much all my life. I can remember saying the Lord's Prayer at like five and just kind of staying steady with the faith. And but after starting to listen, somehow I got caught in this bubble and I didn't really, I live in Louisiana, so it's like the most Catholic, like of Catholics. And somehow I missed all of that. I had no idea how. And then one of my ex-girlfriends, she was Catholic, so I got really exposed to that and their traditions. But I kind of started realizing listening to you and Jonathan Paget and all these other people, I was like, oh, I'm what everybody else probably calls evangelical. Like, that's what I grew up with. Sure. But it's different. You've kind of talked about it a little bit, Al. It's not another umbrella of the big tradition. It's like all these kind of like isolated churches started off by pastors who wanted to do good work. So listening to you and Jonathan Paget, y'all are really like opening up this, all these church traditions that I grew up with. And so it's been extremely helpful. And I think every denomination that I've kind of been exposed to has something really important to offer. And then where I grew up, they gave a really big emphasis on the Bible and scripture. And so, and how paramount that is to our understanding, but leaves out stuff like, you know, because a lot of the features of like a Lashback to Catholicism, like it was too much tradition and I don't think people completely understood what they were doing and why they were doing it and never been taught to them, whether you care or then care deeper. And so this kind of threw it all away. And I'm like, now I'm kind of rediscovering all this. Like, what, where, where'd all this come from? So that's kind of like a little bit of what I want to talk to you about because you talked about St. Augustine and Jonathan Paget talks a lot about this early church fathers. So when I hear you in your talks with other people, you talk about all that. So that's super helpful for me. I'm like, oh, okay. It kind of points me in certain directions. But who do you, like as someone who doesn't know much about church tradition and wants to learn more, like where would you put directionally? Yes, my question. Hmm. Well, let me grab a book. A lot depends on what your main mode of learning is. Where's that book? I got two copies. You came into my office. I just give you one. Where is that? Where is that book? I've got two copies. It's a big, huge, fat book. What's that? I've got two copies. It's a big, huge, fat book. Why can't I see it? It's like church history in plain language or something like that. It should be in my church history section. I just redid my office and I can't find it. Now I'm discouraged. That was all proud of myself for cleaning my office. But a good, whoa, I'm tangled up in cords now. There we go. Well, YouTube isn't a bad place to start actually because I found that when I Google something on YouTube, search for something on YouTube, there are a fair number of decent videos out there that might give you a four-minute version, a 10-minute version, or an hour version of someone. Reeves is a, he teaches church history at Gordon Conwell in Massachusetts. He's got a very good channel on church history, so there's a resource. I think I've got it over here. The book is entitled something like Church History in Plain English. An anthology like that of church history, that would kind of give you an overview. And then from there, my advice would be find something that grabs your interest and then just follow it down a little. And to the degree that, I mean, our brains are quite interesting in that we're mysteries to ourselves. And more often than not, when something grabs your interest, there are other parts of your brain that have a reason for that. And so it's not a bad idea to follow it down. So a lot of, you know, I had, I went to Christian school growing up, so you get that level of church history. And then I was, I majored in American history in college, so not a lot of church history in there. But then when I went to seminary, we had more church history. And so I've always been interested in history. So then I'll read books that grab my interest. I'll listen to audiobooks. I like the Great Courses series that you can get on Audible. Those have nice little half-hour chunks. But even all of those things are overviews. And so just find things that grab your interest. And, you know, another piece of advice we actually got from my church history prof in seminary, you know, seminary, I left seminary in 1990, so that's a few years ago. But one of the things that he told us in terms of our ongoing education was, you know, pick one of four theologians. And he offered Augustine, it's a reformed seminary, so Augustine, Calvin, Luther, or C.S. Lewis. And spend a little time focusing in on one of them. And C.S. Lewis is fairly easy to do because his books are fairly small and he's the most contemporary of them. But just spend a season reading a whole bunch of C.S. Lewis. From there, you'll probably begin to pick up different ideas of, oh, that sounds interesting. I'll do that next. And I think the key thing actually is to find a learning method that works with the rest of your life. I've, you know, some people will say, oh, Powsder, you know so much stuff. Well, you know, I'm getting older and I've always been a lifelong learner. So I read books, I listen to audiobooks. And especially now with audiobooks and YouTube, you can, you know, I had five kids. I had to do a lot of driving kids to school, a lot of work in the kitchen, work on the yard. And I just always made sure I had something queued up in my phone so that if I'm doing something mindless, that would get me frustrated. If I had a good book to listen to while I did something mindless, it would, you know, I could get my jobs done and I could learn some things. Not everyone can do that. So when, for example, I'm going on a trip with my wife, often if I'm driving, I can listen to an audiobook, no problem. But I'm an auditory learner. And my wife, if I put an audiobook on while she's driving, it's just her brain isn't wired that way. So, yeah, she can't. It's tough. Like I'll be listening to a podcast or something and like when she walks in, I'm going to turn it off because it's too distracting for her. And then I have a two year old. So reading books is the window to read books is not, not one of the easiest that you can see a situation that sort out. So I do a little bit of reading at night, but it's super infrequent. And then with all the extra stuff I have to do with teaching, sometimes it's just not a... So what grade do you teach? What level do you teach? Well, I taught, this is my eighth year teaching. I taught fifth grade for seven years. And then this year I got, I was teaching reading and writing, a little bit of social studies at the end. And then now I'm teaching art, which is what I really wanted to do. Wow. Pre-K to fifth. So that's, it's a whole new thing. And it's a wide gamut of different types of children. But that's wonderful. I mean, that's, I don't know. I love kids. That's just, it's just wonderful. And I'm glad that, I'm glad that your school offers art for children because I kind of think it's... We're lucky. I'm in a really low, low income area. And so they, there's only two elementary art teachers in our district. So I'm one of two of them. And it's not offered at every level in elementary, but we have it in all the middle schools and the high schools here in Latvia. They're really big on the arts or try to emphasize it. So it's, that's a good thing for sure. So growing up in an evangelical church, did you ever hear, I mean, generally speaking, you'll hear about the, was it a big church or a small church? Because that makes a big difference too. It was a small church. We got up to, I think, two services at one point. It was in high school. So it was probably like early 2000s, late 90s. And then it just kind of started dropping off later once I went to college. I think a lot of people of my generation whose parents had grown up in the church and really helped build it up and had all that momentum and did all the good work and community. And as their kids got older, my generation, we kind of went off to college and stuff. And then there wasn't much of a renewal of the youth coming back up. So they've been staying pretty small. They're still around, which is good. The pastor I grew up with, he passed away. So that's kind of been, they're in a little bit of a transition right now. So that's kind of difficult. Not exactly. I go to Methodist church now, my wife and I. And so I've noticed that Catholicism and the Methodist church, and I'm sure you guys kind of have plans in place that help the chanceless session in a church. It's better. It's way better. It's one of the things that I've been most impressed with the other churches with long standing traditions because a lot of all the work and all that effort and the community just kind of just dissolves. And it's just kind of sad because a lot of people, a lot of good things happen. It's just one of the, that's the kind of poverty of that denomination. I feel like it's a good emphasis on the word and the power it holds and kind of putting the Bible up in the hierarchy of what you should be staying true to as much as you can. But with the fragmentation of it, it's pretty tough. Not all of them are like that, but it's just a huge variety. And it's like you said about the frames, things you don't know. I mean, and I had like a couple of moments growing up, I was really naive. I was a good kid. I didn't really do much bad, but then it was kind of just like a road thing. I just grown up that way and my parents were really good about race and stuff and all that kind of stuff. And so I had this moment when I was in youth group where I was like, oh, I saw how the people who were on leadership were, they were just teenagers. I mean, doing, you know, have different lives. They didn't have a two parent household. Parents had some divorce and stuff. And so they were, I had them like teenagers acting and stuff. And for me, it was shocking. I was like, oh, like these people are drinking and they're remarried with sex. And I was like, this is shocking to me. And I had to kind of re-evaluate like, oh, I shouldn't keep people holding my standards. And then like as I got older, I kind of realized I was in a pretty self-righteous place there. Not really knowing it's naive self-righteousness. I hadn't really been tempted with all this stuff and I was kind of like virtuous by circumstance, you know. I thought a lot about that because of Jordan Peterson. He was like, he was the shadow and he did his whole thing with like, you know, he thought through like, oh, I could have been a Nazi and I had never done that. So I listened to him and I was like, well, God, what would I be like if I was just like completely unhinged and I let myself go, show me what I could be because I feel like I'm not being responsible if I just go along thinking, oh, I'm a good person. It's like, he's right. Jordan Peterson is right about you being capable. And I had a dream like that night. I was like, oh, I was just fine. I don't even want to talk about it. It was so bad. It really scared me. I was like, a pastor used to say, don't ask him. Don't ask him for what you don't ask him for something because you'll get it. You might not want it. Be careful what you ask for. Yeah, but that made me think about you had the video posted today and you were talking about fake it till you make it. And that really kind of like, it was like a job to like that experience for me because I feel like I hear the it's kind of like when Nietzsche, Jordan Peterson, Nietzsche said it, I think, but it was like, you're not, are you really virtuous if you're just I am unlike Sam Harrison and it's like you're going to heaven. So you're going to do this stuff because of the reward at the end, but you're not really doing it for the right reasons. And I'm a teacher. So I'm like, oh, I deal with all these kids and 90% of them don't do the right thing for the right reasons. They do it because they're going to get a extra recess or candy, you know, or something. And a lot of Christians are that way too. And so I've done a lot of self-reflecting in that area about that. But it's not all bad. Like it's it's a justifiable argument, but it's not all bad because the reverse like they're just just doing whatever you want it to because you didn't, you know, and Or you dismiss any good thing because you know, they called sometimes the hermeneutics of suspicion. You dismiss any good thing because ah, you just have bad motives for it. Oh, okay. So let's dismiss every good thing. Well, where does that leave you? So no, you're exactly right. Yeah, that's really difficult. I've been thinking about that too. It was like, oh, virtuous of circumstance kind of situation. And then when I face like real temptation, like how to if I'm placed in a situation of real temptation, like, well, I will act, I will act this way. I don't know if I will. But it's it's so slippery thing. And I don't know. It's just I feel like more and more that kind of if you delve too deep into it, it's like almost it's too much like you can't. It's it's hard to like I feel like you just need to trap in a loop and then you dissolve and you can't really navigate anything and I don't like I'm going to go to church on Sundays. It's kind of like helpful because I feel like oh, it's like if you can't get in this questioning your motives too deeply, you lose your center and then you kind of get oriented back at least for me whenever I go to church. And it's helpful in that sense. And I don't know how people like Sam Harrison do it. I have a lot of respect for him because it's just like they they he says like they want to ground in something solid. I'm like man, at least I have the Bible. I don't know. He had a guy who on a while back and he said he couldn't look at himself in the mirror and I just like almost brought me to tears. It's just like this is such a hard place to be and I know that's a struggle for a lot of people and I'm grateful I grew up in the church when I did because I don't know. If I wasn't in that circumstance like what I would be at, I'd probably be where a lot of those guys are at. Well, it's it's you know a good culture. I've been working on this in my mind a lot lately, you know a good culture enables enables its enables the children to do what's wiser than their years can afford and the same with being raised in a good family and by good parents. It doesn't mean you'll stay on that road, but they set you on a good road and as you know from what we know about human development, you can pick up you can pick up stumbling, you know habits that will trip you up and bind you and this is the tragedy of victims of childhood abuse is that sometimes you know they things happen to them that builds things into them that inhibit their capacity to trust to avoid certain temptations. I mean we all we are all are tempted by some things, but it's if you're if you've been blessed by a good culture or a good home, it does enable you to do well and you know self-righteousness then again is a terrible trap because you because you were given these wonderful gifts might look down on another and say, I'm not tempted by these things. Oh, but you didn't earn any of that. That was just given to you by your culture and by your church and by your parents. Exactly and that's that's that's something I've really work on because it gets bad. I mean it's everything that you know that people leave the church hate and it's like it's like totally totally justifiable. I mean like it's just it and so I've worked really like I thought a lot about it and I kind of that was one of the big stepping stones of just like my continual journey and I try to be on guard about it because it's I was just fortunate like my dad he grew up in Flint Michigan during the race riots and stuff and I mean he is on life wasn't the greatest and so I would eat he kind of flipped you know he did the other things like I'm not doing that. Yeah, I benefited from it and so I didn't have to have the same struggles he did. It's a that's it. I see with my students to see a lot of students they have a chip on their shoulder even I mean really young too. I mean it's like yeah I never taught kindergarten and pre-k and then they come in and I like four or five years old. Yeah, this is already starting to form in them when they're that small. Yeah, it's that's tough. Yeah, and and then it's like two ways you see him there'll be some day I mean most days they'll be way off but then some days you see like they could come out. Yeah, that's that's what I'm saying. It's like the whole thing it's like it's so slippery and I like I'm not sure I don't know. It's really really hard I think to be positive about stuff when you're kind of surrounded by all that. Yeah. Focus too much on. Well, that was pretty dark. It's it's life is dark and you know one of the things I appreciate about Peterson right away is I think culturally we get this message that the default the default setting for life is happy and affluent and happy ever after. It's just not true. It's not yeah. And what that does when you promote that endlessly is is you isolate people who think, well, I, you know, why do I have problems, it's like you have problems because you're normal. Yeah. Right. Right. Problem is to be normal to not have a problem is the exception. Yeah, that's the odd times for sure. So what's on your list? I saw you had a few things. Yeah, I'm looking. I think. Okay, okay. So I was thinking of another talk. I heard you and it's funny because you guys both like you'll hit on some things and you'll talk to people but you'll both interviewed some some guys who are like new Christians and y'all were talking about how like you guys are giving some really good wisdom about not because you have that. Like you said it was like a honeymoon period. Like you you're like on fire. You feel this great energy and then everything kind of slows down. And I was like, man, like they are like you guys are so right. And I just growing up, I mean, like I saw I saw so many people and we go to retreats or something. And like now for me when I got out of college and I kind of decided to live in a city with my parents, I had to like find my way and have different tricks to kind of keep the fire stoked, so to speak, I guess. And so what do you what do you encourage your parishioners to do for things like that or anybody who like how do you for you know 15 plus years like how do you keep how do you keep excited about doing what you do and not kind of turn away and say I'm done with the whole thing. I don't know if the key is to keep excited. I think again that's a cultural that's a cultural meme that we have. If how long have you been married? Oh, actually six years. So you're just getting started. But if if you were to say well how do you keep excited about your marriage, I would say I'm I'm sometimes excited about my marriage or other times when I'm not. And I don't think I don't think the main thing I have to keep is excited about it. I think the main thing I have to keep is faithful about it. And so there will be there will be seasons of excitement. There will be tough seasons. And so I think that the key is to if we if we live from our aspirations, we will most often stumble. But the key is to get into habits or what are sometimes called spiritual disciplines. And the you know one of the things that I've noticed and and seeing the church over the last 20 years, especially in a place like California, is is people get into the habit of well I'll go to church when I feel like it or I'll go to church with that when I'm excited to go. That's a bad strategy. Yeah. And I grew up in a tradition where, you know, church attendance was a was a discipline. And in my tradition, it was twice on Sunday. And and we for a while in our tradition, we we kind of began to say, well, that's that's legalistic. But the more I watch people, the more I think what's really critical is to develop good habits. And I notice in myself in terms of my own spiritual life that transitions in like transitions in my schedule transitions are hard. And so what's what's really helpful is to develop good habits and say, this is what I'm going to do now. This is what I'm going to do next. Now, temperaments are different. I'm a person who likes habits. So I like ritual and routine. Some people aren't that way. And they're they they they need much more variety. Well, then build that into your structure and and look for look for things to do every day, whether you feel like doing them or not. That's the key, because, you know, it'd be like waking up in the morning and saying, oh, honey, I don't feel like being married to you today. So today I'm going to take a break from our marriage. And what do I want to do when I break from my marriage? Well, there was this person I'd like to check out down the street. Maybe I'll ask her out for a date. That is not going to wash in a marriage if anybody doesn't understand that. So I think finding, you know, then the second thing would be a good community around you because there's going to be lots of up and down in the people's lives. But if you have a good community of people around you with good leadership, that's that's really helpful. Yeah, I'm super fortunate to use the church we're going to now. It's kind of we have a pretty good leadership and it's a bigger church. But the we go to the Sunday School and the main service. So we we kind of have started a relationship with the Sunday School. So that's kind of like that feels a need for that small, the smaller community. So you don't feel kind of lost in there. And then I've been trying to help run the lights and stuff. And so I thought that was a you saw the disciplines like if you kind of you all talk about embodiment like that was a big thing for me to like, man, like, you don't just you can embody what you believe in different ways. And going and I mean, you had the guy talking about going to Orthodox Church and like, think of a room like, man, that's that's amazing. But it's so true. It's like you do that. And then you're embodying your beliefs and get in alignment with all of it. That's been helpful. And then if you know you're on schedule, like you're talking about making a church, it's like, oh, I got to make it this Sunday. Even if you're kind of inconsistent other ways, you know, you got to be there for that. And just showing up people, people don't appreciate what a big deal that is. I was talking to I was talking to a woman who she's got some health issues and she's been a every week a tender and she's been that her whole life because she grew up in the church and she was kind of saying, well, you know, I don't know if I'm going to be in all the time. And I really encouraged her to, you know, no matter how you feel, just show up because hopefully being around others will help. And also, like you said, having a job, one of the things I noticed early on with church work to everybody needs a job. They when they the whole church needs to be dependent on them for something. And once someone gets to the level of participation in the church where they have responsibility and where they have a job. Well, now the church is theirs, too. And they are going to contribute. And and and that's how you build a community. Yeah, I just I'm always struck to by even when you're talking about it. It's funny how the language matches up biblically with imagery because it's all about embodying and they say, like, we're the hands and the feet and all that. And then the way you kind of describe it, it's like a marriage and it's like we're supposed to be the we're called the bride of Christ and all that. And so I think what it's interesting and I was really how that book has all that stuff in there. And then it's just like in our language and there are some of the like the really the best metaphors for describing all of it. It's pretty pretty sounding in my opinion. Well, it's part of the reason the book, you know, people look at it and say, well, it's it's the Bible because everybody because everybody reads it. Well, maybe it's the bot, maybe it's because everybody reads it. You know, it hasn't gone away. And this is this is something that, you know, if I hear some people say, well, it's, you know, it's this book out there. No, it's not arbitrary. And that's one of the points Peterson keeps making. This book is such has such enduring power and has been so astonishingly productive cross culturally and trans historically. When you look at something like that, you have to say there must be something to it. And of course, Peterson's whole message is that this is there's this fascinating connection between human societal health and the Bible. And of course, that's up for huge debate. But look at the evidence. So look at the evidence for it. On that note, like one thing I find very helpful to you do is you put you place in a historical and cultural context. A lot of your sermons, like when you were talking about the Nebuchadnezzar and like I recognize that because I've been listening to a podcast about Roman history. And so they were always forever taking hostages. So the minute you started on that track, I was like, oh, yeah, they're taking hostages for sure. And then they if they did good, they might have an exchange or if they lost the Israelites in the war, then they might like, oh, OK, we're sorry kind of thing. That's exactly right. Yeah. And that stuff is one of the things that I was saying about my church is like the one I grew up in and they kind of read the Bible as the Bible. You don't need any other stuff. And like that there's a huge like you can read the Bible that way. Yeah. And you can get stuff out of it. Yes. And I believe that like you can you can learn and glean what you need to from the Bible on some. But then like you're missing out on like the real like connection to all the all the brothers and sisters in Christ that have lived for I mean for just thousands of years. If like all the oral traditions, depending on how back the old traditions go back. I mean, it's like it. And is that just you find that stuff just because you're interested in history or did you do you like actually go out and like try and figure that's like how do you how do you go about research and that stuff for those messages? Well, again, a lot of it has to do with interest. So I'll read the Bible and you'll read something you think, but that's weird. What's what's behind that? And so you start digging and then as a pastor, you know, I've always got to talk about these things. So when I begin the sermon process, I'll read the text and, you know, I will have planned the text at some point and then I'll sit there and think, well, well, well, what's behind that? And actually, you know, on my on my channel, I have both Sunday School and then my sermon and the Sunday School hour for me is a really important hour just for me because I get to throw things out to just a group of people. And what comes back at me is really helpful because it helps me know what questions they have. And and so when you get to Daniel, you know, I grew up as many people do. I learned those stories from Daniel. The first six chapters of the Book of Daniel has some amazing stories in it and we love it because God saves them. But there is a cultural history and a cultural context around it. And and so then I ask myself, you know, what what's really going on in this story? And on one hand, we think, oh, Daniel's up in Babylon. So what? Well, no, not so what? He was forcibly removed from his family and homeland by a foreign army and taken as a hostage and basically held. And then he's also subverted in that, you know, if you can learn a lot about the Bible by watching mob movies, because it's something the mob would do, you know. Yeah, that's probably where they got the ideas from. That's right. This is this is how and Augustine makes a similar quip about, you know, Roman about what the pirates said to do to a Roman emperor. He said, you know, pirates and emperors, they're not that different. They're not that different. Really, emperors just have much bigger weapons. But the ways to manipulate people, to coerce people, to, you know, to take power over people and get what you want out of them. And this is what governments have traded in forever. And I'm not an anarchist. Right. And in a sense, this is part of the reason and I think we're blessed to live in the United States of America, because this is built into our story. And the founding fathers tried to find ways to keep government from getting too tyrannical. But this government tyrannies and then as we go, I didn't do Daniel too long ago in my adult Sunday school class. So I actually do have those videos online. I think most of them. But what's amazing about the Book of Daniel is the further I got into it, the more I understood the subtle interplay between, OK, you're a slave. You don't have any good options here. And then the question is, how can God use even this horrible circumstance to bring good out of it? And that's something that this kind of facile surface level reading of the Bible just isn't going to isn't going to bring forward. Right. Because Augustine and hopefully as I go into Daniel in my sermon series, I want to touch upon Augustine because Augustine wrestled with these issues because the question was, OK, if if the empire is pagan and against God, should I be what kind of citizen should I be? And now a surface answer was, well, I should revolt and grab the top spot and I'll be a Christian emperor. But what you begin to discover is that the structures themselves corrupt you. Yeah. And so from below, what you see is that Daniel is on one hand the best slave of the emperors, but on the other hand, he's slowly co-opting the emperors and improving and reforming them in a way that even the emperors might not be cognizant of. And this is the way that God that God actually wins us and decorrupts us, purifies us and sanctifies us from below. It's not overt and obvious, which so often in the church, people people want to imagine black and white right and wrong. Yeah. So often God is sneaky and he helps us to do better than even our motives will allow. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, that's like the figure to make a thing, right? I mean, if you hopefully the hope is that at some point you quit worrying about the reward and you just do it because it's the right thing to do or you're trying to be more Christlike or be more in alignment. You do it out of gratitude and you'll notice all of my sermons almost always end the same way misery deliverance gratitude. And the reason I do that is because this the hyper catechism, which is a doctrinal statement of my tradition, says, you know, any good thing we do should be motivated by gratitude, not trying to earn our way, not trying to avoid punishment. And and that it's in that way that it tries to address the motivational problem. I mean, it's a huge distinction. I don't I don't know that it's very self evident. I mean, it wasn't to me until at some point I was like, well, why am I the way am the way I am. Everybody else is different. And there's, you know, there's just a whole slew of who a person is and what form them that made up that. But I mean, the main thing was kind of like, oh, well, you just you didn't want to support your parents and you want to do the right thing because you knew like you knew that punishment was worse than not being punished. So you just did it then because it was habitual. Well, that's why I'm being that's why I'm who I am. I'm thankful for it. But at the same time, that's not like the earning part of it. You got to earn it, I think. And it's kind of hollow out of it. Understanding that you're I don't know. It's vanity, right? I mean, you think about that. Well, that is not. Yeah. Hang on one second. Sure. Sorry about that. It's just just me here. No secretary or anything to interference for me. So I've got to answer my own door and my own phone. But no, that's that's exactly right. And so I just started actually, you know, I listened to these great courses here is I just started a course on on Nietzsche because I don't know enough enough about Nietzsche. And, you know, one of the points that Nietzsche makes is a lot of the good that we do is because we don't want to lose status and it's simple conformity. So on one hand, you can look at that and say, oh, that's morally bankrupt. And in one view it is. But on the other hand, I want all my neighbors doing that. I don't want them saying I'm not going to do any good thing out of a bad motive. I don't I'd love you to do it out of a good motive, but I'm more interested that you just do a good thing. OK. Oh, yeah. I mean, really, it's rather somebody doing the right thing for the wrong reasons, not doing the right thing at all. Exactly. We want everybody to do the right thing for the right reasons. I mean, I don't I don't know how many people come come to that point in their lives. I mean, and even I guess I was saying earlier at the beginning, it's like it's so slippery. It's like I don't even know if I'm I'm doing it for the right reasons. I mean, I hope I am. But if I really like sit there and think about it too much, I'm like, oh, well, you're not really going to do the right reasons. It is a product of what you're doing. So I mean, I'm just very fortunate, very, very fortunate in that aspect, I guess. Well, and gratitude is, you know, psychologists will tell you gratitude is something deeply connected with happiness. If you feel gratitude, you feel happy. And again, if it's a funny thing, because if you say, well, I want to feel happy, so therefore I'm going to feel grateful. Well, it doesn't usually work that way. In order to feel grateful, you usually have to have a sense of having received a gift. It's connected with humility and it's connected with actually a whole bunch of good virtues. And so this, you know, this scheme of the Heideberg catechism that I use so often, you know, miserly, misery, recognize that, recognize that life is hard and recognize that your motivations probably aren't that good. So you shouldn't feel self-righteous and superior to others. And then deliverance then focuses on what, you know, in this case, what Christ has done for me, how, whether, you know, whether you think of that in terms of a spiritual sense or if you think of that, well, Christ has blessed me through the gift of the church and gifts in the culture and gifts in my parents. And I've received all that. I haven't earned that. I haven't done anything for it. You know, you didn't choose your parents. No, I didn't. Or your time or the other gifts that were given you, just given to you. Okay, now how should I feel about that? I should feel grateful. And then that gratitude should well up into, I'm going to do good to others because people have done me well. And that's just a very practical strategy for not only doing good things, but feeling happy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, well, it's fascinating too that it's like misery, isn't it? I mean, it's a church. Why would you want to put misery in it? I mean, like you're saying, like, whether that's misery you reckon on in somebody else or misery that you've gone through. And then the, yeah, that's interesting. There's an old church adage. If you, if you preach, you know, if you, if you figure your sermons to address suffering people, your church will never be empty because the world is filled with suffering people. So talk to the suffering. Don't deny it. And because again, I think what we do in our culture is to the sufferer, we say, well, what's your problem? Why do you have a problem? You shouldn't have a problem. And it's like, no, everybody's got problems. Yeah. And maybe some of them are petty, but often problems will find you. It's just a function of aging and life in this chaotic world. And it doesn't help that like it's really, I don't know. I don't know if it's any easier to hide than it was in the past. I mean, but I mean, it seems like with social media and everything, like, you know, it's hard. There's a lot of happy faces and Google pictures and edited stuff. And so I don't know. But it obviously happened in the past. I just don't know to what degree it was easier or not. But I mean, you know, you know, people in like thousands of years ago were like, oh, that person's fake. You know, they're going through it. I'm going through kind of things. I mean, it's yeah. We have about five more minutes. Five more minutes. Anything on your agenda you just wanted to get to? Not that I can think of. That's pretty much it, I think. But it was a pleasure to talk to you and meet with you. Like I said, my dad, he's like, oh, it was neat. You kind of miss out on a lot of good preaching when the church is in a transition, kind of like it was. And so I know it benefited him a lot. So that was like I'm really grateful for that. Oh, good. How old's your father? Oh, geez. I'm a terrible son. He's in his 50s. OK, OK. Yeah, well, I know kids, kids always got to sit there and do the math, whereas parents usually know exactly. Well, the parents were there for the, you know, for the birth usually. So you don't forget that. But the kids weren't around. I'm probably saying probably wrong, probably more like 60 now I think about it because I'm 33. And I think they're like my parents from the 30s when I was born. So terrible son. Everyone knows my problems. A terrible son. Working his age. But yeah, a lot of he's like he's my hero. He's like really one of the reasons why I am the way I am. I watched him pray and he made sure we were at church. Yeah, yeah. Well, he blessed you. That's that's a that's a huge I'm sure. You know, what I'll do is I'll compile this and then I'll send it to you. And if you'd like me to post it, then then I'll post it. And but, you know, that's a huge there are few, few things that will warm a parent's heart than hearing one of their children say, you know, you were blessed by me. That's a that's a huge gift to him. So because that's what that's what that's what parents want for their children. They want their children to be blessed. They want their children to be happy. Yeah. But but to be fruitful and to to do great things in the world. Nothing makes a parent prouder than the success of their children. So that's just I'll think about it. I don't want to be a I'm going to be that guy. I don't think I said anything really. Well, I'll send it to you and you can mull over it and just you can just email me back and say, yeah, I'd like to post it. Or even if you don't want to post it, it's totally cool. You know, about half of the conversations I do, I don't post because, you know, either there's personal things or the person doesn't want it or they said some things they didn't want or they just didn't think it was worth it. So I'm I'm totally flexible either way. All right. Well, it sounds good. Well, let me let me say let me say a prayer for you. OK, thank you. Your family. Lord, I thank you for David and I thank you. I thank you for how you've blessed him. You've blessed him through his parents. You've blessed him through your church. You've you've given him gifts and skills. You've given him a marriage. You've given him a job. Lord, he feels richly blessed. And I pray, Lord, that you continue to work through him. I ask, Lord, that as you use him as a as an arts teacher to these to these young children, that they too would be blessed. And I pray that through his skill, he might develop their talents and open their minds. Lord, Lord, we know that the arts is an area that we don't we don't always recognize or see its value. But they are those children are being formed and and developed in the arts. That that we can't necessarily see very easily. So so bless him, Lord, and give him your peace. Let's ask in the name of Jesus. Amen. Yeah. Thanks. Well, thank you, David. Oh, thank you. It was a pleasure. It was a pleasure. Take care. You too.