https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=BVOMHrT5Fkc

 I was going to open with the fact that, well, again, like, you know, I find myself as this kind of accidental progressive, and I've established now you know through many autobiographical details that I'm something of a contrary. I occupy these spaces, but I never really commit myself to any of them, which doesn't mean that I, I'd like to think, you know, can't participate. And that's the what appeals to me about the space that has emerged around you is that it is such a genuinely pluralistic space and I mean that in the, in the best possible sense of the word and I don't mean pluralism mistaken for perennialism. But I mean a genuine pluralism which actually accommodates a genuine diversity of thought. And at least that's what I value about this little corner of the internet, and it's what you know dismay me about both the conservative OPC, whereas far as I know I'm still listed in the bulletin as an apostate, and the mainline Presbyterian Church, where, you know, it's like incidentally, Christian. Hi, this is Paul, and there's some randos that I forget I've never actually sort of done the initiation with and CW is one of them. So, he reminded me a few weeks ago that he and I have never been, you know, had the proper initiation right the proper introduction. And so we're going to do this today. CW. Thanks for being here. Well thank you Paul it's a little weird because yeah it's almost like it's like going on a show. But then the whole premise of the show is just have a normal casual conversation. Well, usually the first one isn't just a normal casual conversation it's much more of a getting to know you and people have gotten a chance to know me and you've been around the corner now, quite a while. So, and people have met you at different places and you're at the Chicago conference. Last year in June before Senate 2022. You've been on CRC voices. So, yeah, this is this is this is going to be good because I've gotten to know bits of your story but never sort of had the whole panorama. Well that's another awkward thing too because I'm very resistant to the notion that my story is the hermeneutic key to understanding me as a person. Oh, you can I can already tell this is going to be interesting so well let's let's begin where I begin, tell me, tell me about the house you grew up in. Well first I should say that the whole format of this like so I tried to explain what I was doing with you to the pastor of this church I kind of like lurk at. I guess it's the closest thing to attending that I have right now it's like when I got excommunicated from the OPC I went to this church, because I knew that they would give communion to, you know, like a duck, essentially. Maybe not literally, but, you know, animal blessings aside and all that but ducks eat bread. They do they do they like it, but, but he saw. So that was why I ended up there. But all of that makes me a kind of accidental progressive. I remember a sign of watching your video with Preston sprinkle I think, in which he said well I would love to have conversations with the progressives but they just don't seem to want to have conversations. What's, maybe this is what we're doing today. Well that was an observation that you made, but that is like, it's like I said I'm kind of an accidental progressive so it's awkward to me because, you know, when I'm. So like, this might not make a lot of sense for people but for those who are aware of the, you know, landscape of reformed Protestantism. I don't know if this this will be enlightening perhaps so. So yeah, I was a member at Orthodox Presbyterian Church, but I always was kind of an awkward thing there you know I was never really natively that conservative. Theologically, even even when I started going there. And I remember, you know, the pastor it was a little church plant. And he was really eager you know to get by it and I was like going to everything. And so he was always kind of trying to get a pastor of a small church more excited than someone starts doing that. Exactly. Yeah. What, but I am not really intended to join the church, but his in his mind I was like the perfect person to become a formal member because you know so interested in reform theology I come to like all the offense. And I think they even had some kind of perverse incentive where you know they had to have like a retrieve a certain critical mass to become like a particular congregation or whatever so I mean there is even like benchmarks perhaps that were guy informing this, you know, And I think that was the intuition he had that I was the ideal church member, perhaps contrary to other pieces of information including my own apprehension maybe we tend to filter things don't we. Well, I even have a kind of, you know, ultimately self fulfilling perhaps but prophecy where I said you know if I become a member you're just going to excommunicate me. And sure enough. We will get to that story but I want to know the store the origins of you so. So then, well, just a second. So then I find myself at like the exact polar opposite in reform Protestantism, which is like the downtown mainline PC USA church. And I imagine that they don't think of themselves this way but I imagine that many around the corner would characterize them as woke. And you know and they're understanding I think they would probably be right. Like, you know, they had like a big Cornell West quote on a huge banner on the side you know like. That's what love looks like in public I believe. So it's very very much like social justice oriented. You know, and well and then they for lent. They actually have like interfaith dialogues, like on the dais of the in the sanctuary. I used to joke that Westminster gives up Christianity for like, like an imam you know. But, so that's kind of what that church is like right. It's it's almost like sometimes I think of it as like a, like a political action committee that is sort of set up under the guise of a church. I know they would not like that but that is what a lot what some of these churches have become. Yeah, they don't endorse candidates, Paul. They don't even need to we all know who their endorsed candidates are even if they fail to announce them. Yeah, well and just as a point of reference so like Walter Mondale was a member, you know, before he passed, a long standing member of this church. I mean it also has that kind of like in some regions, Episcopalian like vibe. Right. This is this is where the, you know, the ruling elite. These were the these were the Christian nationalists of the up until very recently, who in fact wielded power in America. You know, without any without any rivals, these, these are the original Christian nationalists here. Globalism is the new Christian nationalism. Do you not get the memo. I got it. I totally got it. It's Christian imperialism. Tim, Tim Hart Anderson is the senior pastor this church who just announced his intention to retire and you know as as press good Presbyterians they have this like five year plan to figure out the, it's not quite five year plan but you're really long involved plan to figure out the succession arrangement, but I'm trying to explain to him what it was I was attempting to do and talking to you. And his, his advice was to listen. Oh, that's not going to work here. If you want to listen. I've got plenty of other material on the internet. This is not these conversations are not about PVK, they are you are the star of the show CW, you're not going to get out of it that way. Yeah, yeah I said I don't think I don't think you understand what what the premise of this is clearly has not watched the channel. No, I doubt he's watched the channel, but, but he's an interesting figure though. So I did ask him in preparation for this conversation because what really inspired me to talk to you is the goings on in the CRC, and, you know, the, the sort of intricacies of this church family, sort of rending itself apart. And so he came to Westminster from San Francisco, and actually founded one of the organizations that I imagine would be comparable to like, what is it abide and abide or the conservatives all one body or the progressives. And these kinds of entities that have sort of emerged to try and win the hearts and minds of the requisite players I guess and also ease the consciousness of the belligerence I suppose but. So, so he founded one of these entities that was instrumental in lobbying the General Assembly, when the mainline Presbyterian Church went through a similar controversy. And so, you know, I had heard all these sort of murmurings are among people in the congregation about how you know Tim was really essential in the, in the affirming events and in the denomination you know ultimately taking the path that it did. And I thought that I would ask him about this, and, you know, he would have some her, well, more or less story that lined up with that right but, but, but I told him that you know I had heard people say that he was sort of this instrumental figure he's like I love that. I tried to press like well what did you do. And the way he described his involvement was, you know, he founded this organization, it was a moderate organization the aim was to prevent the schism. Oh, so they were better together that's the CRC organization that's trying to avoid the schism. And all he said after that was, and we failed. And his fear of his involvement was that it was, I mean, it's not shameful necessarily valiant effort I suppose but in his mind it was an abject failure and not something to be celebrated or or lot of necessary. So I wonder if you, Paul are heading towards a similar thing. Because I did hear you're interested in sort of real though kind of scant proposal. Maybe having like a parallel synod but having a way to maintain institutional unity of these two divergent factions I guess some form of institutional unity. You know you have, you have joint custody of children after a divorce, and in many ways the institutions are the children of the Christian reform church. But you my friend, are trying to make a way with the goods without paying the price. The price I work for stories my friend, and you have yet to give me one and you want to distract me with the drama within my own denominational house without coughing up anything about yourself and we're here to learn about you. I do have a story that is apropos, it doesn't start with the house I was born in although I could tell you, me us is that what you asked where that is what I asked but if you say the story is apropos we can start there. Well no I mean actually the house, the house I was born in this kind of play I was born in a house, in fact, on pill hill in Rochester, Minnesota, which is ironically perhaps you know, not in the shadow but overlooking, possibly the world's premier hospital. Yeah, but yeah I was, you know, born by midwife at home in this rather kind of pretentious neighbor. Wow Rochester Minnesota so that's, that's the story of my noble, my noble birth, and why a midwife and why not in a, you know, in a clinic that will, whose name we seem to be avoiding. The Mayo Clinic. Yeah, aren't they in Rochester. Yeah, yeah no that is indeed that is indeed when I was a print, but I thought it was. Yeah, no I wasn't a secret. I just figured people. Why did your mother, why did your mother want midwife birth. Were you also born in a hot tub. I do not think it was a water bird. I guess that was just her thing. When my parents were kind of, of that generation you know they were like the hippies who became conservative Republicans through like some form of Jesus movement fundamentalist Christianity. Yeah, I think they were in that class. Okay, I'm not sure how hippie they were. But, but they definitely became conservative Republicans, like, yeah like they. Yeah, well and they so they met in the way international, which of course is where Sam grew up. Our own heretics Sam. This is why I dig. This is why I dig it's like, it's like burn powers but first we dig. Yeah, I had like a two hour and 45 minute conversation with burn. And, and I was more curious about him so I ended up not really disclosing much of anything. Yes, yes, yes, I am. I am. I think I know your way so parents met in the way international. Yeah. Yeah, my dad was a campus minister or evangelist or something to that effect. So he was actually from Wisconsin. And they shipped him out through the way to Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, to lead campus Bible studies, which I'm not sure why that makes any sense but that's apparently what happened and my mother was attending school there she was studying journalism. And that was where they met in one of these little, you know twig was the nomenclature for the wig. Wow. Yeah, which stood for something, but it must have, because they would pick it otherwise. I died. So that's how they met, and they were married. And they met they got married in a house, and my mother enjoyed doing things in houses, I guess so. How many siblings. So I have an older brother. And he was born in Florida. That's where they were before they came back up here so my house. I believe so. Yeah, but not not as, you know, auspicious house home churching home birthing we do everything at home in this in this family apparently. Yeah. Well, so my brother was homeschooled up to fifth grade. My mother said she attempted to homeschool me but I wouldn't believe anything she said. So, so she had to send me up to the public school. It sounds about right. I think about right. Yeah, I don't have lots of memories of them but I'm sure I'm sure that's accurate more or less. Did you go to church or were you house church again did your parents stick with us or did they know this is a crazy thing like so part of my whole mythology was the, in fact, the absence of my father, so also. So the way that happened was, you know, kind of its own complex story I guess it's not it's weird because it's not really my story so well here, if it's not your story you can beg, you can. I'm talking about it but I'm a little bit it's like difficult for me to really know or understand what happened in my. Yeah. It's more kind of their story I guess you obviously greatly affected me. You can tell it from your point of view that is your story. So he was gone. I mean this is like these initial elements aren't even from my point of view that just things that I've sort of been told, or led to believe it. Yeah, so they went to Florida. It was kind of a crazy thing because my dad actually dropped out of college. I guess to do this like college outreach ministry, which again doesn't necessarily make the most sense. And then, so they both applied to what was the ways seminary, which I think was something called the way corpse or whatever and they. And you know the way it was very like egalitarian in terms of women made charismatic movement so in terms of women being involved in teaching and stuff they were more and more less equal opportunity, as far as I know. And so they were going to kind of join the seminary and go into ministry in the way which by the way as a Protestant denomination, very very unfortunately viewed itself as the one true church. My mind actually precluded from being genuinely positive. But maybe in some you know in the sense that it's not orthodox or Catholic. It's positive in that sense. In another sense, I would say is deviant. I don't know what you call it exactly but. So it's very disappointed yeah well that was kind of weird dynamic too because I, you know, ended up being very interested in my Christian religion which came to me from my, you know, single divorced mother who had not been permitted to participate in church life because along the road there my dad became a deist. And, you know, they moved to Florida. The story about the way corpse was they rejected my dad because he never finished his undergrad, but they accepted my mom. And so they decided that that wasn't going to work. And so instead they moved to Florida to start, you know, one of these way businesses that's supposed to facilitate their little house church movement thing that they do. And so he was in charge of a custodial company for them in Florida, and they started getting involved in politics and my dad sort of started slowly drifting away from his faith I guess. And the thing that I remember of that was, he at some point realized that he could do this custodial business and not send all the money back to the religious entity. And so I ended up kind of like dude splitting himself off I guess and keep keeping the business in one way or another. Which I don't know what the ramifications if any there were that but that was kind of how their marriage started and my brother was sort of born at some point after that in Florida. But yeah they ended up back in Minnesota because my dad is from here, he has kind of a weird childhood. He was the product of my grandfather's third marriage. And so he was in well into retirement, by the time my dad was born so I didn't actually grew up dividing his time between Rochester and Naples, Florida. Hanging out with all the old people. And that was kind of like his, his childhood. Wow. How old was your father's mother, then his biological mother. I do not know. I do not know. You've never done any genealogy work on your family. Especially I mean I know some things like my most luminary ancestor was Thomas Wentworth, the Earl of Stratford he was like, yeah. And while that was some weird irony too because of course you know I ended up going to the be one like I've been Presbyterian all this time And I was like effectively the Presbyterians who killed him. Because it's the it was the same parliament that actually convened the Westminster divines and produced the Westminster Confession was the parliament that executed Thomas Wentworth. So that's that's a whole weird historical irony. Perhaps. You grew up, you grew up in a single parent family. Yeah, so my, so my single mother, sort of, you know, after a long kind of spiritual drought ended up taking us kids to this is after my dad finally left. And so I guess I was in like, first, second grade, when that was happening. First, second grade seven, maybe seven years old, it's pretty young. Yeah, well, that was the funny thing because years later when I would meet my dad right before going to Bible college. And that was a whole like crazy thing because, you know, a couple years before that, like, so we haven't heard anything about him at all. It was as if he'd like dropped off the face of the earth essentially. And a couple years before I turned 18 he was on the news, because he was wanted by the FBI. He was assuming people that I don't know all the details of my understanding of it is that he was like, assuming people's mortgages under a kind of like a series of assumed entities that may or may not have actually existed. And then he would, you know, build up this huge real estate portfolio but subsequently perhaps failed to keep up on some of the payments, you know, and end up kind of screwing these people who had allowed him to take over this mortgage under false pretenses because he was supposedly represented these organizations that didn't actually exist. And the funny thing was when he was doing for the vote like the part about assuming the mortgage and not paying it was not actually illegal. But, but he was like screwing over so many people that they were really like looking into him and he had, it was kind of like how wire fraud is like how you take down anybody who's just like a problem. So in this case he they got him for like social security fraud or something because he had like falsified some, you know, papers of incorporation or something like that. But, but so at the time they were just looking for him and they actually had footage of him from the house that we had lived in in Lakeville before before my parents got divorced. And of course this is like really surreal because they had him like driving out in this little blue station wagon he had bought after he had separated from my mom. And he almost like ran over the reporter. And he was like hiding his face with one of those like dashboard clipboard things. They like drum off in this little like Japanese midsize station wagon, which I vividly recall that vehicle because the last time I had seen my dad as a child was my brother and I were getting out of school. And he appeared in this little blue station wagon. And, you know, he's our dad or whatever he didn't live in the house although even when he did he was like barely around anyway. So, so he just appeared and so we just got in the car and he took us to the Dairy Queen. And all I remember was really just in being silent. And like you said it was a long time ago so I'm not sure how accurate this memory is but I remember you know riding in the little blue car that was like new new car smell. Going to the Dairy Queen sitting there with my dad not really like talking or anything just kind of like he got his ice cream or something. And then he got back. Like he drove away and we went in and my mom was freaking out because apparently he had not told her that he was going to pick us up. Or what he was doing anything and so she thought we were dead and kidnapped or you know this is like the Jacob Wetterling era. All of that sort of thing. I don't know like what the hell he was doing exactly he was like I'm going to like, saying goodbye to my kids or like see them one last time or something I'm not sure what I never really figured out. But he probably doesn't even remember anymore. Wow. Wow. Well, okay, I think you've paid your debt. Yeah, I mean that doesn't think it's like every day I have so many stories Paul they could it could go on. Could go on forever. There's the father's you know. So what was school like for you public school. Yeah, I went to public school actually dropped out of. Well here it wasn't even high school yet so it's kind of organized it was ninth grade was the, and I guess from some places that is high school but in where I was, it was 789 was junior high. So I was in the kind of the cusp of going to high school. And you dropped out. And I dropped out. Did you go to juvie or Hall or something did you do a crime. No, no I managed to never do it again I've never even smoked a cigarette, Paul, a tobacco cigarette. You and I both. Various times in my life, I've been mistaken for a pothead. I think just because I have long hair and I've kind of a laid back attitude maybe I'm not sure. I'm not the affectation without the chemical or anyone else, not in fact a button. I do see an occult sign on that beverage that you're sucking though so. Yeah. We've yet to hear grim gris really call out Starbucks have we. You know as the cult capitalist institution that they are, but anyway, yeah, it's coming. So you dropped out of. You did go to Bible college and met a certain mo at Bible college though I picked that up in Chicago. Yeah, that's true. Yeah, well I was in my book I was on the same floor Colby 17 as our friend mo who was a music major I believe, actually. State theology so yeah that's kind of what happened to me so my, you know, I'm, you know, my dad always loomed large over my childhood or rather the absence of him loomed large. He was kind of this mythological figure especially after it emerged that he was like wanted by the FBI you know just sort of added to the mystique of everything. And, but then this intrepid clerk at the county somehow had tracked him down and was able to sort of begin a process by which my, because he owned my mom, like, all the child support basically never paid like anything. And so, you know, I had this long outstanding child support debt which you know those can be tricky to enforce I don't know if people are familiar with those kinds of situations in that but I know homeless people that when the stimulus checks came out they were complaining to me how the, how their stimulus checks got taken by their back child support and these are men in their 60s so yeah child support is an interesting whole thing. Yeah, it helps to be your own boss and to own property. So it's much easier to evade traditional methods of siphoning off your income and forcing you to do the right thing so I guess I could entitle this video how to evade child support and that might make it go viral you never know. Yeah, yeah, there you go. But, so my. So my dad you know I wrote him a letter, because I you know he was out there now like he was in context my mom, the person at the county said that they couldn't give me his information, but that if I wanted, I could, you know, write something and she would like pass it on to my dad, which I rather know it's not like I was fucking adopted or something and they're like laws and I thought that was pretty annoying. And you know my dad was like invading the FBI for years. So he's pretty good at like not being found, you know, so you know I haven't done pile or Yahoo or whatever the thing the emerging thing was to try and see, see if I can find anything about you know, I mean he had like changed his name and stuff to which I didn't even really realize that all came out at the trial when he was sent to federal penitentiary, which I was also not allowed to go to my mom would not let me go to it, which at the time I was not a dog yet so that was rather frustrating to you. But, but yeah so eventually I wrote this letter you know it was very conciliatory I had already been accepted into Bible college at that point. And so you know I saw this as part of my, you know, almost like Luke Skywalker like destiny. So why did you apply for Bible college I mean obviously you must have had some kind of religious experience in your youth that. My mom brought me to my brother to sort of suburban Baptist Church, which has interestingly since become a kind of I mean it's just sort of like a non denomination of mega church now, but it was part of the Baptist general conference, which changed their name inexplicably to some weird thing that I can never remember like, like, like I remember your video about like the buzzwords or holy words. You're like the name of that denomination is some sort of buzzword like, yeah well we used to have home missions and world missions and they became resonate, and then I've got pastor church relations and all these church offices and now they put them all together in an agency and they thrive that's something weird like emerge or converge. Yeah, something weird like that. We're not a church. We're a movement. Yeah, yeah I was long since the time all that went down but, but it endlessly fascinates me like driving by the church I was baptized in that church when I was eight. So I mean, according to your math, this is like a really quick turnaround Paul. Yeah, which interestingly, I would tell people later you know when I became more Presbyterian in my affiliations that Pato baptism wasn't really a thing for me because I pretty much regarded my believer baptism as a Pato baptism because I know what the hell I was doing. You know I don't remember having like a credible profession of faith, although they thought that I did. Good enough. I get eight year old I Pato eight year old. Yeah, that's pretty Pato but go on. I just think to me, I viewed it more or less like that because it's not like in my mind I had made a credible profession and do you love Jesus. Yes, good enough. Yeah, but at the same time I had to admit that I did not feel any compulsion to you know redo my baptism. And so I was of the mind. Yeah, I was of the mind to like calling good and so that sort of made it easier for me to accept the average I guess the big bugger move for a lot of people coming from a Baptist background to Presbyterian but it never really bothered me because I was like oh yeah that's like essentially what I did. That's the benefit of like confirmation. We got we got you dropping out of late middle school and going to Bible college. I mean, yeah, I mean you need to. I don't want to say anything bad about Bible colleges but you at least got to be able to manage school and Bible college you got to write papers and stuff so what Well so in the interim there I had. Well so I got a GD. Okay, which was really easy for me. It was kind of like an afterthought you know it was like, and then my mind later I was like well that was like the easiest way to do high school. Because I just tested out effectively. But yeah I worked at the Lego imagination center I bought a Pontiac Fiero. Oh, I remember the Fiero. Yeah, it was a little white GT fastback. Yeah. And that was living my best life. After I got the GD actually went to community college so I did end up kind of so after all the BS of high school was neutralized. Yeah, I went to college community college anyway where it was, you know, much less of a social war zone. Yeah, community colleges mostly just kind of little after college but you know, no no no the high school vibes just class. That suited me much better because I was always kind of a misfit and really belong to my head like I had a really close cohort of similarly misfit people. So I think I was lucky in that sense, and, and you know some of them I still fairly close to, to this day. And the relationship between you and Mo has been able to continue so so and then you go to you go to Moody of all the Bible colleges in America you can pick from you chose that one. So Moody had the benefit of being free. And that's, that's, you know, not a, not a thing to overlook. And it was also in Chicago. As a child, I like, for some reason I've always been kind of drawn to urban aesthetic, I guess, and the city like so we lived in this little town home complex in a southern suburb here, Minneapolis. And it was like a hill in the center that they had created with all the, you know, dirt from the foundations of these rows of townhomes is like this little artificial hill. And I used to like walk up on this hill and gaze at the Oz like skyline of Minneapolis sort of fantasizing about what, what, you know what adults do in the real world. And I've always had this kind of longing I guess for the city. And when I was a kid I actually had a poster of Chicago over my bed. And so yeah I was always fascinated by Chicago the idea of never been there. Going, living in Chicago studying the Wimby City there on the lake was really appealing to me. And you know it fit, essentially my broad conservative evangelical upbringing, although, you know, there's a whole story there too, Paul, like, and I don't know if we're here for the stories. There's a whole story there. So, yeah, well so when I was like 16, we had switched churches, I was no longer at the Baptist Church that we've been going to my mom took us to this. It was basically like the mega church at the time in the state of Minnesota was the largest church at the time, it's called Grace Church. At the time it was Grace Church. A very, very unique name for an evangelical church. Yeah it was really bold, really bold messaging. But it used to be I think Lake Harriet Baptist Church, way, way back in the day so even they had been but they were always unaffiliated Baptist. And so then eventually they just dropped the Baptist and they were very much in the Rick Warren saddleback, you know, kind of church growth philosophy you know there was always like statistics from George Barna. You know, in the pulpit you know so they'd have given us an idea about the landscape was, you know. And this, this church had, you know, they had some kind of pastoral transition way back when they were just, they were healthy but not really growing or huge or anything. And one of the interim pastors was a Dr. John Eek, and he had been the president of Crown College. So he was actually an administrator he had no background in theology. And in fact he did his PhD in, I believe it was a study education but his dissertation was in like long range planning. But, but he was apparently a compelling preacher, and they hired him as the senior pastor. And he was the one who really grew the church and when he said like long range planning he had this crazy method where he would write his sermons six months in advance. Oh yeah that was popular for a while with preachers. He was one of those people. And so, you know, similar, I guess to my own social experience in school being difficult, I never really felt integrated I guess let's say into the youth ministry. Either but I did really enjoy the adult service. Where Dr. Eek. Which is just nowhere near as sexy as like adult bookstore or something like that. Yeah, but, but it was well so even at the height of the thing in the old building they ended up building one of these like gigantic, you know, monstrosities in further flung suburbs. And they, yeah, and it's really like it was the first church of its kind like that here. But, you know, so the whole time I was there it was all like the ramp up to that, you know, like the capital campaign and they're like this is what God's calling those are the storied years of the, you know, yeah it was like the camera era of grace You know, and, and it was very much like, you know, he was a fan of like the West Wing and Star Trek. So even have like this. So you know it's all like Captain Picard you know Symposium and leadership and stuff. I mean, I don't think he really talked about that from the pulpit call to worship wasn't engaged. I'll say like so, so the church in a weird way like kind of felt Star Trek, like the architecture. Like so it was all like white in the sanctuary and had these kind of artificial plants that like, you know, you could imagine sort of on the enterprise somewhere like it's very like Star Trek like vibe to it weirdly. It's kind of hard to quantify, I guess, but, but, you know, if there's any doubt there was a room off the stage and it was called the pastors ready. The ready room. Yeah, and this became like a kind of, you know, architectural trademark that Dr. Egan brought to the Wow, the pastor's ready room. Just imagine these pastors in suits sitting in these leather chairs leaning back like fighter pilots ready to launch. Yeah, exactly. With the, you know, with the little holographic Moriarty sitting on their desk. And they're drinking from their various misadventures. All right, so so what did you take away from Moody Bible College. Well, I was gonna say that when I was 16 I felt called to pastor ministry, which who wouldn't after the church experience like that. Well, so that was the thing about it that was awkward was, you know, nobody saw me as like a leadership. You weren't the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. You were the captain of the football team. The father of the football team lives infront of where reading that is telling me just my whole the church was like moving into the new facility, this crazy huge, you know, like 4,500 seat worship center they had constructed. And Dr. Egan ironically was beginning this series called the Road to Armageddon, which he would only, I believe, preach two sermons from the series because it turned out he was having an affair with his long time personal assistant, executive assistant. And it really was the adult service. It really was. And so this came to light and the elders, you know, kind of dramatically met him at the airport. Because I think he was like it's I don't know if it was Africa. He was in some crazy other part of the world because Grace has always had like this really aggressive, well-funded missions program. Right. And so he was out there playing, you know, the ambassador of Christianity to some poor God forsaken place, you know, and setting up relationships and all of these things and doing his, you know, his Dr. Egan on top of the world kind of thing. And then and then, yeah, they met him at the airport and he basically forced him to resign. Grace is right there like that. But the interesting thing was, so I had actually turned 18, like right in the midst of all these things happening. So like they were just moving into the new building before they even moved in. I was like, I got to find my own church. You know, I want to go into ministry. I need to like strike out on my own. I care about the city. I want to like be in a more urban context. And what year was this around? I guess this would have been like 2002 ish. OK. More or less. And so I had heard about Bethlehem. Oh, yeah. John Piper. See where this is going. And so I had actually visited there. And and yeah, I was just like completely blown away by his preaching. It was like radically different than anything. Dr. Egan's heard before. Yeah, it was much more. I would say theological. Yes, it would definitely be theological and reformed. And then, yes. And then when that was so, I became a Calvinist at Bethlehem. Good for you. But what happened was I ended up signing up for the membership class that first day I was there. Wow. The very first day I went, I was like, this is the place I want to be. And interestingly, to even apply to Moody, you have to be a member of a church. And if I had not, like for some unknown reason, decided to join that precise moment, I would not have been a member in time to apply when I did. Well, you'd be surprised how many people applied. Maybe you wouldn't be surprised how many people apply to Bible College. And people, people come into me and say, Pastor, I want to be a minister. Well, what church do you go to? Well, it's like, you don't even you're not even a member of the church and you want to lead one. Yeah. Well, yeah. Well, it's just I viewed it as very fortuitous because it's all kind of like that. And one that knows very much my mindset at the time also, you know, was one of like Providence and all these things. All the dramatic things were happening. Like my dad, who was supposed to like never be part of my life, was now suddenly like part part of my life. And like, you know, accepted in the Bible College. It was all very like Providential. Like and I even thought that was problems because I like filled out the essays for the application like the night before I sent it in, which is probably just more like procrastination than Providence. But I regarded that as providential to me, you know, like because it was all sort of stream of consciousness or something like that. But yeah, so I also the big thing that I thought was a gracious thing for me at the time was that I had kind of like psychologically transferred my allegiance from like Dr. Egan as my role model to like John Piper as my role model, like right before he like spectacularly imploded. You had a ministerial father figure transfer. Yeah, yeah. And I viewed that as very fortuitous because in my mind, if I had not made that kind of psychological shift, I think it would have been much more devastating to me and perhaps even, you know, cast doubt on my trajectory and all of that. But I was not so personally, you know, invested in Dr. Egan as the archetype anymore. By the time that had happened, which is ridiculous because it was only like a few months difference. But by so fast when you're young. Yeah, I mean, I was still going there to get the tapes, like the sermon tapes. People remember back in the old days. Yeah, yeah, there used to be sermon tapes. I could play in my Fiera, which was the perfect. Yes, there were there were cassette players in cars and I, you know, they're back in the day of the Willow Creek Association. You could get those every month. They'd send you a little tape if your church was part of the Willow Creek Association and you just pop those in your cars. And the minister, when he's driving around town, visiting people, he just, you know, listen to little Bill Hybels. Pick me up. Yeah, yeah, that's exactly. Although you probably couldn't really hear much over the engine of the Fiera. Not the best. I have the best audio experience. Not not not the heyday of General Motors. But yeah, so that was kind of enough to me. So I became a Calvinist, joined Bethlehem and then basically shipped out to Bible College, like more or less immediately. Yeah. I managed to get somebody to, you know, believe that I have ministry potential and feel how to record. What did you study at Bible College? So I studied theology. OK. And that's part of my story, too, because I actually ended up dropping out of Bible College. Oh, that's part of my I'm disappointed. So I'm disappointed. You know, you're like you're like my new adopted father figure. So it's very worried about the track record here. Very damaging for you to see if the see if the elders at Living Stones meet me on the tarmac when I come back from a mission trip to Africa. But anyway. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I don't know. Weirdly, I don't really view you as my pastor. Like I've had things like that before where I would, you know, tell people that I knew from Bible College that like, oh, like, you're my pastor, you know, because I've listened to like the sermons creepily, like online or something. And I eventually I realized that that's not really a good thing to do. So I stopped. I mean, not listening to sermons online, but telling telling people you don't know at all that they're your pastor. Yeah, I realize it's probably not. I don't know. Is it not accurate? It was probably just not. Pastor, I'm part of your other sheep. Yeah, it's probably not helping you or them. So yeah, I've never I've never actually viewed you as my pastor. Interestingly, I have viewed you as an intriguing figure. Like I called you the Francis Schaeffer of the YouTube generation. Oh, my. What's something that the title I've conferred upon you? Oh, well, I guess I guess being on YouTube will bring titles, so. Yeah, I mean, I think there's a pretty strong analogy there in this in the sense that you are taking on all comers and then you walk right into it with your S.G. or anything, which I guess is maybe it's John Van Dock's S.G. or anything's not really clear, like who's S.G. or anything it is, but we've got dual custody. Who custody? Yeah. So he's he's like your Edith, let's say. And let's not say that, but let's not say that either way. That's that's like your LeBree is what I'm trying to say. That's OK. John Van Dock is my Edith doesn't really work. Yeah, that might be a stretch. So we got to speed up this story, because even though we got lots of time on the Internet, I myself might not have four hours. So Bible College, you drop out of Bible College. Why? Why? Well, so I am an epiphany that God exists in in a Starbucks, of all things. Interestingly enough, and I've been drinking it ever since. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait a minute. Wait a minute. You're going to Bible College and it isn't until you get into a Starbucks that you have an epiphany that God exists. You were skeptical of this while you're in Bible College. So imagine my surprise, Paul. You think you're surprised. Yeah. Well, so well, that was actually a large part of my leaving was this sense that, you know, what am I doing here? Because because, yeah, I had this like sudden realization about the reality of God. That was very much a mystical experience. It's difficult to describe. I would say I. And you had it in a Starbucks. Yes, it was right near campus under the L train. So, you know, it was a very, I guess, aesthetically dramatic environment. It's not just your average suburban drive through Starbucks, Paul. I mean, this is like in the heart of downtown Chicago. The city that you had a poster up of over your bed. So exactly. Yeah. So I was already primed. Yes, indeed. It was experience and revelation. But what provoked this experience? I think it was just my mulling over the. Well, actually, I had been thinking a lot about faith and what it is. And I was too impatient, you know, to wait for a systematic theology five or whatever, you know, to let them tell me. And so I would take like a informal sample of the student population. And I found that and this is again like stories. I'm an unreliable narrator of even my own story here. So this is like my recollection of what happened or what the significance of it was to me. So, you know, whether it actually happened precisely this way or is is harder to say, maybe. But but the sense that I have thinking back on it was that I was sort of trying to nail down, you know, this ecumenical and yet thoroughly evangelical school. You know, what is it? What the hell is the Christian faith? Because my whole objective in going there was to relate it to other people. That that was like to be my job was to actually explain this thing to, you know, unsuspecting and faithful, dutiful. Like like Pastor Egan and Pastor Piper before you. Like all my great role models. And and I was kind of unnerved by the lack of unanimity, I guess, as to what constituted even just faith. Like never mind anything else. Like I just started there, you know. And and so I had kind of like a faith crisis over the doctrine and definition of faith, I guess, in a little microcosmic sense in my, you know, young Greenhorn Bible College student way. And and yeah, it was just in sort of trying to reconcile the sometimes I thought mutually exclusive answers that I received within in theory, you know, the same church and theological tradition that I had this sort of sudden realization of the reality of God. And I even wrote on this napkin, this weird aphorism that well, a couple aphorisms like one of them was God is that which is most real and by his light, he reveals all that is such. And one of them was faith is the means by which God reveals that which is to whom he wills. And that was sort of my big epiphany was that faith had a revelatory function. And interestingly, that basic insight, if it is that. I think they're pretty good. I think they're quite good. Yeah. Two little aphorisms are very good. Well, but the insight on faith has really informed my intellectual trajectory ever since. It's not as though I hang my entire Christian religion on this, you know, ecstatic, incommunicable, although, you know, there was a couple of aphorisms that came up, but you know, this ecstatic mystical experience, but I can't deny that it has, you know, informed my, it's just like this basic intuition that I have about the nature of Christian truth that has really been with me ever since. And, you know, maybe that's awkward for my rationalistic tendency or something. But they're very, very good. So you have, you have a, you have a, you have an experience that clarifies and so you no longer need to be at Bible college. So you drop out. I wasn't that so much as like, I realized that I had got to the point of being groomed to, you know, take up leadership and I was like, I felt like any kind of really credible conviction about the reality of God. And that along with the, you know, later, I would say, theological ambiguity, but that's more kind of, I wouldn't say it's revisionist, but that's almost like an anachronism because at the time it was more about me and for me and for the church and for the church itself, and I felt like that was more about me and feeling like, you know, I don't really belong here. You know, like I'm not like I'm just now become certain about the reality of God. I can't say that I have. So they didn't ask that on the Moody application. Are you certain about the reality of God? Check. Yes or no. I can't say that I have some definitive calling to lead people in the church, which, you know, whatever that is, right. And it's all so I may just seem like many orders of magnitude removed from what I was doing, you know, and I just kind of wanted to focus on being a, you know, existentially committed Christian rather than have this pretense that somehow I'm supposed to lead everybody or whatever. And so I'm gaining conviction about God, my sense of minister vocational calling, I guess, more or less evaporated. And I remember when I was leaving, you know, well, this is the other thing. So when my dad came back, it turned out he was like rich. And so he liked in order to try to buy my love or something. He gave me this credit card when I was going to college and he was like, I expect you to spend at least 400 dollars a month on this credit. I had no expense at Moody. So actually mostly what I did was buy books. Like I bought like, you know, 16 volumes of John Owen and like all this, which is still, you know, yeah, I mean, I would say like I got a pretty good running start on my library from my dad. But I did other things too. Like, so I took this girl on a blind date to the signature room, which is the 98th floor of the Hancock Towers, like where people go to propose and stuff. And it was just like some whimsical, like let's hang out. And Mo was always bad because I used to take people to Smith and Valesky's, which is like a really nice steakhouse on the river there under the Marina Towers. But then I announced that I was leaving. He's like, you never took me to Smith and Valesky's. And so years later I would have to take him and his wife to Smith and Valesky's to kind of compensate for the oversight that he wasn't included in my. But well, it's all that to say, like, so I had this like weird reputation in Bible college as this kind of eccentric, like Richie Rich type personality, you know, like my dad and his new wife. And that was the whole thing because he actually asked me to be the best man in his second wedding, which, which, and that was the first time I had met as an adult. He had like asked me this, which was a little weird. But I did, I, so I ended up agreeing to it. But that was before I knew that it was the same woman that he had initially cheated on my mother with, created all this like drama, as you can imagine. Like I said, there's stories. They just, there's so many stories. And in terms of the, yeah, the interpersonal, you know, socio-cultural background of my makeup, it's just like endless. And it is really, you know, pretty almost comically melodramatic, I would say at times. So yeah, it was a crazy thing too, because on her side of the family, there was an aunt who was actually the live-in girlfriend of the Lama Kuga, who was the second highest figure in Tibetan Buddhism. So he was like at the wedding and he had like, he had like made this like traditional calligraphy like blessing for them. And it was in this context that like fundamentalist, moody Bible student me is supposed to give like the best man's speech. But it was like really awkward for me trying to figure it out. You know, I was like always sleeping nights trying to figure out how I could like somehow express the gospel in this like hopelessly at the time I would regard as, you know, sort of pagan hostile environment with my, you know, father codifying this like adulterous affair and all these things. So I ended up giving a speech that was sort of like vaguely about love loosely applied to a wedding scenario. And that was like my speech. It ended up being okay. You could write a very interesting autobiography. Yeah. Yeah. I will. Somebody got the material. Somebody asked me if I wrote an autobiography, what it would be called. And I joked that the publisher would want it to be topical for marketing purposes, so it'd be called artificial intelligence. And the first line would be I have always been a hopeless romantic hell-bent on being an intellectual. But you drop out of Bible college. No intention to write an autobiography. Just to be clear. You've got a few years to wait anyway. So you let you, you leave Bible college because now suddenly you have knowledge of God and you do what with this knowledge? Well, so I was planning on starting a house church in downtown Minneapolis. Well, back to the way international. Yeah. Yeah. It's the sins of the father's public. The sins of the father's public. It's all coming like a dog to its own vomit. There's my family lineage. And so you have this like storied, you know, auspicious line in ordained ministry there. And I get this like sort of, you know, half cult, you know, half usery, whatever, whatever the hell my family is doing there. Although I guess William Bradford is in there somewhere too. Like on my mom's side. So that's pretty okay. Maybe. But yeah, so I saw the plan after Bible college was, you know, my dad was intending to induct me into his real estate empire. Okay. Which I actually was not interested in like at all unbeknownst to him. So I was kind of playing, playing a lot. It didn't seem like he paid a lot of attention to actually the details of your life. So not a big surprise there. No. Well, and so I, you know, so he had somehow again, he had like, so he technically should not have been able to have a broker's license. After what he did. Yet somehow he wrote the secretary of state and obtained one. And so, you know, he had developed yet again, this like real estate empire and it was all kind of in the family. So his wife was a loan officer. And which worked out for me because she got me this like no doc subprime loan in 2005 on this inner city house that I had no right ever actually qualified for. But she was the loan officer. And so, you know, I kind of like sort of slid, slid into this house. The plan. So they wanted me to buy like a duplex to maximize my passive income or whatever. But I was like, no, I'm going to buy, you know, the house that I feel like I could live in the rest of my life. That was like my secret agenda. And so, you know, there was this little 1927 bungalow that we looked at in South Minneapolis, which incidentally now is, you know, noteworthy for being just some five blocks from George Floyd Square. Of course, which is that's another story, which I think people are more or less aware of that. My wife and I were actually walking by George Floyd when Wally was being arrested. That's another crazy story. You could see burned house. My telling of that story. I should really get get into the search engine because there's all these little things, you know, and they're kind of peppered throughout. But my intention was to start a house church with my friend, Richard Baxter, who had a great name for it. A great name for it. And his father was actually in charge of something like international ministry training for the Baptist General Conference yet again. And now he was also on my floor in Bible College and he actually left before I did. And he but he was kind of one of these interesting things. I was like an anomaly because everybody was like an MK or PK. Yeah, no, and I was just like random guy who willed himself into Bible College in spite of like everything. But so he was part of this, you know, important evangelical family. And so they were great expectations kind of a thing. But I remember we were having a discussion about the entry essays for Moody and as one of the requirements back then anyway, was you had to want to go into full-time vocational ministry. And so I remember asking him like what he had said he wanted to do like in his entrance essay and he was like, I think his like exact words were I think it might be cool to do linguistics. It was like the most non-committal states owned up. So not surprisingly, he ended up leaving because he didn't really care to begin with. But he was a really interesting guy and like of all the people I've known in my life, he's probably like the most like me. I think like temperamentally like we just had this kind of intuitive awareness of where each other were coming from like just like effortlessly kind of a thing. Well, so I was like, hey, this is great. Like we're both live, you know, on our way out of Bible College. We can and we had a lot of like maybe ill-formed naive ideas about non-institutional ecclesiology, which I gather you flirted with yourself. I did. Yeah. Yeah, I'd be interested to hear that. But I know it's not about it's not about you, Paul. It's not about me. Well, so long story short, like I bought the house and then he moved to the Philippines. Which kind of screwed me up because you know that I'm stuck with this house here and my dad who expects me to like join his his empire, which I had like no intention of doing but I didn't really have the wherewithal within me to do this myself. And so then it ended this kind of dark period where I just tried to like make the house work financially because as I had described it was already like way more house than I had like any right to have. So I ended up like renting out the rooms to all kinds of like crazy pagan people and you know, a labree. It was not like let's just put it that way. Like whatever the hell it was. It was not it was not a Christian study center. And and so I I ended up actually getting like $14,000 in debt because I had like no financial management concept at all and I had to sign a quick claim deed to my father and move back in with my mom just to like pay off my debt. It was like an extremely demoralized. So there was like five years of this like black hole where I was working like two jobs. Like I was delivering pizza like at night and I actually got robbed twice. There's there's so many stories, Paul. So many stories like that, like the time I, you know, got maced. It was temporarily blinded like delivering for Pizza Hut and and I like, you know, drop the pizzas and I ran off into this intersection and these like four people who had, you know, maced me just then. I just remember one of them was like, why'd you run, bro? And I'm like, why the hell do you think you just reckoned blinded me? Like stick around to see what you do next. You know, so so I just remember is funny because he's like, it's like a surprise like, hey, we were supposed to rob you like, why are you leaving? This is the narrative. This is the liturgy. This is the robbing liturgy and you broke it. Yeah. Well, I remember like being in the center of this intersection, Franklin Avenue and Portland there in South Minneapolis. And I wear my pizza hat uniform, you know, I got like my pizza hat on and I and I can't see like anything. I go to this car that stopped at a red light and meanwhile, they're like rummaging through my, you know, Mazda protege that my uncle had given me for free that I was using to deliver pizza and I asked this guy random dude in a car like, can you take me to the hospital? I'm like, I'm blind and then he's like, oh, sorry. And the light turns green and everybody drives away. They were like five cars and they all just leave me there. Now like, wow, that's that's great. So then I remembered I had my cell phone and I called, you know, and I just remember the ambulance came and they like flushing on my eyes in the back of the ambulance and it was this I just remember this British guy and he's like, you know, you're taking your life in the own hands delivering pizza in this neighborhood. I was like, this is my neighborhood. I live here. So that was something and it really was like that too, because you know, I also worked for as a 911 operator for a while and I remember when I told him where I lived, they're like, oh, you're right down there by crack alley. Like, thanks. That's great. Well, you know, you had intentions of being a light in the darkness and all those things. You just people are hurting. That's right. And go and hurt with them, which is exactly what you did. I excelled at that. All right. We got it. We got it. If we're going to have any time for you to ask me what you want to ask me, we got to, we got to get you at least to some, some point here. So, uh, how on earth did you find me? Yeah, you, I'm not exactly sure. Exactly like you, cause I wasn't the Jordan. It wasn't through Jordan Peterson. I remember that wasn't Jordan Peterson. Somehow or other your, you know, one of your videos appeared in my, in my feed. And I don't even remember like what it was or how or why, but I, you know, quickly realized that you were like this Dutch reformed, which is like specifically my adopted, well, one half of my adopted theological tradition in particular, under the auspices of Dover, uh, not that you're doing really interesting, but the point is you were, I very seldom mentioned Herman Dover on my channel. Very, very seldom. I, which is a shame, but I have heard you talk about Kuyper and there are people around me who talk about Dover and Bob Inc and you know, all the, all the people that I read for fun, the neo Calvinist lights. Yeah. Yeah. Well, and I, well, actually what happened to me was when I was in Bible college, I was like, you know, one of the many impetuous thoughts that I had was, Hey, I should write a book. So, cause I had this epiphany, right? Like people need to know. People need to know this. Don't hide your light under a bushel. Well, and so I thought like, Hey, you know, I'm going to write this book about the reality of God, you know, nevermind the fact that I've yet to receive any formal training on the, you know, many centuries of complex intellectual tradition. I felt like I was ready and I was going to call this book. The God who is. And so naturally they write that down. Yeah. Yeah. Naturally. I thought, Hey, I should Google my title just to make sure some jerk hasn't written something like that. Right. And sure enough, there's some guy, Francis Schaefer, who wrote this book, the God who is there, which I thought was pretty redundant actually. That's right. You didn't need the word there. There. You're going to just stop it at is it's gratuitous. So I'm like, who is this cloud? And so, you know, so I dutifully got the book and, and that was actually what began my intellectual journey was like, you know, when my college career was like imploding, but my interest in theology was exploding at the same, at the same moment. And like so many fundamentalists before me, it really started with Schaefer introducing me to a larger intellectual world. But I wasn't satisfied with that for well, a variety of reasons. Like, well, and he, I actually like, oh, a huge debt to Schaefer because he put me on both of my tracks intellectually. Um, Doryvird, although, you know, uh, probably like in spite of Schaefer cause he never really like mentions Doryvird or, or even Van Till, who by the way, he was a student of, but if you read true spirituality, you would get the impression that he was just spontaneously pacing in a barn. And this entire fully developed presuppositional, presuppositional apologetic just came to him. Just like at your Starbucks. That, yeah, just like, only more, but even more so. Yeah. That would, that's the impression that you would get. But yeah, one way or another, I went on the Dutch reform route. You know, I went from the, you know, talk about pipelines. You know, I went from the Schaefer, Van Till, Doryvird pipeline, but then Schaefer also had his little analysis of the trajectory of Western culture, and he, he talked about this weird, eccentric Danish thinker as, as Schaefer called him the first to go below the line of despair. And so me being the contrarian that I was, I thought, well, this is somebody I have to pay attention to. You know, Schaefer's basically saying like, this guy's okay for like, you know, pietistic devotional reading, but you don't really want to like, there's nothing to see here, people. But so, so with the reamed endorsement of the first to go below the line of despair began a long love affair with Kierkegaard, you know, the, the other Yes. behind me here. Yeah. And, and it got pretty intense. In fact, it turns out that Minnesota is home to the largest collection of Kierkegaard related materials outside of Copenhagen because Edna and Howard Hong, who were the couple who translated the Princeton paperback series were based at St. Paul with college, which is where the Kierkegaard library is. And actually ended up attending Howard Hong's funeral. So I guess I've like sort of ensconced myself in, you know, this Kierkegaardian world as a kind of honorary Lutheran, I guess, maybe, maybe in a kind of paulatelic existentialist sense. And then I sort of adopted neo Calvinist tradition, all the Neueberg as well, but it's all, it all tied back to Schaefer and the fact that he ripped off my great ID. And he was also, he also died in Rochester, Minnesota, the same year that I was born, 1984, because he was actually getting treated at the Mayo clinic. Wow. And that's why there's a labri there. In fact, it's the headquarters, I think still. Really? And the administrative headquarters is in Rochester. Well, you know, I began this video worried. I wasn't going to get enough stories, but I had, you know, this is the filibuster. This is the filibuster, but you induced it. It's like you might as well just stuck your fingers down my throat. And here we are, Paul. This is the mess that you created. I don't know who's listening to this or what they are. If they're still listening, but here we are. Yeah, I was going to open with the fact that, well, again, like, you know, I find myself as this kind of accidental progressive and I've established now, you know, through many autobiographical details that I'm something of a contrary. And so I occupy these spaces, but I never really commit myself to any of them, which doesn't mean that I'd like to think, you know, can't participate. And that's the what appeals to me about the space that has emerged around you is that it is such a genuinely pluralistic space. And I mean that in the in the best possible sense of the word. And I don't mean pluralism mistaken for perennialism. But I mean a genuine pluralism, which actually accommodates a genuine diversity of thought. At least that's what I value about this little corner of the Internet. And it's what, you know, dismayed me about both the conservative OPC where as far as I know, I'm still listed in the Bulletin as an apostate and the mainline Presbyterian Church where, you know, it's like incidentally Christian. Wow. I think you're really onto something there. I find myself in something that I think of as a kind of Christian diaspora and I don't think I'm the only one. I think there's actually a growing number of people who have deep seated Christian convictions but can't quite make their home unreservedly in the extant Christian Church in the West. That's not to say they can't participate in its church life and It's programatics, but there's a deep uneasiness there that causes us in the Christian diaspora, if you will, to long for a more pure visible manifestation of the church universal. And you know, that runs the gamut from, you know, super naive people like me trying to start a house church without any kind of like knowledge at all to, you know, lifelong ordained ministers who become disaffected or disillusioned in one way or another. Dare I say John Van Dunk may even be part of this Christian diaspora. I don't know. I think he definitely is. I actually thought of deciding a channel dealing with that theme, actually sort of inviting people to discuss their own sort of disaffection or disillusionment while still maintaining an existential identification with their received Christianity, even if they couldn't quite participate in it the way that it was given to them. And I even got permission from Grim Grizz to use his VNA bubble. Yeah, so that was a major coup. Although he did say that if it did not succeed in making people feel virtually not alone that, you know, the assassins would succeed and I couldn't use it. Kind of a double-edged sword there, but yeah, where I was going to go with it is, yeah, just kind of feeling dismayed about the nature of the conversation around the CRC and House. Yeah, from my more kind of latently progressive standpoint, I guess, in this, this is funny because it's all relative because in this context, I'm like a crazy wide-eyed liberal, but over there I'm like a crazy wide-eyed fundamentalist. Yeah. Yeah. But this is my strange situation, Paul. So I wanted to kind of, I don't know, maybe by way of like shock exposure therapy or something, kind of introduce myself as a bonafide progressive member of the Little Corner because I do identify particularly as a liberal Protestant theologically, but I would characterize that as like a classical liberal in the sense that I'm not with like Hicks, you know, in speaking of like the myth of the incarnation or something like that. I for the most part embrace the contours of historical orthodoxy, but I do believe in my own kind of narrative as a Protestant that the most salient issue in the Protestant Reformation was in fact a philosophical one. There were of course, socio-political issues. There were obviously theological issues and ecclesiastical issues, of course, but I think the philosophical issue is maybe what Tillich identifies as the Protestant principle and that's the part where some years ago when I first entered the corner, I kind of chastised you for suggesting that the protest had to end and pointed out that the protest can't end if what the protest is, is the philosophical rejection of any attempt to usurp divine authority. And that's how I think of Protestantism. That's how I identify as a Protestant. So I see the purpose of the Reformation philosophically was to rest divine authority away from the ecclesiastical institution and the way that that was affected was to push it back into scripture. And the reason that I identify as a liberal Protestant is I think with liberal theologians that after 500 years of Protestantism, we've now seen that that move was necessary indeed, but insufficient. And I'm with the Christocentric tradition in liberal theology that seeks to push that authority back further into the person of Christ. That's more or less where I'm coming from. That's really good. That's really good. Yeah, I mean, that's more or less where I'm coming from. But out of that place, yeah, it makes me somewhat of a unicorn. I think I'm kind of like that Randall guy from Portland who's always going on the Capturing Christianity channel. It's like is a weird, which is a weird name for a channel because it's like now that you've held Christianity hostage, it's like who are you ransoming and what are the demands? You know, that's never really clear to me, but there's this poor liberal theology professor who's always like on there. His name is like Randall something. He's kind of like the foil, you know, he's like, he's like, though progressive science so bad and you guys have to kind of like moderate here. Wait, the Capturing Christianity, that's the guy who's always got Muslim, this is the guy who declared that he was running a statistical assessment to determine the probability that quote the papacy is true. This is that guy. Oh, don't get me started on the merits of that project. Because we don't have enough time for that story. Yeah, someone pointed me to a couple of his videos that I watched some of his videos and I just was unsure about a whole lot of things after watching his channel. I'm sure there's fans of his channel out there and that's fine. But I mean, it's not like the worst thing, but just the idea that you could somehow bracket all of the questions about the truth of Christianity and then quantify the statistical probability that the papacy is true. Why don't you know what that means? You know, my friend ran a karate school and he said that, you know, you get these like martial arts magazines and they're always these like absurd articles and one of them he said was how to use martial arts to defend against a hand grenade. And I remember him saying, you know, if that's what you're doing, too many things have already gone wrong. That's kind of how I feel about the, that's quantifying the probability of the papacy being true. It's like too many things have gone wrong. If that's where you're at like. But I've been listening to the conversation around sex and gender and you know, my wife and I actually identify as asexual. So technically we're in the alphabet soup. Okay. Of the of the people that you know, that are. Nate warned me you were gonna you were gonna come into this conversation. So let's have it. Oh, well, I mean, I guess I'm just. You keep talking. I gotta I'm gonna fiddle with some things. I've been on I had two hours with Richard Roland already this morning. So it's been a it's been a busy morning. So I got to replenish a little so keep talking. I hear you. Okay, that's not that's not weird at all. But focus folks. Hey, hey, hey, we've got a grim gris here. You can handle me refreshing my drink. It gives me a chance to inspect all the formerly out of focus debris on your table. But yeah, I mean, basically. My wife and I we've been married for it will be 12 years next month. We. Okay, so content warning there may be sexually if not explicit suggestive discussion that is not perhaps suitable for immature audiences. So your discretion you already warned us you went to the adult service and it's panning out. So keep going. Your discretion is advice. But yeah, basically what happened was my wife and I on our wedding night. We dutifully attempted to consummate our marriage. It was awkward not unpleasant because we were thoroughly lubricated at that point from dinner and such. But it was awkward and we weren't really into it. So we, you know, effectively failed to achieve consummation that evening and then this is where I guess the rest of the story just kind of fills in. We just never tried again. He just never attempted again. And it was basically like years later that we realized that we just didn't care, I guess. And at some point like a couple years ago, we started to kind of think of ourselves as at least, you know, having some sort of affinity in our experience with what is described as a sexuality. Now that does not mean that I have, you know, ideologically endorsed some sort of neo-Marxist or other rationalistic, you know, heavy-handed description of human nature or sexuality or something, but it does happen to fit our anecdotal experience, which I would not in any way present as a norm to do to be, you know, to construct an entire monolithic civilization on, but the way I kind of think of it is almost in a kind of Dory Verdean sense of unfolding complexity of God's latent possibilities within creation, such that these diverse sexual expressions that are, you know, have become the kind of political and social football that they have, I wonder if they are not further disclosures of the creative possibilities that God has placed within his cosmonomic order. That's kind of how I think about it theologically. Now I have a lot of idiosyncratic reasons for relativizing the, you know, much assumed scriptural teaching on sexuality, but mostly I guess my issue, well, so we had this experience that I just described, and it wasn't really until our 10th wedding anniversary that we kind of like looked at each other and were like, you know, it's kind of weird. We just like not only never had sex, but never really cared to have sex. Like it wasn't like some traumatic thing. It wasn't like we were seeking marriage counsel. It's not like it was like driving us apart or something. I mean, initially it was kind of in the back of our minds, like in the early years, you know, but we didn't have this deontological expectation much less the, you know, innate drive to do that. And then we were not intending to have children. So it just wasn't something we were interested in. And that was essentially our experience. And it wasn't until we thought of it as corresponding almost like incidentally to this asexual thing that I started to kind of rethink my own views, I guess of homosexuality and all the rest of it because I didn't really care. You know, I was more interested in frankly Christian philosophical problems like in inscrutable Christian philosophical problems that I'm playing intellectual tradition and still I'm still more interested in those things, but that's why, you know, I'm not doing the, you know, what is his name? David's Sint, I think thing and holding up a sign that's like is anyone else here asexual? You know, he was the first openly gay minister in the mainline Presbyterian Church and he went to the General Assembly and just held up a sign. Is anyone else here gay? No, this was like 1974, I think. So, but the reason I don't do that is because that's not my issue. You know, my issue is the reality of God, the living Creator God who is love personified in the historical Jesus Christ. That's my issue. And so, yes, I incidentally identify, you know, as asexual to the extent to which that has a, you know, discernible, graspable content. And as such, yeah, you have a kind of sympathy and even perhaps understanding for people who have more definitive, let's say, sexy sexual orientation. And you know, being asexual, if I can say, if I can speak of myself that way is weird because you kind of like don't fit in in either thing. Yeah. You know, like there was a gay pride parade in Australia and the asexual contingent came up and people were haranguing them saying you guys are no fun. So, so they, so, you know, they get it from both sides, you know, it's like what's wrong with you people? So, so we occupy this awkward kind of liminal spin, but I know where you feel about coming out and the secret sacred self, you know, so God forbid I come on Paul van der Klaas channel and you know, make myself some lightning rod of it because this is going to be the this is going to be the thing that sets off my meteoric rise. Paul. This is going to be it. Well, you know, at least you're safe from Dr. Egan's temptation. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's true. Although, you know, one, one can never know. Well, you know, there are, there are many Christian saints over the years that would have aspired to have been asexual. Well, that's the other interesting thing. Yeah. There's a sense in which our sexual ethic is actually more similar to a lot of the historical roots than even, you know, the focus on the family or what, what have you, but mostly it's been, it's been interesting for me as a kind of foil because like, so take like the, you know, the don't say gay bill or the whole controversy over exposing students. I'm not going to say children, but students, you know, to this gender ideology or the notion of a more expansive fluid spectrum as it relates to sexuality. I think there is a lot of, I wonder if it's not unjustified fear about say like social contagion. I'm not saying social contagion isn't a thing or isn't something to worry about, but I think there's a lot of perhaps hysteria overestimating the possibility of it because for example, like if you sat down a bunch of teenagers in a sex ed class with like raging hormones and suggested to them, Hey, you know, it's possible to be asexual. I don't think anybody would believe that that some of them would delude themselves into thinking that they were and somehow just not engaged in any kind of sexual experimentation or have experience any sexual attraction. So my question is if it's so obviously not transferable by suggestion for asexuality, why is it so intuitive for people to think that everybody's going to think they're gay or trans or something? And I just wonder about that. I mean, it's not an argument. It's just something. So I think asexuality is an interesting kind of foil to kind of look at the whole issue. And it's the one that I happen to occupy so I can't help. I can't help pulling it up. Well, it is because it's also different from celibacy, which in practice is asexual but is is renunciatory in the sense that because the asexual has nothing to renounce. Exactly. Yeah. I just have a good one. That's also interesting from the, you know, moralistic, pietistic, theological perspective because our sin is like a sin of omission, which is a little bit if anything, and then that's a little bit of a little bit softer, you know, you know, if you're one of Judah's sons and you just sat down with Tamar and said I'm asexual. So I mean, would you get the would you you know, oh, yeah, there's something there's something different about it. But but I mean, I guess part of my purpose of, you know, emerging there whatever in the midst of this conversation is a, you know, there's a contrarian thing because you know, I could never notice that there does happen to be a significant backlash against that entire population. So this is the moment that seems to me to say, oh, yeah, I'm with those. This is our moment. Like everybody hates these people now. Okay, I better like now I better. You can have the A parade. We're not into any of you. So, you know, you would you would you would very severely tempt a world of people who would find this orientation to be a challenge to overcome. Oh, yeah, it's already happened. Well, Jacob, you know, is convinced that we're going to name our children after him. You know, so it's a good get in line. It's there's no there's no shortage of people who, you know, we're, you know, designing their conversion therapies to to cure us now. So that's cool. You know, I'll audit your class. I don't know. It'll work out. I don't know. I have no like vested interest in remaining a sex. So it just happens to be something that, you know, is an apt Imperial description of my anecdotal experience. Well, you know, I have a lot of these conversations, as you well know, and there are very few of them in which it seems. I get to a point that I think I can't be surprised any further and then it happens again. And that has been this conversation. Your life is. It's quite an amazing life so far. I just can't stand. Well, just by the fact that it's happened already sort of leads one to imagine it's going to keep happening. That just seems to be how you are. It's a Chinese blessing, you know, living in introducing times. Yeah, give it an interesting life. Well, so I wanted to, you know, because this is something or at least that aspect, you're referring to other aspects of my story also, but because that aspect was so maybe like unfathomable to some people, you know, that somebody could be so interested in adjacent to bander clay and his Dutch reform Calvinism with like the meeting crisis and bringing to bear overt Christian philosophical remedies. And yet, you know, in any sense whatsoever, see themselves as also adjacent to whatever the hell the inverted clown show the world's on fire, you know, that with all of the interesting descriptions of those people who yes, I do in some sense see also as my people, you know, that they didn't ask me to be part of them. But I felt like it was important, you know, because like Beth Elmogrew who I met with you in Chicago, you know, I have a lot of love and respect for her. But so we are on Twitter and you know, as all good stories where things go right again, like on Twitter, I was following her on Twitter and at one point just like seemingly out of nowhere she notes that of course people who are incapable, she said of consummating their marriage don't have valid marriages or something to that effect. I'm sitting here reading this like what the hell like Beth Elmogrew and I was really tempted because I don't know if you remember that infamous John Piper tweet to Rob Bell. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, Piper not even read. He said farewell Rob Bell. I almost tweeted fuck you Beth Elmogrew. Somehow, somehow I restrained myself for no other reason than I hadn't had this video and it wouldn't have made any sense. So this whole conversation is to set up a tweet. There are things like that though is my point is that you know occupying this little corner, whatever the hell it is, like there's a certain level of discourse that is, you know, and this is all cliche stuff from the CRC. So I know people have heard it before but you know, it's otherizing, it's demonizing, it's dehumanizing, it's all of these things. Well, well and nobody ever gets all hardly anybody ever gets all the way around to your letter. LGBTQIA and then you just have to wonder is that my A or is there some other A that takes precedent in the line? I was at the FBI booth at Pride Festival, which I've never gone to Pride ever but we have a bisexual friend and we like, you know, I was like, hey, you know, what the hell we should just go to Pride. Let's go to Pride. This is why not. This is our kind of all right. So might as well check it out and the FBI had like infiltrated in plain sight. They had a booth inviting people to, you know, sign up to become agents and things. So I'm not sure it was kind of weird. It was a little weird and not sure why the FBI had an official booth, but they had all these stickers and this guy's like, oh, like we're looking for the asexual sticker because he always trying to like make us feel welcome or whatever and the one that they sort of landed on was like demisexual and I'm like, what the hell is that? Like it sounds like you don't even have like, you know, our flag has already been like colonized by some other nuance, you know, so I mean, these are the travails of being part of the ever-expanding diversification. You think you got your identity. You got your A, you know, if it's a scarlet letter, whatever it is, at least it's there. But then, you know, somebody else has got it down. So you can't even rely on that problem. You can't even rely on that. I really wanted to talk to you about the strategic ambiguity in Protestant churches with regards to ecclesiology and how that phenomenon is aggravating the already arduous emotional dynamics of what's happening in the CRC. That's why I really wanted to talk to you because church, I think has to be one of the most equivocal words in the English language and theologians and I think, you know, church institutions, I really do think that they take advantage of that like to varying degrees of self-awareness, but it's not really helping anybody, least of all, you know, the public witness and intellectual credibility of Christianity through time in a post-Christian Western world. That was one of the things I wanted to talk about. That's a big topic. You took your fingers down my throat, Paul, and then all this autobiography vomited everywhere. And so here we are now in the last five. Do you know what this is? This is like George Lucas at the end of Revenge of the Sith and suddenly everything's got to be a new hope. You know, nothing is like that at all. The aesthetics are all completely different and in the last five minutes of the movie, we're all caught up. Everybody's British. All the technology is like 1970s. None of it is explained. This is the position you put me in, Paul. I have like five minutes to somehow tie everything together. And you know, for me, that was actually punctuated because my screening of episode three, the film broke right before those five minutes. And so we were all like, oh my goodness, this is the most incredible movie we've ever seen. And the clerk, you know, the attendant, he tried to warn us. He was like, oh, there's not that much more left. It's not really that. But then, you know, so there was this wait. There was like a 20 minute wait. They repaired the film. The last five minutes ran. It was all the like, we got to get caught up. We got to get caught up. But it was more punctuated than I think any other person's viewing was. And I swear at the end, when the credits rolled, there was this guy, total silence. And there was this one guy who just yelled out, what the hell? Because that was not the ending we were expecting. Was not what we were expecting. Well, I kind of feel like this conversation is a little bit like that. What the hell? What the hell? But it's okay. I had books I was going to recommend. I had a whole thing, Paul. It was beautiful. I feel like I owe you another, CW. I feel like I owe you another. So, fortunately, if the Lord tarries and gives me strength, we can do another. Because I even, you know, I always. Shoot, where is it? I look down. Is that Clouser? The blue? The dark blue. Where is it? The dark blue right there. It's like fourth in from the left on the second to the bottom shelf. Oh, you got another one. Oh, yeah, that's a way earlier edition. Yeah, myth of religious neutrality. I would love to have a reading group of that book with interested parties in this little corner. I would love to do that. Even if it's just the first part disambiguating the nature of religious belief, I think it is. It's so elucidating to understand in our current situation. That's really what Roy does masterfully in that book is disambiguate Dory bird's notion of religious ground motive. But there are newer editions of this. Yeah. Yeah, there's like there's a second edition, but then there's like a 2.5 edition that isn't officially recognized, but it's kind of negligible changes. I feel like they just oh I have to owe you. I just owe you an apology because I've you know here you had, you know, you had all these expectations and look what I've done to the your conversation. That was my mistake. I shouldn't should have no expectations. I mean, I didn't think it was bad. We had a lovely experience and you know, just in that pie place. Remember that on the way back from Thunder Bay. I feel like you took Laurel's idea about making the estuaries a cohort throughout the weekend. Did you or whose idea so Laurel at Betty's pies coming off of Thunder Bay. She observed that the estuary was really impactful, but it might have been more impactful if you had a cohort that went through and met repeatedly throughout the comments. I know that was the donks idea. So he's a van. He's another shape. He's still stealing these ideas. No, that's how that's right. Well, incidentally, Laurel also had that idea and told you about it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, that's that's to her credit. That's what we call the Spirit of God. He'd eat. Well, I'm glad I made you laugh. That was like I knew it would happen, but I wasn't sure where it would hit on the meter. Well, I just I do have a question to ask. Do you still have your surface duo? Yes, is it still working? Yes, no, no, no. I just know that, you know, there've been subsequent updates that have sort of messed it up and Microsoft has abandoned the project and so I just you know, you showed me that surface duo up there in Thunder Bay and I was all like, yeah, even with the cover on it. That's so cool. I've shopped. I've tinkered with buying one, but it's like really I don't really need it. But so in case people need to establish my credibility in this space as sufficiently progressive. This is a Communist Party of China emblem. I'm not going to explain that. I'm just going to note that. Also, I for some reason, I'm a card-carrying member of the NAACP. It just showed up one day in the mail. I don't know why, but I was like, okay, I'll take it. Maybe witnessing the George Floyd arrest was sufficient. Apparently so. Yeah, they're like, you're an honorary member now. Oh, I just didn't want people to think that I was, you know, appropriating progressivism or something. But I think you have and I'm going to edit this video. And I'm going to leave it off. You never edit videos, Paul. You never edit videos. I don't, but only on very special occasions when... Because you don't want the algorithm. So somebody said in the comment section that I was the Roy Kent of the Little Corner. I didn't know what that was until I watched Ted Lasso. And he's this character who just like gratuitously uses profanity. Which I do. I've never seen you gratuitously use profanity. That's because you're from New Jersey and you didn't notice the like two f-bombs I've already had in this conversation. You weren't scandalized at all. I wasn't scandalized at all. I am from New Jersey. So, oh, I thought that was why you were going to bleep me. No, no, no, no. And I think you put your finger on one of the real essences of what's going on. And I thought I want to put that up front so people don't miss it. And I want people to watch the whole conversation. And they really should. If they don't, they're really missing out. This has been... This is one of my favorites. I mean, this conversation has been... I'm a little dumbstruck by the whole thing. Paul, do your children ever say we can't all be your favorites, Ted? Do they ever say that? No. Because they know what they're... They know what they're... Well, my sisters know that I was the favorite, so... When are you doing the epic crossover with the primitive home? I kept thinking this is obvious cross-promotional opportunity. You could turn to the bungalow. You have the historical tie in that this is where DeVries lived. I mean, what is happening? What is the holdup here? I really don't understand why... The problem with my poor sister is she's even higher in openness than I am and lower in conscientiousness, which means she gets bored quicker. And so the primitive home thing might even just all go away when she goes and does some other even more nerdy YouTube things that nobody watches. But... I was really hoping for like the VanderKlay extended YouTube universe. I thought that was going to be a thing. If my younger sister had lived that she had just started a podcast and she was... She, my younger sister is more progressive than I am. And so she had just started a podcast with her daughter who... Her daughter is just like her. And so... Yeah. How progressive you are? You mean? Just like in that sense? No, my... Her daughter is a high school English teacher too. Her daughter is... Their middle child, their daughter is a lot like my sister. So anyway, I'm not... Not that my nieces and nephews are going to watch any of this. Nobody... The only ones who ever watch any of it... Jared will watch something sometimes and I think Benny's watched a couple of things. But I think my daughters and my oldest son, I don't think have watched any of it. My wife doesn't watch any of this. So... Yeah, that's the perils of being a content creator. You just alienate those closest to you. I don't identify as a content creator. I'm rather a myth because YouTube keeps sending me things to content creators and I say, that's not me. I am not a content creator. I noticed you're like super meta commentary about the system notes you received from the back end of YouTube on Twitter. I think you're always like, this is what YouTube thinks of me? That's exactly right. I do not identify as they... I mean, I don't even have an alphabet to stand with. There's no parade for those who make YouTube videos and are not content creators. Not yet, Paula. Not yet. Mr. Beast will make it happen just because he said it. And they'll be blowing money on the crowd. It's going to be incredible. Oh, CW, CW. What this... I have two simultaneous fears for this conversation. The first is that hardly anyone will watch it. And the second is that it will break the internet. And they're both my fears. So... Who knows? Maybe... I have a dedicated in-ground fiber line, so it's not going to break my internet. I made damn sure of that. Hey, and what happened to the... We're still waiting on the Minneapolis estuary to emerge. Yeah, you know, I realized so... So Luke had contacted me and he was like, do you not use Signal anymore? Because he created a Signal group for the Twin Cities Estuary. And I was like, oh, like somehow I was in some other like annoying thing and I just like turned off all notifications. And so I logged in there. I got like 700 messages for the Twin Cities Estuary channel. I was like, oops. I'm not the most upstanding member. Well, the thing about Minneapolis is you guys have some really great potential. You got Paul Anleitner there. You got you. You got Luke. I mean, in terms of metropolitan areas in America, you're just a little south of Thunder Bay. You guys have super potential. It's just like Lake Wobegon, you know, when it comes to cult of personalities, we're above average here. That's right. Indeed you are. Indeed you are. Well, I hate to bring this thing to a close, but I have been doing this for over four hours today. And I, you know, I don't know if... It's too long. It's not too long. You gotta pace yourself. Well, you know, I felt bad because you're like, we've never done this. And I'm like, crap. I've never... I mean, there's so many others that are still also kind of waiting in the wings. And so it's like, okay, I got to get busy now. So let's get CW. And your calendar was easy. You said anytime you want. I said, great. CW on the calendar. I was trying to be accommodating. You sent me like some GIF of this woman blushing. I was like, you act as if not everybody accommodates. No, no. You're the VIP. How can I be like, oh, I'm only available? Sometimes I try to... Sometimes people like, you know, oh, I can't get a rando slot. Okay. All right. Well... And they're like, but it can only be for these 25 minutes. Exactly. It's like 3 a.m. On a full moon. Yeah, on the solstice. That's right. And like, well, I don't think I can make that work. Oh. Yeah. You know, you're not paying me to do this, dude. I'm just trying to... But don't act shocked. You're a pastor with a small urban church. So you... This is like your everyday life. It's true. I love it when people call me at 1115 while I'm in, you know, while I'm in church and it's like, where did you think I would be? You're obviously not here right now. Why do you think I'm available? Yeah. There are many interesting ironies to my life. So... Well, it was good. I guess maybe we'll pick up the thread. We'll have to pick up the thread. Pull the thread I intended to pull. Now there are so many books because I really would... I really enjoyed this book. And he had a more popular book too. Well, maybe not in terms of sales. But he had a more less technical book, Knowing with the Heart, which I believe has now been republished as Can We Know God is Real or something like that. That's like right up your alley. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah, I love Roy. Like I was trying to get you to talk to him, but you know, I mean, I think that's part of the hazard of your job. You know, you have to kind of have like a really over aggressive filter. It's like when people are suggesting like you should talk to it, it's just like that's when you start to tune out. Because if you even like entertain the possibility of everything people think you should do, then you would never be able to think about anything else. No, it's true. I mean, I get it. I get it. But you know, Roy, he's not going to be with us much longer. I would love to see you talk to him. Well, the thing the thing about, you know, chasing someone like this down is that he's like in his 80s. He's not going to go very fast. But I don't the reason I don't like hunt down many celebrity conversations is because he'd be flattered that you view him as a celebrity. Well, he wrote a book. So that's something. Lots of people write book about him. Although that book does have the distinction, you know, most academic literature goes out of print in five years. That book has been in print for decades in multiple editions now. So there is something good. There's something about that book. But but I like, you know, I like to have conversations within relationships. So, you know, you and I have chatted and Bridges of Meaning. You've been on live streams. I've had pie with you in the state of Minnesota. You know, you showed me your your your surface duo, which I thought was really cool because I think they're really cool, even though they're you know, I I actually built computers and ran OS 2 for a while. I'm like that. I usually back technological losers. So, you know, and so I like it. To me, it's way more fun having conversations with people that you can at least have some hope of having something of a relationship with because just like this conversation. I mean, we only scratch the surface of the interesting things in your life. We only and and and what a bonanza it was. Yeah, I mean, I mean, that's why I don't like to talk about autobiography because it's like, what do I what do I say? Like like which you know, which metanarrative of my own experience do you want? What's the emphasis you're looking for? Because I could probably cobble together something that would suit, you know, in a compelling narrative. So and and so then I think, you know, I'm going to talk to this guy about his book. Now, if I if I reread the book and I get super interested in it, I might go ahead and, you know, send him an email and land him because I got a couple of conversations like that. But like, I mean, if you have the bandwidth and you just want to like put out there, hey, whoever wants to read this book, however infrequent, you know, like once every three months or something, we'll like talk about this part of it. I would totally be there for that. And then, yeah, maybe you could parlay that into a conversation with Roy or something. If he's still alive by the time all that happens, which is not guaranteed at all. But but but to me, these conversations have to have a telos and and to me, the telos context. And when the hell are you going to eulogize Tim Kelly? I know, I know, I know it's kind of disgrace at this point. They've not not to pile on anything. No, and and I should. I mean, I know how important he's been to it. Tim Keller was really important to me. I mean, in many ways, Tim Keller. It was funny because it was after I went to New York and met him and and and and even know that story. I didn't even know you met him. I was in his apartment. Met his wife. Whole nine yards. That sounds like a good story. And it was after that that he actually had the impact in my life and it had nothing to do with him meeting him. It had everything to do with. It had everything to do with where I was and I was I was I was a hair's breadth away from burnout. I was I was in bad shape. Are you saying that nothing to do with your meeting it? But you've also just said that these conversations need to tell us. I mean, is it possible that his preaching ministry needed to tell us too? And having met the man, I mean, is there any sense in which it made you more receptive? Because it's kind of hard to believe that. I know, actually, I actually so so I went to his conference because my buddies, the guys, the church planting group, my buddies here in Sacramento, one of them, Tim Blackman, whom going to have on the channel, Tim Blackman had an in. And Tim Blackman's like, let's go to New York City. And then Tim and then we also we've also had a way of finding other people to pay for our things. And so the four of us flew to New York. We stayed in a cool place. We had good meals. What's that? What year was this? 2006. OK. And I hadn't been back to the New York area since. The 90s, early 90s, and I hadn't lived there since the early 80s. And so my buddies are like, you're going to be our guide to New York. And I got to New York and it's like everything's different. You know, the Twin Towers were gone. I know the Twin Towers were gone. They didn't have tokens in the subway anymore. It's like, you know, I was anyway. So we were there and we got to there's this tiny little secret conference that Keller would do sometimes for certain people. And so we got to talk to Tim and ask him questions and meet other people, staff at the church. And then like the climax was like this evening of Chinese food with him and his wife and their apartment with a few other people. And, you know, it was totally cool. And then we went to church on Sunday and heard him preach, yada, yada, yada. And my whole thing was, it's interesting. And it wasn't until a couple of months later that I was really in bad shape. And I started listening to Tim Keller recordings, mp3s. And then I did a, you know, there were three years that I'd listened to two, three, four Tim Keller recordings a day. I mean, just hard into it. So, you know, weird way you were like a prototype for your large swath of your current audience. Yes. Yes. In this kind of. Yes. And so then it, you know, it sort of happened. Well, I wasn't burned out when I found Peterson, but Peterson was just fascinating. And that really caught my attention. And I couldn't find conversation partners. So that's why I made my video. And I thought I'd find a few conversation partners, but I didn't expect this. So, but what you said about this little corner, I think is true. It's it's it is it is very definitely, you know, it is probably the most pluralistic. Enter, you know, enterprise that genuinely pluralistic space that that I've ever participated in and delightfully. So and and and one in which you can keep your convictions and people approach each other with interest about their convictions in a in a think, generally speaking, a mutually satisfying way, which is quite remarkable. So. Yeah, yeah, I want to kind of be a pull a hezzy and be like, can I also be welcome? I mean, I know, because I'm here, but it's not like I'm, you know, in your face, you know, I'm not shoving rainbow cupcakes to people's throats or something like that. No, nor do I intend to. Oh, you are. You're very welcome. CW. I don't know, man. You know, I don't know, Graham. I don't know if he's gonna let me use the VNA bubble now. He's like, you didn't say you're asexual. If Grimm gives you shit, you come talk to me. I'll I'll straighten Grimm Grizz out. Shadow Cabal. See, you just outed yourself. No. Well, I still have to sign up for Shadow Cabal because I want you doing the Minnesota goodbye. Paul. This is like the long goodbye. You're like it was like 20 minutes ago. You're like, I gotta go. I've been doing this for five hours. I gotta go. So you should go. It was good. It was good. CW will do it again. Off in Internet land. There's nothing we can do. No, but this this will this will be a landmark. I think this will be a landmark video. This was a good one. So, all right. All right. I'm gonna I'm doing the Minnesota. Goodbye. I'll get in the car and drive away. Okay, bye bye. Until the next time.