https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_99qxkTPXRA

 Hi, this is Paul. A friend of mine sent me this video clip from Lix Fridman's channel on Andrew Huberman talking about prayer. And it's really a rather remarkable clip. Now, I know that a lot of Christians are going to watch this clip and find his sense of prayer and how he conceives of God as being deficient. I know that. But what I hear here is something that's not very uncommon. In fact, to me, what this whole video clip talks about demonstrates the fact that this disenchantment, reputational winter, what do I mean by that? I mean that people lose status when they speak in a more enchanted way. Let me pull up the cover, at least, of Charles Taylor, A Secular Age. And one of the examples of secularity that Taylor talks about is the buffered self. Now, the buffered self is immune to spiritual forces. The buffered self is sort of self-existent. There might be psychological things that connect you to the world. There might be sociological, secular things. There might be cultural things. But there's no real such spiritual things. All there is is the self. Now, when you listen to him talk, he's very careful about trying to, as much as he can, maintain the buffered self. But there are points where he departs from it. And again, in many ways, secularity or disenchantment is propagated by social status, or a loss of social status, if in fact you act like yourself is not buffered. And what I see happening is that I sort of think about that as C.S. Lewis's winter in Narnia with the White Witch. And for me, this little clip is all about the melting of that winter. So let's give it a listen. I have a morning meditation that I do. Let's give it a listen once I have the sound properly set up. Okay, let's go again. I have a morning meditation that I do. Well, I wake up now, I get my sunlight, I hydrate, I use the bathroom, I do all the things that I talk about. Now, I had never heard of Andrew Huberman until he had that conversation with Jordan Peterson, which I didn't even listen to. But then I heard my son talk about his stuff and his podcast, and other people in the local meetup talk about his podcast. So he's a pretty big deal in terms of giving advice to men about mental health, physical health, social health. I mean, his podcast, is enormous. I've started to practice a prayer in the last year, which is new-ish for me, which is we could talk about in the morning. Can you talk about it a little bit? Sure. Yeah. And then I have a meditation that I do that actually is where I think through what the different roles that I play. So I start very basic. I say, okay, I'm an animal. Now, part of what's interesting, what I find interesting here is sort of this monkish culthood of manhood that we see sort of pervasive in the wisdom sphere, where now with the lack of, let's say, a culture, a monastic culture, or the monastic culture was really replaced by other manhood cultures. There's very much a hunger for men to be disciplined, to be focused, to achieve, and of course with individuals like Huberman, that seems to be very much who he is. And he'll talk about this in this clip. He's sort of naturally driven to that. And so it makes perfect sense that he will wind up going beyond just meditation. It's a fascinating point that he makes. It's where I think through what the different roles that I play. So I start very basic. I say, okay, I'm an animal. We are biologically animals, right? Human. I'm a man. I'm a scientist. I'm a teacher. I'm a friend. I'm a brother. I'm a son. I go through this. I have this list and I think about the different roles that I have and the roles that I still want in my life going forward that I haven't yet fulfilled. It just... Now, part of what's interesting is that lacking, let's say, a tradition that would give someone these things. There are many traditions in prayer and you pick them up, little ways of prayer and discipleship programs and all of this. He sort of had to make it up because he was out there in the secular world. But it's fascinating to me that he developed it because he didn't inherit it. It's sort of an inventory of where I've been, where I'm at, and where I'm going, as they say. And I don't know why I do it, but I started doing it this last year, I think, because it helps me understand just how many different contexts I have to exist in and remind myself that there's still more that I haven't done that I'm excited about. And to me, it sounds like a great practice. In each of those contexts, there's things that you want to accomplish to define that. Yeah, and I'm ambitious, so I think I'm a brother. I have an older sister and I love her tremendously. And I think I want to be the best brother I can be to her, which means maybe a call, maybe just, you know, we do an annual trip together for our birthdays, our birthdays are close together. We always go to New York for our birthdays, we've gone for the last three, four years. Like really like reminding myself of that role, not because I'll forget, but because I have all these other roles I'll get pulled into. It's interesting also to me that he is unmarried. Now, of course, there's no crime against being unmarried. He'll refer to a romantic relationship a little bit later. But again, that's sort of going back to my conversation with Dr. Jim, that's sort of part of what's going on here in terms of the unattached man. You say the first one, I'm an animal, because I have to remember that I have a body that needs care. Like any of us, I need sleep, I need food, I need hydration, I need that I'm human that that the brain of a human is marvelously complex, but also marvelously self defeating at times. And so I've been thinking about these things in the context of the different roles. And the whole thing takes about four or five minutes. And I just find it brings me a certain amount of clarity that then allows me to ratchet into the day. The prayer piece. Yeah, I think I've been reluctant to talk about until right there, the reluctance to talk about it. Why? Because you'll lose status. And again, there's this great clip from from Dallas Willard, that's on the Veritas forum that every time I play it, I get this little note on YouTube about it, because Veritas kind of clings tightly to it, I wish Veritas would just understand that. If you've got YouTube Gold, let it run out there. But Dallas Willard walking through a university with a secular university with a young man, notices that the young man sort of edits his language with respect to enchantment. And so, yeah, of course, this isn't something and so kudos to him for talking about it publicly. But again, to me, that shows the thawing of the of the winter. Now, because I don't believe in pushing religion on people. And I think that and I'm not. It's a highly individual thing. And I do believe that one can be an atheist and still pray, or agnostic and still pray. But for me, and my pause isn't to say that atheists and agnostics don't pray, because I think many of them do. They just feel a little bit of dissonance when they do. It really came about through understanding that there are certain aspects of myself that I just couldn't resolve on my own. And no matter how much therapy, no matter how much, and I haven't done a lot of it, but no matter how much plant medicine or other forms of medicine, or exercise, or podcasting, or science, or friendship, or any of that, I was just not going to resolve. And so, and I think that is a deeply rational conclusion to come to. Because of all of the good things you can do for yourself, of all of the the the male wisdom stuff you can harvest from YouTube, of all of the books and podcasts. Life is like this. I started this because someone close to me said, a male friend said, you know, prayer is powerful. And I said, well, how? And I don't know how, but if you can get it can allow you to get outside yourself, get let you give up control. And at the same time, take control. I don't even like saying take control. But the whole notion is that, again, forgive me, but there's no other way to say it. The whole notion is that, you know, like God works through us, whatever God is to you, he, him, her, whatever life force, nature, whatever it is to you, right, that it works through us. And so I do a prayer, I'll just describe it where I ask, I make an ask to help remove my defects, my character defects, I pray to God to help remove my character defects so that I can show up better in all the roles of my life. And that's a powerful prayer. Go to God and say, okay, Lord, show me my sin. What's your sin? It's where you miss the mark, show it to me. He will. He will. And do good work, like to which for me is learning and teaching, learning and teaching. And, and so you might say, well, how is that different than a meditation? Well, it I'm acknowledging that there's something that bigger than me, bigger than nature, as I understand it, that I cannot understand or control nor do I want to, and I'm just giving over to that. And does that make me less of a scientist? I sure as hell hope not. I certainly know I, there's the head of our neurosciences at Stanford until recently. I should talk to him directly about it. Bill Newsom has talked about his religious life. For me, it's really a way of getting outside myself and then understanding how I fit into this bigger picture. And it's, and the character defects part is real, right? I'm a human, I have defects, like, I got a lot of flaws in me, like anybody, but, and trying to acknowledge them and asking for help in removing them, not magically, but through right action, through my right action. So I do that. Not magically, you're still a little anxious about the enchantment, but, and through my right action, so it's sort of a, you know, works. I wouldn't say it's works righteousness, because he, he certainly hasn't framed it as justification, but he's going to do the work. Every morning. And I have to say that it's helped. It's helped a lot. It's helped me be better to myself, be better to other people. I still make mistakes. But it's a, it's becoming a bigger, bigger part of my life. And I never thought I'd talk like this. But I think it's clear to me that if we don't believe in something, again, doesn't have to be traditional standardized religion, but if we don't believe in something bigger than ourselves, we, at some level, will self-destruct. That's a powerful statement. And, you know, again, he sort of pushes back on traditional religion. Again, that's, that's just sort of where society is at. But the truth is, if you start pursuing it, you'll say, well, even though I'm nervous about the pluralities in traditional religion, and it's very difficult to wade through the complexity of the plurality, certainly there must be a benefit to all of the, not just haphazard work, but organized work that religious people have done, because this realization is not a new thing. There's a reason for thousands and thousands of years, men and women and children have been praying. And again, just as a pastor, in terms of talking to people who I meet, especially now after having this channel, what he's saying here is not in any way unusual. There are many people who feel this way, who do this one way or another, they basically just keep it quiet because they don't want to be embarrassed by it. And, or they don't want to lose status. So kudos to him for his courage and, and being willing to talk this way in a podcast. Good for you. I really, I really think so. It's power and it's powerful in a way that all the other stuff, meditation and all the tools is, is not because it's really operating at a much deeper and bigger level. And, you know, yeah, I think that's all I can talk about it. Mostly because I'm still working out, you know, the scientists in me wants to understand how it works. And I want to understand. And the point is to just go, you know, there's some, there's, you know, for lack of a better language for it, there's higher power than me and what I can control. I'm giving up control on certain things. And somehow that restores a sense of agency for, for right action, better action. And, you know, in some ways, just sort of lift the page right out of AA there and say, we're not going to forefront thousands of years of theological bickering. We are going to lean into the action, which is itself a step of faith and invite God, even if I'm a little reluctant to believe there is one invite God to act and in one way or another reveal some of his power to me. And, you know, I don't see this as being wholly different from, let's say, how God and Abraham get going as the apostle Paul sort of works this through in the book of Romans, because now, of course, Abraham was in a very different place, all kinds of gods, not in any way a buffered self, but it seems that this one God approaches Abraham and basically says, I'm going to give you everything that you want. And I know you've been frustrated in your life because your wife is barren and begin a relationship with me. And so therefore, you know, the apostle Paul in the book of Romans says, you know, before he Abraham acted with circumcision or any of these things, it was faith. And, and what I hear in in Huberman here, am I saying his name right? I hope so. Is these the first flicker of faith and and going to God and engaging God. And I think that's that is in many respects, especially if you as an adult, that's the way you come. And he's got the wisdom and the self knowledge to to approach it. So again, good for him. I think perhaps a part of that is just the humility that comes with acknowledging there's something bigger, more powerful than you. And then you can't control everything. It's I mean, that you go through life as a hard driving person, you know, forward center of mass. I remember being that way since I was little. It's like a new Legos. I'm like, oh, Legos. I was like, on the weekends, you know, learning about medieval weapons, then giving lectures about it in class when I was five or six years old, we're learning about tropical fish, and you know, cataloging all of them at the store, and then organizing it and make my, you know, my dad drive me is clearly a driven personality. Or my mom drive me to some fish store and then spending all my time there until they throw me out, you know, all of that. But I also remember my entire life, I would secretly pray when things were good and things weren't good. But most of this does not surprise me at all. Again, it's this winter of social stigma in certain communities where certainly not going to to anyone that I pray but secretly people do when things weren't good because it's important to pray. For me, it's important to pray each morning regardless. But when things weren't right, I couldn't make sense of them. I would secretly pray but I felt kind of ashamed of that for whatever reason. And then it was once in college, I distinctly remember I was having a hard time with a number of things. And I took a run down to San's Beach, UC Santa Barbara. And I remember I just, I was like, I don't know if I even have the right to do this. But I'm just praying. I just prayed for the ability to be as brutally honest with myself and with other people's I possibly could be about a particular situation I was in at that time. I mean, I think now it's probably safe to say I'd gone off to college because of a high school girlfriend. We essentially she was my family more, frankly, more than my biological family was at a certain stage of life. And we'd reached a point where we were diverging and it was incredibly painful. It was like losing everything I had. And it's like, what do I do? How do I manage this? Do I, you know, I was ready to quit and join the fire service just to support us so that we could move forward. And, you know, it's just, but praying just saying I can't figure this out on my own. It's sort of like, I can't figure this out on my own. And how frustrating that is, no number of friends could tell me or and inner wisdom couldn't tell me. And eventually it led me to the right answers. And she and I are friendly friends to this day. She's happily married with child and we're on good terms. But I think, you know, it's, it's a scary thing, but it's the best thing when you can't control all this and asking for help, I think is also the piece. You're not asking for some magic hand to come down and take care of you're asking for the help to come through you. Right. So that your body is used to do these. It's okay to ask for the magic hand too. I mean, don't, I mean, if, if you're, if you've taken the step to dare to talk to the creator of the universe, I mean, it's like the old story about the king, the king, the king has a servant and the king invites the servant, someone who he favors and says, ask what, ask what you will, but ask a kingly sized thing. Don't ask for just a little thing, because in a sense, if you ask for something massive, you praise me because I'm that large. So, okay, through you, that's fine. But you know, maybe get a little bolder and ask for a big thing. Now it might not come. He might say no, which is absolutely the right of the king, but you honor the king by asking for a king sized request. So, you know, don't, if you, if you have, if you build that relationship, own it, right works, right action. Isn't it interesting that this secret thing that you're almost embarrassed by that you did it as a child is something you, that's another thing you do as you get older, as you realize like those things are part of you. It's actually a beautiful thing. A lot of the content of the podcast is, you know, deep academic content. And we talk about everything from, you know, eating disorders to bipolar disorder to depression, you know, a lot of different topics, but the tools are the protocols, as we say, right, the sunlight viewing and all the rest. You know, a lot of that stuff is just stuff I wish I had known when I was in graduate school, if I'd known to go outside every once in a while and get some sunlight, not just stay in the lab, I would, you know, I might not have hit like a really tough round of depression when I was a postdoc and working twice as hard. And, you know, when my body would break down or I'd get sick a lot, I don't get sick much anymore, occasionally about once every eight. And again, I don't know him much, but, you know, his, his path sounds very interesting because, you know, he, he, he had to look out for wisdom because obviously he was living in, in an unwise way that our culture sort of temps people into. 15 months to two years, I get a, you know, get something, but, you know, I used to break my foot skateboarding all the time. I couldn't understand what's wrong with my body. I'm getting injured. I can't do what everyone else can. Now I developed more slowly at a long arc of puberty. But I, so that was part of it. I was still developing, but you know, how to get your body stronger, how to build endurance that no one told me the information wasn't there. So a lot of what I put out there is the information that I wish I had, because once I had it, I was like, wow, like a, this stuff really works B it's grounded in something real, you know, some place, sometimes certain protocols are a combination of, you know, animal, human and animal and human studies, sometimes clinical trials, sometimes there's some mechanistic conjecture for some, not all I always make clear which, but in the end, like figuring out how things work so that we can be happier, healthier, more productive, suffer less, like reduce the suffering of the world. And I think that, well, I'll just say thank you and for asking about the prayer piece. Again, I'm not pushing or even encouraging it on anyone. I've just found it to be tremendously useful for me. Wow. So I thought it was a super interesting video and it'll be interesting to see where he goes with this. So yeah, just a little short video. Leave a comment.