https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tuxT74WkWdM

 As I'm playing around with YouTube, one of the things I'm trying to figure out is the relationship with not only my work world, but also my blog. I've been blogging for probably a dozen years in my current blog. You can find it at leadingchurch.com or paulvanderclay.me. I've been using WordPress and its current iteration is I think about eight, nine years old. I've been using WordPress and its current iteration is I think about eight, nine years old. I've been using WordPress and its current iteration is I think about eight, nine years old. I've been using WordPress and its current iteration is I think about eight, nine years old. I've always used my blog as kind of a preacher's file cabinet. You'll find amazingly diverse things on my blog because I'm not promoting things when I post them on my blog. I'm just noting that I read them so I can find them again. You'll find all kinds of stuff. Sometimes people will read my blog and say, are you promoting this? Are you promoting that? I'm not necessarily promoting any of it. If I have a comment to make on it, I'll make the comment. Usually I just throw up a link because I find the link interesting or helpful or annoying or enraging or beloved. That's kind of how I use my blog. Then thinking about YouTube and how I want to use YouTube, thinking, okay, well, maybe I should do a video log, touch base a little bit more in terms of some other things. Obviously I got going with the Jordan Peterson stuff, which I'm still very much into and will keep going with it. But ran across some interesting things today. I usually try to read as broadly as I can. I like to read from different across the political spectrum, across the social spectrum because I'm high in openness. I like to read a lot of different things and that all gets streamed into my head as I process all the stuff that I stream. A couple of things that I read today that I thought were noteworthy. Andrew Sullivan, I've been reading for years. He was the daily dish, a terrific blogger. He's now on New York Mag, which is obviously a site quite a bit further over on the left. Today's comment, though, could have been written from I think Jordan Peterson's perspective. I've been noting this quite a bit from Andrew Sullivan lately. A long time ago now I came to an abrupt face to face with what being a man means. I don't mean the gay thing. Now, Andrew Sullivan is a gay man who was very much an early proponent of gay marriage. I don't mean the gay thing. Figuring that out in the 1970s hadn't been easy. But I'd never questioned my sex or my gender, whatever occasional taunts came my way. I mean the fact that in years of being HIV positive, my testosterone levels had sunk and I decided given my lassitude, depression, and lack of sexual desire to go on hormone replacement therapy to get me back in healthy range for a 30-something male. It was a fascinating experience to witness maleness literally being injected into me, giving me a sudden jump that has been there all along. And now I saw and felt more vividly. You get a real sense of what being a man is from an experience like that as the rush of energy, strength, clarity, ambition, drive, and patience, and above all, horniness, came back to me every two weeks in the wake of my shot. I remember a really interesting article that I haven't been able to find, you know, even with my blog, on a woman, a transgender woman writing about her experience of receiving testosterone and not just how that shaped her body, but how that shaped her thinking. And this very much gets into the entire conversation of gender and sex and biology. And so often, you know, people will... Oh, there's someone's calling me. So I remember this article reading about this transgender woman who's taking testosterone and the shock that she had and not just how that changed her body, but how that changed her thinking. And, you know, what so often strikes me in this gender conversation is people want to deny the reality of testosterone and, you know, if you're a man, it's like, no, you can't deny the reality of testosterone. It's biology, baby. And so Andrew Sullivan continues. Where was I? I wrote about this a couple of decades ago in an essay called The He Hormone, and you can find that on...I'll put the link to this article in the notes. The visceral experience opened my eyes to the sheer and immeasurable natural difference between being a man and a woman, and it helped me understand better how nature is far more in control of us than we ever want to believe. I was listening...I forget, one of the regular commenters on my videos mentioned... pointed me again to a Jordan Peterson video where he's talking about his experience with social media. And I'd watched that before, and I was watching it again this morning and thinking about, wow, you know, how clueless I am. The second, third time I see something, I see it more deeply. But getting into this...now where was I? I lost my train of thought. You know, getting into this issue of, you know, the difference between men and women and how, you know, how nature has control of us. I just finished my rough draft to Sunday that I'll be posting a little bit later today, and how the Heideberg Catechism begins with this confession that I am not my own. And that is experientially true. I'm barely in control of my own motivational structure. You know, and testosterone, as men know, testosterone surging through your body means you're, you know, dealing with...if you want to be a Christian who lives a, you know, lives a chaste life, lives a faithful life, lives a life in control, you know, testosterone is one heck of a thing to deal with, but it's...you can't live with it, and you can't live without it. And so, you know, part of what you do, as, you know, Peterson talks about socialization, part of what you do is you come to grips with this, and you use the rest of your world to, in a sense, put your world in order. But again, back to Sullivan. I thought this was a very interesting article I learned a lot from. I mention this because in our increasingly heated debate about gender relations and the Me Too movement, this natural reality reflected in chromosomes and hormones, no scientist disputes, is rarely discussed. And it's almost become taboo. You can spend a lifetime in gender studies, and the subject will never come up. All differences between the sexes are now informed, all differences between the sexes we are now informed, are a function of the age-old oppression of women by men, of the patriarchy that enforces the subjugation, and of the power structures that mandate misogyny. All differences between the genders we are told are a function not of nature, but of sexism. In fact, we are now informed of the latest generation of feminists, following the theories of Michelle Foucault, which if you listen to Peterson in that Wisconsin talk, it was pretty rough on, that nature itself is a social construction designed by men to oppress women. It doesn't actually exist. It's merely another tool of male power and must be resistant. And now this is where I think Sullivan adds something new. This, however, is untrue. Even the newest generation of feminists can see this on the quiet, although they will organize to shut down an entire magazine or prevent an airing of an alternative view on gender. They are not currently campaigning to shut down Planet Earth series, because it reveals that in almost every species, male and females behave differently, very differently. And they are, and there appears to be no patriarchy in place to bring this about at all. In other words, male lions, female lions, male chimps, female chimps, there's no patriarchy. And if you're going to find patriarchy there, baby, you know, it wasn't made by us. And this, again, is a point Peterson makes over and over and over again. They know not enough. They know enough to not push their arguments into places where it seems to be quite obviously ridiculous. But it is strikingly obvious that for today's progressives, humans are the sole species on the planet where gender differentiation has no clear basis in nature, science, evolution or biology. This is where they are hostile to Darwin as any creationist. And this is stupid, Sullivan says. Again, I'm just reading Sullivan here. The alternative explanation that these core natural differences between men and women have been supplanted by centuries of conscious oppression is staring us in the face. The fascinating conundrum is where one ends and the other begins. How much of this difference is natural and how much of it is social? That is the question. And the answer is a tricky one. Is the fact that the vast majority of construction workers are male and the huge majority of nurses are female a function of sexism or nature? Is male sexual aggression and horniness a function of patriarchy or testosterone? Is the fact that women now outnumber men among college students a function of reverse sexism or nature or nature? My suspicion is that it's more about nature than about society. And one reason I believe this, apart from all the data, is because, again, this is Andrew Sullivan writing, because I am gay, Andrew Sullivan says. I live in a sexual and romantic world without women where no patriarchy could definitionally exist. A subculture with hookups and relationships and marriages and every conceivable form of sexual desire that straight men and women experience as well. And you know what you find? That men behave no differently in sexual matters when there are no women involved at all. In fact, remove women and you see male sexuality unleashed more fully as men would naturally express it, if they could get away with it. It's full of handsiness and groping and objectification and lust and aggression and passion and ruthless pursuit of yet another conquest. And yes, I mean conquest. That's what testosterone does. It's also full of love, tenderness, compassion, jealousy, respect, dignity, and the need for security in a home. It's men's revenge on men. The old joke applies. What does a lesbian bring on a second date? A U-Haul. What does a gay man bring on a second date? What second date? I know this must be a pain in the neck for most women, but it's who we are. It's a blessing and a curse. It's called being male. This strange creature covered in hair, opinioned between morality and hormones governed by two brains, one above and one below. We can and should be restrained, tamed, kept under control, but nature will not be eradicated. And when left feminism denies nature's power, ignores testosterone, and sees all this behavior as a function entirely of structural patriarchal oppression, it is going to overreach. It is going to misunderstand. It is going to alienate a lot of people. If most men are told that they are down deep in fact problematic, if not toxic, they are going to get defensive and with good reason. And they are going to react. So, by the way, are countless women who do not see this kind of masculinity as toxic, who want men to be different, who are in fact deeply attracted to the core aggression of the human male and contemptuous of the latest orthodoxy from Brooklyn. From Brooklyn. I grew up in Patterson, not far from New York City. So anyway, again, I wanted to share that Andrew Sullivan piece and I would say, well, why do you read it? Why don't you just link it? Well, again, I'm exploring the YouTube format. And if I just say, oh, here's this good article, go read it. You're not going to read it. You might sit there and listen to me read it, even if I don't read it particularly well. But I thought it was a fascinating piece and I thought Andrew Sullivan sounded very Jordan Peterson in this. And so if you're interested in it, I'll put the link in the notes and let me know what you think more of a vlog format. And if you want to hear more articles that I find interesting or perceptive, leave a note in the comments section and that'll help me figure out what you all find helpful. So thanks for watching.