https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=la4yBkT6Mvo

 Hi, this is Paul. I just wanted to do an announcement. I've been organizing my first Quinnbrook overnight meetup retreat. I've talked about this for a couple of months. I haven't organized anything yet. This one is really just a trial run in some ways, and so I'm doing it about as easily as I can. I'm going to be in Massachusetts in the middle of November for the one year anniversary of my sister's death and So I thought it'd be a good time to try out this idea So I'm gonna do it at my sister's bed and breakfast. She's my sister is sort of a bed and breakfast that she runs It's it's fairly rustic She's got a YouTube channel where she actually does Designing things and she's fixing up the farm. I've got a lot of a link to that in the notes here, but Well, so what I'm gonna do is just sort of a retreat we're gonna start on At some point on Let's see the afternoon of November 8 2019 probably about 2 p.m And we'll just start hanging out and I'll figure out what I plan probably depending on how many people sign up I think there's about five signed up right now and I'm gonna I'm gonna cap it at 30 because just in terms of Managing that number of people and trying to have a conversation Breaking up into small discussion groups seeing what people want to talk about this kind of thing So I'm gonna cap it at 30 and it'll be November 8 and 9 2019 at Quinn Brook Farm. That's my sister's place in Connecticut that's 270 country road Thompson, Connecticut and I'll have all the details down here in the notes if you want to register I'm having my sister run the registration So if you want to register there's a there's an email address below that you can contact her through There's a link to her YouTube channel, which has her chasing the dream videos where her and her husband are fixing up their farm and That's what her videos are but you'll get a sense of what the place is now the the bedrooms if you you can So we're gonna start probably about two o'clock on November 8 probably go till lunchtime or so on November 9 so that's a Friday afternoon evening Saturday and Yeah, we're probably just gonna hang out and talk and see who shows up and have conversations and that's what we're gonna do so if you're interested in this sign up below the cost is $60 for the event and then lot and that includes the two meals. That'll be a dinner on Friday night and a brunch on Saturday morning. And so the $60 goes to my sister and then the Accommodations if you'd like to stay at Quinn Brook Farm, you can organize that with my sister There's a lot of other bed and breakfasts and places to stay around there. It's kind of a funky touristy area in in northern Connecticut just across the line from Massachusetts if you're flying in you could fly into Providence or Boston or you could drive up from the New York metropolitan area. It's in northern. It's in north It's in northeastern Connecticut. Basically, so if you're interested in this sign up again, I'm tapping it at 30 just because above that Numbers would get too manageable. I think there are five people signed up so far I don't know if maybe those would be the only five who show up. I don't know but it's Just trying out this I'm just trying this thing out and Seems like a good way to do it. So if you're interested the details are below and If you come I'll see you there