https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=au1tN6ryHHg

 Hi, this is Paul, and we're going to do a little bit of introduction to what's coming up for the German Festival in 2023. Some of you might remember we had one in 2022. One got going with a fair amount of controversy, but we weathered that storm, and now plans are well underway for the next one. So with me today are Cassidy and David, and I'll let those two introduce themselves. So well, hello, I'm Cassidy. If you've been around Paul's channel, you've probably seen my face. I was one of the OG randos. Oh yeah. And you were the one, in fact, that coined the randos for these. So you get credit for that. Yes, my one contribution to your fandom. I helped run the Bridges of Meaning Festival last year with Matthias, and Matthias is also doing it again. He couldn't be on this call, but he's joining us again, and David's joining with us. But we are doing the same sort of event and style of event, but under a different name. After the first festival, we had a lot of fun, and we were really happy that we could produce something for the Bridges of Meaning community and sort of help Estuary. But we realized that what we're doing is probably something separate from Bridges of Meaning and having that sort of different identity is helpful for us as we keep moving forward and participating in Estuary in the place we feel like we're best suited to do that. So this year, instead of Bridges of Meaning Festival, we're doing the Breakwater Festival. And David, why don't you introduce yourself and sort of explain Breakwater? Yeah. So I'm Dave, and I live here in Mannheim. And you could say Mannheim, this area has become a little bit of the kind of the hub for the German scene for Bridges of Meaning or the Estuary. So I participate in that regularly, help with Matthias leading the German Estuary here where we meet just across the river, just across the Rhine. And a lot of people come from, yeah, this greater metropolis. It's called the Rhine-Neckar region. And so this year we wanted to host the event actually in this region. There's a bunch of people here that are involved and will gladly come. But then, of course, more broadly in Germany and then more broadly in Europe. And so, yeah, we kind of went through how we wanted to think about this event, how we wanted to name it. And we decided upon the word Breakwater, so the Breakwater Festival. Part of the idea behind that is it's just a very vivid image of one of those borders, right? You've probably seen those structures that sometimes they're submerged underwater. Sometimes they're just a pile of stones that go out on the, jut out from like on the ocean. And what they function as is that right that in between the harbor and the chaos of the ocean. So it's not that breakwater. There's a lot of energy, kinetic energy, but it's that in between, kind of between chaos and the harbor, the safety of the harbor. So it's kind of a fitting, I think a fitting theme for how I think a lot of us feel in that space. There's a lot of chaos and we're looking for that harbor. And we'd rather be right on that fringe, right on that edge of that discussion. And I think a lot of us feel that space in our lives. And so that's part of it is the Breakwater Festival is going to be a bunch of us coming together, talking, making sense of things, and listening to each other and also having some great input from different speakers. Yeah. And the whole point of Breakwater too is to sort of calm the tides that come in from the keep the things that are on land sort of protected. And so as a festival, our hope is that we can create some structure to calm the tide of like all of this crazy online exchange that we've been doing and help support in person estuaries, grounds, create a foundation and grow so that people in local communities have those places to go and work through these questions of meaning and figure out how to navigate that. So what are the plans shaping up? And what did you learn from last year? And how's that going to sort of feed into what's happening this year? Yeah. Well, last year was fun because it was sort of this experiment, right? We had this idea of like, let's get these people together who've spent all this time talking online and meet in person and have this connection. And it was very intimate and sort of a smaller event, but the way that we were able to structure it, people got to engage with each other and see each other on this human level. And there was all these deep connections that happened. And it was great to see how those connections really helped strengthen the German estuary and the continued process of that already pretty strong group, but growing stronger. And so partnering with that estuary again this year to work with them to even grow deeper roots is something we're really excited about. So our hope is to continue making sort of these small, intimate festivals, about a hundred people in attendance and bring people from around this corner or sort of compatible with this corner to have conversations and engage in that local community as much as we want to bring speakers that people are interested in. Our hope is that it's not just people coming to sit at a lecture and have them be taught something, but that they can put some skin in the game and learn to do that with each other. So and this year is a fun little lineup. We've got Paul coming back to the festival, but we also are inviting Andrea with the bangs from Canada. She's been a pretty active member on the Discord for a long time and she's going to bring her podcast to the festival. Dr. Thomas Steininger, he's a German professor and friends with John Verbeke, been on his channel before, runs Evolve Magazine. He's going to come and be a speaker and run one of our breakout groups. And we also have Aaron Van Os, one of the Dutch estuary participants. He helped run the Dutch events last year. He teaches philosophy at University of Utrecht. And so he's going to come and have a lecture and sort of an interactive lecture to talk about, I believe, Nietzsche. So we're excited to see how it's all shaping out, but it's an interesting group of people that I think will come together and will have a good rapport to have really interesting conversations that I hope will spill over into the conversations that people will have between each other who attend the event. Do you have a theme or? Yeah, David, you want to talk about the theme? Well, we're we're working on it. What did we decide today? What you so so our overarching theme is past places and people and basically trying to discover how we're navigating this journey of meaning and what that looks like as we all individually come to life with different stories and experiences. And yeah, being able to bring these speakers from all different paths of life so they can talk about the different paths, experiences, you know, places and people that help them navigate this space that is estuary. So we're excited to continue to see how that shapes out and what that will look like individually. But we hope that it can eventually be helpful for those who want to create more in-person estuaries, that space to kind of learn how to how to practice that and take some of these things that we're working through at the festival. And with that, we're also going to do a panel with the German Estuary Group, taking some of those members and talking to them about their process of starting and participating in the estuary and how it's changed and affected the way they life and the way they orient themselves and sort of the differences of it being online versus in-person, because they're probably one of the groups that I think has been the most successful at taking this online thing and grounding it in a lot more person in-person engagement. And David, you probably experienced that more being a part of it. Yeah. In fact, I don't take part near as much on the online part and only in the in-person. So yeah, that's part of my motivation to be part of this, because I think that's such a rich experience. And I missed the one last year. So I thought, well, to make sure I'm part of it, then I should be on the leadership team. That's right. You did. Yes. He overcorrected. But outside of just the speakers and the breakout groups, we're also doing sort of a bonfire like we did last year and some unstructured time to have people kind of engage. And we're working on some sort of musical experiences from people in the German estuary space to give some variety and some different ways to connect to each other and enjoy the festival. Yeah, I remember. I mean, a big part of last year's was the unstructured time. And at the at the Chino event, they had they had the camping and the bonfire. That was sort of separate at the festival last year. That was sort of central to the whole vibe of the festival. Yeah. Well, and we're at a different venue this year. So unfortunately, there won't be camping on venue like we had last year, which is probably a good thing, because last year we did in the summer and now it'll be almost November. So I don't know how many people want to brave the German the German weather in late October. But we are working on some ways that people who want to come can have shared accommodation. We're working with a nonprofit in Germany. I don't remember the name off the top of my head, but they have some pretty reasonable accommodations that what service up to 20 people. Yeah. So we're trying to help organize that for people who want that communal experience. And yeah, I mean, I think we're trying to give enough space to have those sort of natural connections. I remember last year being able to sit and watch like you, Paul, playing chess with some of the guys and, you know, seeing that interaction with the the people who are coming to speak and the people who were there. And it felt very natural and beautiful. And so we hope to continue bringing that and keep it small enough so that we have that intimate feel and you can get to know everyone. And it does foster that connectedness of the local local location that we're in. Dates, you got to give dates. Yes. So the festival is October 27 through the 29th. Saturday night we will have the kickoff bonfire and Friday night. I'm sorry, Friday night, the 27th, the kickoff bonfire. And then Saturday and Sunday will be the different schedules of lectures and podcasts and music events and all those things. As a festival, we'll be providing three community meals this year, two lunches and one dinner on Saturday night. And we'll also be offering tickets for special admission that with your full festival pass, you get access to a private dinner with up to 10 people and the speakers to have a more private intimate dinner Saturday night. So we did that last year and I thought that was a lot of fun and getting the chance to talk to other people and give people a little bit of a chance to talk to the speakers without so much chaos of everybody pulling your attention. So yeah, those are sort of the main points. Tickets will go on sale July 1st. So we'll have a link. We'll provide Paul a link to put in his description so you can look at that. And I'll talk about pricing because we're doing a little bit of a tiered pricing system to sort of help people who maybe can't afford the full price ticket. We're doing early bird ticket purchasing. So between July 1st and the end of August, so July 1st and then September 1st, prices will change, but it'll be 165 for the general admission ticket and then 220 for that special admission ticket with the dinner. That euros or American dollars? Euros. Euros. Okay. Euros. Sorry, I'm American. I haven't quite figured it out yet. And then September 1st to the day before the festival, we have pre-order tickets. So if you pre-order your ticket between that time, it'll be 185 for the general admission and for the special admission 250. And then day of or you come to the festival and you buy tickets at the door, it'll be $200 to 280. So we highly suggest everybody pre-order your tickets. And if you do that in the first two months, it'll be the best price for you. And it helps us too, because we have a sense of what's going on and what to prepare for. And for those who would like to support us, but can't come to the festival, we are also selling some vintage festival t-shirts from our last festival. So you can get your special edition Bridges of Meaning merch, Bridges of Meaning Festival merch, and we have a limited supply. So when they're gone, they're gone, but that'll be available on the site too. So yeah, those are all the options for people who want to support us and what we do. And like we said, the first time we did this, we plan to make this an annual thing. So everything that comes in, it keeps going back to creating more events and making this thing more sustainable. So that's our hope and commitment to you. And so if you put your trust in us, we hope to deliver and give you something that is really helpful to Estuary, because I don't know, we all believe it and we want to see it be more grounded in these local spaces. And all of me, David and Matias, all being in Europe, it's our frontline, if you will. So this year will be Germany, but next year, who knows? Maybe we take it somewhere else, different country. Okay. Well, it was great fun last year and there are some videos around, but as with all of our conferences, you can watch the videos. The videos will give you a sense of the speeches, but the conference is a lot more than the speeches. I mean, the talks are, the talks sort of gather the people, but as with Chino and Thunder Bay and all of these events that we've done in the German Festival, it's a lot of the people's, the main thing they took away was what happened one-on-one, meeting new people, making new friends, that broader experience. And last year's festival also was, I was impressed by how much, well, first of all, I didn't know how much of Europe was in Germany to begin with, because even though many people were students in Germany, they were from all over Europe and even Israel. And one from South Africa. Yeah. It's definitely international. It is. It's very international, whereas I think some of the events in North America have been much more North America. So that was what was really cool about the conference, is just meeting people from all over with a lot of different backgrounds. Yeah. Well, it's interesting. We are planning on recording the events this year and releasing them after the festival, but I'd be interested to know what you think, Paul. We've talked about not recording the events. One, because I don't think they fully show the truth of what happens there, but you put a camera in something, it changes the dynamics of things. It does. It does. It's such a hard choice because you never get a second chance to record, and sometimes things happen that you really wish you had a record of. I mean, that's sort of how the Rando's conversations got going, because first I was just talking to people that was completely unrecorded. And then people would ask me afterwards, well, what exactly did you say, or how did that part of the conversation go? And it's like, I don't remember. And so then, you know, there's this little button on Zoom that I could press record. That was before the pandemic, before Zoom was popular. And so, okay, well, then we can record it. And then I was getting repetitions. So I thought, I wonder if anybody else would benefit from listening to this conversation. So I think, you know, I think it's, boy, it's a really good point. There is something intimate about not having that camera in that space. But then again, you don't know whether or not somebody's just recording the audio. So at Chino, we had this one event that was an impromptu event. And so there was no plan on recording it. And someone did record just the audio with their smartphone. I'm really glad they did, because I wasn't able to be at that event. And I heard right after the event, oh, wow, that was so good. And I was like, well, what happened? So yeah, I don't know. I don't know quite what to do with that dynamic. Yeah. Well, it's all very interesting. And too, we've been having these conversations too, about like the level of popularity of speakers, and how that'll affect certain participation too. Because the more high value speakers you get, the harder it is to get that really sort of natural and integrated participation from speakers and festival goers. And so it gets really tricky. And so you kind of have to ask those questions while you're doing these events. Well, what's the purpose? And yeah, I think something we feel lucky about is recognizing that our purpose is not necessarily to get the most esteemed person in front of the stage, but find people that are going to bring value to the communities that are there, and that will help them sort of grow. And so sometimes that means get people who've got a following and a name, but sometimes it means just bringing the people that are going to mesh well in the conversation and participate well in the spirit of what Estuary is. Because it's very different than a lot of things on the internet, and it's hard to sort of categorize and pick up. Yeah, that's very true. And we noticed that with even just the events that we've done. There is a dynamic with obviously the speakers sort of draw the people to a degree, but these hierarchies bind and blind. And these are tricky, tricky things, and then helping to sort of form that community. And you just have to try things. You just have to try things and see how they go and see where it goes, because you never know. Well, I mean, we're going to give a good amount of space and time for the connections with the participants. And in that way, it's, you know, at the least, there might be some parts of it that are videoed, and then there'll be many parts that are not, of course, because that doesn't make sense to put those publicly. But I know that the festival last year was kind of a whole catalyst for a whole bunch of people getting to know each other. And I think people are looking forward just to come and celebrate that connection again. And so in some ways, you could almost put any speaker up and it wouldn't matter. And so I think, yeah, there is a real balancing act. And I think what I hope everybody can take away is that we're trying to pay attention to what kind of culture we create at these types of events we want it to be about that connections and relationships. And we want good conversation that I think is where we do look to speakers sometimes to help us with that. And so that's, it's all a balancing act. Go ahead. I was just gonna say it's all a trust exercise to like creating spaces that are not necessarily safe, but like, you can find a place where you can trust to be there, share yourself, be vulnerable and participate in that. And yeah, what's nice is, you know, the more exposures you have to the speakers, the less sort of like, why did you get by this sort of celebrity mentality, I guess, it sort of all fades away. And all of a sudden it's like, oh, yeah, Paul's just a human being. Very much. I am very much. Well, and there's been sort of a cumulative effect with as these events. I mean, the German festival very much fed into Thunder Bay and that very much fed into Chino. And even though, especially the events that are sort of separated by the Atlantic, there still is a lot of cross pollination between them. And in Chino, I think one of the big learnings that we had was using the estuary protocol and some of the small group stuff, integrating it more into the conference itself. Because again, the shocking thing, not shocking, but the pleasant surprise from Chino was that again, people liked seeing the speakers and the speeches were fine and you can watch them on the internet and that's all good. But by and large, the takeaways that people left the conference from were all from the interactions between the randos, as it were. That was really what they came for and that's what they left with. And the fun thing is that hierarchies do bind and blind. And you might not be able to get a rando slot with me very easily or have FaceTime with Peugeot or Vervecky, but the beautiful thing about this little corner has been all of the connections between everyone. And then the development of other channels and other spaces and other relationships because that's scalable. Whereas celebrities sort of puts things in silos. I liked how last year we got to bring John Mandonk and he talked about the estuary protocol. We got to put it in place and this year we'll have Thomas who he's talked about doing sort of this fishbowl. Oh yeah, that was very interesting. Oh, we didn't record that, did we? No. Oh yeah, I see good meaning. We do have to schedule it. Really, I do have to schedule something with Thomas and sort of bring him into the conversation. And he's been more in the Vervecky area. He did have a conversation with John Vervecky. But yeah, his ideas of the fishbowl and a lot of cool ideas in that. Yeah, and I still have to talk with him exactly what that involves, but it's sort of a different way of sort of bringing in the conversation. And so we've tried the estuary protocol, which is great, and we'll still probably use it for some of our breakout sessions. But yeah, having this other way to communicate, it sort of opens the door of like, okay, there's a lot of people trying different things around this little corner and how do we integrate those all together as we're trying to figure out life and navigate the whole messiness of it. And is there going to be a baby in attendance there, or what's the timing look like? Well, to be determined, but there will be a new Bridges of Meaning baby. I guess this is my official announcement. Sorry. No, no, it's okay. So one reason we're doing the festival in October is because I am pregnant. So I'll be due at the end of August. So I'll have a fresh baby on the way. So there may be an appearance from a Bridges of Meaning baby also. But we shall see. They're out there, those Bridges of Meaning babies. Yeah, they're just growing. They're multiplying. We need t-shirts for that. Yeah. The Bridges of Meaning baby. Yeah, Bridges of Meaning baby. These little certificates, you know, this is a Bridges of Meaning baby. Yeah, Paul, when you started this, did you think you'd have Bridges of Meaning babies? I did not, but my wife and I, we have five kids. I seem to have a fertility gift about me somehow. So that's a good thing. But yeah, so there may be babies in attendance. So if you do have children and you want to figure out how to bring them to the festival, just email us. We get it. And we're happy to try to figure out a way that works and helps. So yeah, and if you have any questions about anything, just email us. Questions, concerns, we're normal people. We're open. We'll try to do the best we can for you. We have a Discord for the festival that's active. So if you have any interest or you decided, oh, I want to go, please join that because there's a lot of conversation happening. And what we found with the last festival is that when we had people who took the time to engage online before they met, it made it so much easier when they came together because it wasn't starting with small talk and not knowing anybody. There was already a connectedness and it made things a lot easier. So whether you decided you're coming or you have a thought about coming, just join that, engage in the conversation. And it's just helpful for everybody. Definitely. So you'll email me some links so that I can put them down below. So do that right after this because I want to. I didn't have a video for this morning. And some people are like, no, Monday morning home room, you know, but there's still some Sunday stuff out there. So people have something to listen to. I don't know if they can find it. Is there people knocking down your door saying you're not making enough content? You'd be surprised. Wait till vacation this summer. There's going to be some people who are going to be complaining. It's like, what am I going to do with my run? So some people like some people like the daily. So anyway, good. I thought I should maybe say something about where we're actually. I don't know where in Germany where we're going to be. Don't remember. You didn't say specifically. It is basically specifically. We're going to be in Mannheim, which is not so far away from Frankfurt for any international people intending to come internationally to the festival. But Mannheim is probably has a distinctive of being a good pit stop or train hub for most people heading to Heidelberg. Heidelberg is just down the road. It's a beautiful city and Mannheim doesn't have that reputation, but it's a big city. And we are going to be at what's called the Villa. The Villa is a community center. That my wife runs and we're going to have a facility there. It used to be a kindergarten. So we even have a playground for people that want to go down a slide. Yeah, but we have we have a lot of community space. We have a cafe and then we'll also have access to what it's part of the Protestant Church there, which has all these has a big fellowship hall and that'll be our main space. We'll have outdoor area. We'll have a kind of a lounge area and we'll have a big fellowship hall where we can use. So that's the northeast, the northwest part of Mannheim and it's very accessible through public transportation. So we have we have a tram line that runs right just right around the corner and that runs every 10 minutes. So that connects to all major parts of the city. So it really is a good location as far as for international travel and local travel. And like Cassidy said, we're going to also work on some shared shared accommodations, but all that stuff that all stuff will come out in the down the road. Yeah. Yeah. And any anything we forgot to mention, we're trying to get a detailed description in our event. So you can check there and then if your question is still not answered, there's always a way to contact us and we will we will answer all of your pining questions. So is the is are the invitations to the discord for the event? Is that open to anyone before the event? Yeah, it's open to anyone before the event. So you don't have to come to the event to be part of the discord. But it's great if you if you're sort of on the fence or you know that you're going to be and it you know if you want to know what's coming down the line for other events in the future, also a great place to join because we'll likely be communicating there first about anything we do. So okay. So if people are curious about it, they want to know more details, the discord would be a great place to get those questions answered. I I what you just have to say Heidelberg and of course, a Christian before ministers like Heidelberg. Wow, because I mean, the favorite confession, the Heidelberg catechism and actually my son, my son Jared went to Germany with a college interim group and Heidelberg is one of the places he went to that he was most impressed with. He said, Heidelberg is super cool. Yeah, yeah. I shouldn't have mentioned Heidelberg because then everybody will just skip manheim. We'll go straight to Heidelberg. Yeah, maybe we'll have to maybe we'll have to have a little side thing to Heidelberg. I've got to get back to the UK right after this for the Peterson event. But so are you going to the Peterson event? I'm going to the Peterson event. Yeah, I get my invitation. So that's that's not the kind of event I usually go to. So it'll be super interesting. So you do have to bring a suit. I will have a I will have a suit with me. I brought I brought one last year. And I'm glad we did last year's event because that sort of gave me some orientation to Europe. And so this year will be and I won't have Vendonk with me. Vendonk, you know, last year Vendonk was like everywhere you go, I've got to go. And at the end of the CINO conference, he's like, I'm getting old. I can't follow you around the world. You're on your own. Just make sure that there's some estuary trained people there. I said, OK, John. Delegation. I like it. Delegation. Yeah, no, Heidelberg. I think I'm definitely going to want to. Oh, yeah. Time to get over to Heidelberg, because I've just heard it's super cool. It is. So well, great. We can probably do that. Great. Great. One of the things so so Marcus over in Ireland, he was he was actually thinking one of these years of doing sort of a because CS Lewis was northern. He was from Northern Ireland. He was thinking about doing like a whole CS Lewis tour and conference. And I mean, you guys should definitely work that Heidelberg angle. I could get some Christian reform people out there. Each step, say, out of Bergen's like, oh, I know that word. All right. Any anything else you want to get in? Otherwise people can follow up in the discord below and I won't post this. Like I said, I want to post this morning. So afterwards, give me all those links, Cassidy, and I'll have that up and we'll get this thing going. So. All right. Sounds good. I think that's it, David. Anything else? Sounds good. All right. I will stop the recording.