https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FCQoFLxMuCo

 Hi, this is Paul and I have my friend John Van Donk with me today and we are going to have a conversation that was, John came out to my area he has some family around so he makes trips up to Northern California fairly regularly. And he had some ideas about leadership and starting new, we'll call them estuary groups for just for the sake of clarity now but obviously any group that begins can self brand and name, you know, work on that kind of stuff so john has a whole bunch of ideas and john has a scheme. And I like john scheme so we're going to introduce john scheme, and at the end of it there may be something I know a lot of people have been sort of waiting for what when's this thing going to roll out. Well, as I've said many times this is more caught than taught. And so roll out is going to be very organic, in case you didn't see it. The randos channel, I'll put a link below to the randos channel into a conversation that job had with an American living in Europe and another European about starting again what just for the sake of this conversation I'll call estuary groups in Europe. And so john has some ideas about how we can facilitate that and train leaders for that, partly because one of the things that I have seen in church planting is there's, you can plant churches without money, you can plant churches without core groups, you can plant churches without facilities, you can plant churches without nearly anything, but you can't plant a church without a leader. So if we want to see estuary type groups start, they need leaders, and so that's what we're going to talk about. So john how did, how did this whole thing come up in your mind was sort of the genesis of this. Well, you have all people should know that because when I, when I learned about your amazing conversations about Jordan Peterson and the start of your YouTube channel. And right away occurred to me that these kinds of conversations in the digital world realm are all good and well but people really need and want, or some people really need and want the personal contact and face to face conversation that can only happen when you are in the same room. And so I suggested to you to do a meetup, meetup had already been part of my experience in for other reasons and so meetup.com is a platform that that exists precisely to bring people together in the same room to to share whatever their interests may be. And so, I have, I was eager to get a Jordan Peterson meetup going myself when Jordan Peterson was in Los Angeles I already used the platform to get a few people together after the book signing and, and we use that to, to connect with one another. And then in that conversation we do very shortly thereafter you said okay well I'm going to do that here in Sacramento, and apparently it worked. I mean, subsequent conversations that you have had with other people and with me. It's pretty clear that your meetup was an unqualified success. From the point of view that, in fact, there are people who want to get together in the flesh to talk about life. And so, then you were able to put some new direction in life into my meetup group, and between the two of us we've kind of experimented. Excuse me, and cultivated at least two groups that we know of and perhaps several more that that are precisely for that purpose to bring people together in one room to talk about life. Yeah. Yeah, and that is the beginning of, of, of what it means to me personally, but now it becomes apparent that our world of talking about life is getting bigger, you doing it online and the discord doing it in the online also. And yet there is still that hunger, and the video you just mentioned of Matthias and David that that video, you know, really underscores an existential hunger for personal contact, perhaps further aggravated or facilitated or encouraged by coven. I don't know how that all plays out, but there does appear to be a desire for people. Excuse me to be together. By the way, whatever cough I have is not going to go through the wires to you so I'm not wearing a mask right now but my coffee is harmless. Don't worry about it. Take a drink of water. Okay. All right. All right. Or some other beverage of choice that will help you get through this conversation there's no telling what is in this cup. And when when when john and I have conversations john is a planner and so we have a whole script here that that he wants us to follow and I always sort of sometimes follow it but the point one and I think is a really important point he says this conversation is not about teaching people what estuary is. And there's a lot of that talk on the bridges of meaning discord server. Those conversations will continue to have. And part of the reason I say that this is caught not taught is that I can't tell you what estuary is. I sometimes know it when I see it. I know what can kill it. And I have some ideas of what can help it to flourish. And so I think a lot of this is going to be trying things. So just Tuesday night we had a meeting of our Sacramento meetup. And we wound up talking about the discord there, which we try not to too much because there are other people in the meetup who aren't on the discord. But what we've done in the bridges of meaning discord is a lot of exploration to how can this medium be used to facilitate the relationships and the conversations, but the entire premise right from the start of the bridges of meaning discord has been. This is a, this is in some ways a step, but this is not the goal. The goal are real face to face, belly to belly, nose to nose, people meeting in groups relating and so on and so forth. And an incarnational concept. Yes, to throw a fiat Christian theological word in there. But the, and the point of what John and I are going to talk about and explore today and invite some of you into is in fact with that goal, and we are going to continue to use electronic media as as steps towards these other things. So the goal is in person relational face to face, and I wanted to get that out front, clearly, because no matter how I can't say no matter but with any current level of technology we current we have presently. And it's always a talking on zoom is not the same as having a real life face to face relationship it just isn't, and we're, we're, we understand that so. All right. Where are we at john. Oh, we just about covered point four here. So, you know, our meetup groups, just to just to clarify that our meetup groups are sometimes about ideas, and many times about life situations about making your bed cleaning your room taking responsibility and how to navigate the suffering we encounter. This is not going to be about some magic formula to make people do things they don't want to do. It's not that it is not that we are recruiting leaders to do magic. We are recruiting leaders to to navigate what will naturally and organically I like the word organic in this context, what will naturally and organically happen because it is, it is arises from an internal felt need people want to be together. And there's people who can facilitate that. And so, and to jump on to the question about early on in our local meetup. We had a lot of discussion about, are we going to get around to talk about abstract ideas, or are we going to talk about personal issues and that's actually something that we talked about in our meetup and I've been wrestling with on the discord. And part of the reason face to face relationships in person relationships that aren't too heavily scripted are, I would say, nimble and flexible, because sometimes the conversation will be about abstract ideas meta ideas sometimes the conversation will get personal. And so, in that experience, a full blown relationship has those aspects. Now, just because of the way consciousness work and works and time works. You can't have all of those aspects for front at all the time. There might be seasons in which we have a lot of conversation about Jordan Peterson and abstract ideas, there might be seasons in which we talk about very practical things like cleaning up your room, and a group that is fundamentally interpersonal and relational will have over time And that's part of the reason again that we're not just say, here is a book group, a group may study a book. And here is a video watch party, they may do a watch party, but part of what human relationships have is the bandwidth to afford the recognition that there are different seasons in our lives, and the relationships hopefully are have enough of a spectrum that they can afford And so, when you're negotiating among the group, when is too much this when is too much that that's always a part of negotiation and that happens naturally and sometimes people leave a group for a season then come back to it again in church work I've seen this stuff for a very long time. And so my the knowledge and you know whatever wisdom I possess with respect to starting this and leading groups like this has a lot to do with my experience in churches, which are very similar. Yeah. I mean we're talking now about okay so people had to have, you know, really spend some time hanging out with you on your YouTube channel perhaps even in the comments section, people who spend a great deal of time on the discord server and and and gotten actually actually quite close up close and personal, but nevertheless online. We are now at the point of asking the question, if these people want to go deeper where do they go, you know if they want to do something local in person, where do they go. And then, and then, and then as you already pointed out earlier, a lot of it evolves around the availability of a leader to facilitate that. So now we are going to move to before you get there. Okay, okay, okay. Pre coven. You know, the way corporations and institutions like to roll out is there's this whole matrix there's this whole plan and it's all set. And then you can just be a little widget and plugged into this or you have a menu of options you can select that. And I haven't done that. For better for worse, but pre coven, you know we had our, we had our West Coast tour. Oh yeah yeah yeah what we're doing now in that that that was the, that was basically the plan seeding groups, because I have networks of pastors and churches and spaces seeding groups in these places and these networks in order to facilitate them of course coven came along. I had the, the meetups slash retreat at my sister's place in Connecticut. That, that we had in. When did we have that, I can't, I can't go over. Yeah October 2019. And we had a dozen people there. So, what we sort of have right now some pent up demand. We do want to get to the place where we will have, you know, we have meetup group in Fresno we have meetup group in Southern California meetup group in Alameda meetup group in Chicago, we do want to get to the point where, again we wanted to, we're going to go all the way up to British Columbia we do want to get to the point of where we're going to have other events such as again the Thunder Bay event, which hopefully will happen in September 20 2021. So, this has been anticipated and we, because I would love to have another road trip in the making, there is another road trip in the making and everything just starting waiting so okay what, what will be the resolution of the coven crisis and whether that's a vaccine or whether we learn to live with it or, or however that happens. Our goal is to facilitate this and I think what then we will want to see is both a local manifestations but also a network between them. And again, a network of personal relationships so that's, that's really my vision of what I'd like to see in terms of interconnected groups. And that is why we're actually talking now about the estuary host network. That's sorry. Anyway, that's for down the road away. Okay, we've already got a name. Yeah. We have subjects to change. Yeah, but but but but you already pointed out very clearly the centrality of some form of leadership to to further this, albeit vague and nebulous cause and and thing that we're trying to create and which will take many different locations in different locations, but nevertheless, each one of them is going to require some kind of leadership and so what we're really looking for today is to find out okay well who are these people and how can we get them to talk to each other and encourage each other and so that's what we're talking about. So, um, there are people out there, oh you're going to start. No. Seven. I'm typing notes so that when I post it. And I had to get this estuary. This estuary host network onto the list otherwise I'll forget it okay. Okay, here's john script for me this is this is me reading the teleprompter. There are people out there, men and women like Paul. You have the same have the sort of small group leadership skills that are conducive to facilitating conversations and that's something that we talked about early on and that's part of the reason you know people might say well Paul has a suspicious sneaky religious motivation. Okay. Yeah, we've all got motivations. But one of the things that I noted very quickly is that churches for a very long time, really for the last 3040 years have been cultivating small group leadership skills and have people in them that have those skills. And so part of what we're looking for for local estuary group leaders are people who have skills and experience in working with small groups, because there are there are just certain things that you learn over time about how to keep a group going well, and how to avoid pitfalls and side rails. There's a lot of things that complicated there's even books about that there's an emin book that's already fairly dated but Emma Griffin, who wrote a book about how to do small groups it's a fascinating material out there in the church world on small groups. And also people out there. Again, men and women who, like Paul are high enough in openness to be able to hear people express views that may in other settings, raise eyebrows. These people, then, would be able to not react, not become defensive not feel a need to defend God Christianity, or the church. We're working now with the assumption that if God exists he's big enough to defend himself. The church has been able to survive long enough without me to defend it. And, and, and has been around long enough to survive me. Yeah, that too. Yeah, that too. So, so, so there there's really no need to, for us to be really uptight about, you know, having the conversation follow a certain certain dogmatic parameters. So, high in openness Paul you probably should explain yourself what you mean by high in openness. I have a real good feel for it because you just you demonstrated so clearly on your channel, and on the estuary side, and but but but what precisely, how do you define high openness. I think, of course, Jordan Peterson and his big five personality profile openness is one of those things and so people who are familiar with Jordan Peterson's work will be familiar with this but I think this is actually a key element of estuary that that sort of a non passive security that Christians have with respect to hosting conversations, where you can be almost assured that heresy will be in the room. And, and, and I don't say that and sometimes people will get very nervous about that. I don't say that to make light as a Christian minister of heresy. I say that because one of the things I think we see in creation is a certain liberty and security that God has. And so, I think this is actually a vital skill that churches need to develop, because part of what has made churches the kinds of places where these kinds of versions are not having is a certain anxious insecure defensive posture that churches have to, there's I think the gods must be crazy where the rhino is described as kind of the firefighter of the bush, or anytime anybody lights a fire the rhino runs in and kind of tramples out the fire and Christians behave that way. And that's a real problem because they're, again, Allah Jordan Peterson Allah, all kinds of other people. If people are going to make progress thinking through things even as the old preacher saying goes stinking thinking that people are going to make progress thinking through things. And so, you have an open space to think it out. If you're doing math when I was in school you needed scratch paper to work on problems and estuary group in many ways is scratch paper. And so, you want actually a space in which people can think out loud now again that puts that makes a lot of other people nervous because what if the smartest person in the room is a is an atheist and they keep winning the fights. Well, I've seen the smartest person be in the room be a Christian, who keeps winning fights and nobody's minds are changed. And I think that is because we have this rather rather modernist shallow view of how human beings actually work. And so from a Christian perspective I would, I would ask if not all these leaders are going to be Christian, but those who are Christian and come out of churches to have a little bit of faith in God and the Holy Spirit and the process to, you know, and have a little bit of security and a little bit of security in the process. So that's that's sort of speaking to Christians but again, we are not saying that this is only for Christians, or only for churches either. I think what we're going to find is that just simply by virtue of the amount of organization that Christians and churches have achieved. It's going to be far easier for them to start groups because they already have a space, they already have the small group skills. They already have some defined belief and some education about these conversations that matter most. So I think that's part of the reason there's going to be a high percentage of Christians in the midst, but by definition this isn't something that is exclusively Christian. And maybe this is also a good context to remind people of the concept of Jesus smuggling. And, and, and what you just described is the antithesis of that we are trying to not come with a heavy agenda. But in my conversation just before our meeting today, I spoke with a person who is is pretty well established in in in relationships. And he asked me he said, Is there such a thing as marks smuggling. And is there such a thing as some other ideology smuggling, and is there some such a thing as, as, as Jordan Peterson smuggling and Paul Vanderkley smuggling and then worse than that, we are trying to not come with a heavy agenda. And is there such a thing as some other ideology smuggling, and is there some such a thing as, as, as Jordan Peterson smuggling and Paul Vanderkley smuggling and then worst of all he said, John Van Dunk smuggling. And so I thought that he was really keen on the concept where where okay so it is not out of the question that people will show up with some kind of an agenda. The question is to what extent, are they able to temporarily suspend any urgency to to to enter that agenda into the conversation, and to what extent are they able to temporarily suspend that to in order to to facilitate the emergence of other ideas that can then enter intertwine with each other. Am I saying this right or would you like to say the different way. Well, I would say, you know, Eric Weinstein's. Eric Weinstein's idea of Jesus smuggling. I want to up the resolution on that a little bit because what I think he is pointing out is the annoying and sometimes obnoxious habit of Christians to come in and say well Jesus is the answer. Okay. And I think that's a good point because if you actually look at at Jesus ministry that you find in the canonical Gospels. It's clear that he is the answer, but he doesn't smuggle himself in a way that he's a pat answer, or an easy answer, or an assumed answer in fact the way that Jesus seems to promote himself as an answer seems bottomless. And, and I think that you're exactly right that, oh, you know Mark smuggling or woke smuggling or anti racism smuggling or Jesus, you know, it's basically that oh well what basically the the American commercial marketing approaches, you have this problem. And that's the answer. And Christians have been doing that with Jesus for a long time. And as a minister. What I see is that, okay, those who buy the answer and are confronted with Jesus very quickly begin to realize that this isn't like Pope heals, you know, kitchen answer that in fact, the deeper you get into Jesus, there will be more questions, and, and there will be, which is exactly why the just will live by faith, not the just will live by pad answers, because faith is what you actually need in a, in a participatory survival way to lean in and to continue to enter into the unknown, with a degree of confidence that you're not alone, and that his rod and his staff will guide you. And so that smuggling of a pat an easy answer is very much what we want to avoid, and what the you know, how I see Christianity is that we in fact, lead them into deeper waters, or where there is often chaos and unknown, but your rod and your staff will guide me, even to you set a table before me in the presence of my enemies and so perhaps another way we can talk about estuaries are, we are going to set tables before enemies, and have them sit together and eat. Stump tish. Stump tish. Shout out to David and Matthias. Yes, I'm case. Yes. Beautiful, beautiful image by the way. Yeah. So, it's not original to me. We'll let that we'll let that murder rapist, David. Take credit for that one. Okay. So, so we're on nine and you're it. Oh, I'm it I've got another line here. I always have to say like Paul, people who want to talk, have a passion for dialogue who thrive and participating in free flowing ideas and see open conversations as a tool for personal growth. Absolutely. That's, that's the kind of people we're looking for. Now, as David and Matthias and job noted. A lot of people, you know, in many ways. This is easier for me because I have a YouTube channel and there are at least enough people around that will gather and so when I set up a meeting people will come. And not everybody has that but I think the conversation that David and Matthias had were right in that it is better for your group to stay small and grow slowly and organically. Because what happens in there is you have all the subtle little recalibrations about. Okay, we're always negotiating, we're always improving the group. Now, the danger of that is you create a holy huddle. And so you're going to have to have practices to always try and keep the group open. And again, church small group materials are full of answers about this kind of thing the empty chair, there's a lot of little tricks and hacks that you can use. But, but we, but obviously these groups are going to attract the kind of people who want to talk. And now at our meetup last Tuesday night we had someone drive in from Rio Vista, which you know where that is john that's where we had our at our lunch drove in from Rio Vista who's sort of lurked on the discord and he didn't actually say much in the group. And then our group in Sacramento we got plenty of talkers so you know there's never any question that they'll be talking, will it be something worth listening to that's the open question but the point is, these groups are going to be full of people who process and we're going to need people who are extroverts who process externally. And we're going to need leaders who can listen, because that's actually a really key skill for leaders. But yeah, these are the kinds of people that initially I think we'll see the groups, and then let the groups be helpful enough and life giving enough and engaging enough well people where people want to bring their friends and have enough confidence in the quality of the group to bring their friends. Yeah, those friends will be respected and yes and yes, that their presence will be validated even their sketchy friends. Exactly, because we all have sketchy friends I more than most but that you need to have sketchy if you don't have any sketchy friends you have a problem. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I have Jonathan Donk, very sketchy. There you go. So, and I wear that label proudly. So there are also people out there men and women who, like Paul, sense a clear calling from God to connect with people outside the Christian community of which they are a part in much the same way Jesus went out of his way to connect with people outside of the religious establishment people like Matthew Levi and the key is that the key is tax collectors all and and Mary Joanna and Susanna and none with traditional Jewish religious credentials, but dear to Jesus, just the same, he seemed to have loved them. And I love I know people hate his story of his. Jesus tries to get away from it all so he goes up to, you know, into the Phoenician area tire side and in that area and meets the Syro Phoenician woman, and people don't like the way Jesus talks to her. But, you know, in the end he heals her daughter. And I, my, how I imagine Jesus based on reading the Gospels for a very long time. Jesus, Jesus could be right. Jesus could be, Jesus could be offend some people sometimes. And Jesus wasn't always nice but had a tremendous capacity for kindness. And so, I think these groups are for people who love people. And that's, and people can be annoying. People are messy. People are dangerous. But I think the real fun in life with this world so full of people is to meet people who are messy and offensive and dangerous and again if you have a posture of of personal security and openness. You can learn to grow and and be in groups of people who are dangerous and messy and offensive and obnoxious. One of the things that happened in our local meetup group is that we have a number of people who are low and agreeableness, very low and agreeableness, and And leaders of groups like this are going to have to figure out both how to not let people like this throw them, but also figure out how to approach people like this when they're disagreeable qualities are beginning to poison the group to be able to kind of take them aside and say, I know you have these ideas about this and I know you have little, you suffer fools, you don't suffer fools lightly, etc, etc. But for the sake of the group. Can you tone down your condescension and maybe clean up some of your dismissive insults, because not everyone has rhino skin here and and in the process of these things, probably lead even disagreeable people into some practices of valuing the group and valuing members who are perhaps a little bit more thin skinned. I like the way you say that. And you're, you're up next at 11, Paul. My script. Yeah. Oh, thank you later. Yes. Yes. I picked this one for you, especially. Especially. Well, he picked this one for me because I'm talking about people like john in this group that there are out there. A lot of individuals. One of the things john sent me a text a few days ago, and he was meeting, he was having a conversation with some people about estuary type things and he said, some of the people said, well, what happens when your walled garden becomes something of a cesspool. And he said, well, we're going to build these churches after. So what happens on Sunday morning is, you know, Rick, some of you know Rick, Rick does a lot of our AV at church right now because he and I have been developing all this computer stuff to to put living stone stuff out there. And Rick will Rick and I will will go back to this little room that we're using for the AV stuff and we'll take a look at what we did and look for glitches and stuff and then Rick will often pull up other churches on YouTube. And I look at so many of these churches and think I would never in my life want to go there. And it isn't just for theological differences, although there are some that isn't just for stylistic differences. And of course the kinds of churches were pulling up on YouTube have, you know, thousands of members locally and 10s of 1000s of followers internationally these are mega churches. And so we find these corporate spaces to be to be very consumeristic and not terribly sensitive to individuals and their needs. And now, yeah, I'm getting to pastors. And as with some of the, some of the people with the biggest psychological or personality problems I know go into psychology. Some of the people with some of the biggest spiritual problems I know go into ministry, because they're trying to heal themselves. And there are out there. And many, many people who, at one point, had thoughts about going into the ministry, went into the ministry and it didn't go well for a variety of reasons usually because here's the thing about a church. There are complex dangerous places to, and people regularly get their feelings hurt they get offended in church churches have rules and part of obviously estuary is a loosening of some of that and that's why my image has been churches are walled gardens and the walls are there on purpose. Those walls have gates and doorways where you can get in and out but estuary is much more of an open space. And that makes estuary and some kind, some ways more dangerous, but there are certain dangers in walled gardens as well because the walls are patrolled, and the, and the rules are enforced and estuary it's a little less so the rules and estuary tend to be a little bit more natural. But part of what we're looking for in leaders are perhaps some who, for one reason or another couldn't lead a walled garden, but temperamentally might be better suited to lead an estuary. And there, there'll be a certain natural selection that happens in estuaries. And it could be the case that if you didn't have the skills to lead a walled garden you don't have the skills to lead an estuary to that might be the case, and maybe, maybe you'll just be a really important part of an estuary, because there are always point leaders and role players we see that on basketball teams and football teams, that's sort of just human dynamics. And I don't think there's anything of lesser status of being a role player than, than a point leader. And that's the difference between a specialist and a generalist. So we are looking for people who perhaps have had difficulty fitting in walled gardens, because maybe you're high in openness, or have had some mistreatment in walled gardens and and we hope that you don't. Sometimes people hurt people hurt people is a phrase because it's true. And so it might be that in an estuary, there will be some work to do in terms of working on your relational patterns but I sort of lost my way. So you did good actually I mean this is okay this is this is kind of what it's about the idea that that that certain, you know, leaders of churches may find themselves personally quite constrained by the demands of administrative leadership, you know, to be a church senior pastor who's got to keep the show on the road protect the brand and and make sure that the budget is met. And then you kind of lose lose the opportunity almost to engage with people at a very personal level, because you have so many people's demands in the church that are hard to delegate to other people, but that actually erode your own sense of calling erode erode your own sense of what why am I really doing this. Am I, am I now the guy who, who maintains this institution, or am I the guy who got initially called to come alongside people and be a spiritual leader or guide or, or resource to. And I think that for quite a few pastors in in in medium to large or any kind of size churches, if all you end up doing is setting up chairs and and making sure that that this or that thing is taken care of and that the bills are paid and all that and then in the larger churches, you know, am I the chairman of the board and I deal with all these highfalutin, you know, personnel issues I got to make sure that that all my underlings are doing what they're supposed to do. And in an all in the midst of all that to actually lose lose the opportunity to come alongside people, almost like Jesus came alongside people and say hey how's it going, you know, how's your life. How is, how is, what, what are you struggling with what you know what are your victory today. And so that's kind of the, another thing that I'm kind of imagining that that potential leaders in the estuary are the ones that say, you know that part of my job was all good and I did it well, but it didn't fulfill my sense of calling and ministry and it didn't really give me many opportunities to to do what you know what's close to my heart. I kind of got put into the institutional ringer so to speak. And I think you're, you're highlighting the other side of it and for me that was very much the case, not that I, I love pastoring and I love the church and the walled garden aspect of the church doesn't bother me, but I also longed for. I longed for a space. I mean, I think it's a good thing that you're in the church is that you become a captive of the walled garden as a pastor. That's what I meant. And, and so I longed for a space where I could have atheists and woke people and anti woke people and and lots of other people just come at, just come and tell me I'm full of crap and say it to my face church people won't do that they'll just say, well thank you pastor and I'll be there for dinner. But, but the people low and agreeable this and my they'll tell me I'm full of crap and I, you know, you believe that God daddy and even that they'll, they'll put it out there and once it's out there we can actually talk about it and actually one of the guys I'm thinking about too we have a. We have a young guy who's a going to be a church planter in our Sacramento cluster right now. And during coven like church planters they'll often go out and, you know, want to meet people in coffee shop he can't do any of that. And so his, his, his mentor is telling him, you need to have a lot more conversation with a lot of people who are way outside the church, and you need to do that fast if you ever want to know enough to be a church planter and I told him I said, you know, I'm not going to be there coming to my meetups because I got I got tons of those people and they will tell you exactly what they think about your religion and your church and all of that stuff and no uncertain terms, and they won't blush, instead of talking to people who will be very nice to you and say, Oh, I'm so glad you're planting a church isn't that wonderful walk away and think, what an idiot. So, so, no, there might be pastors of existing churches, there might be church planters out there that say, I'm a native of the walled garden. And I didn't, I didn't get into this profession to just, you know, clip the bushes on the inside. I came into this profession because I wanted walls and gate I wanted doors wide open, because the truth is that every walled garden lives in actually a continuous ecosystem with what's out there, plants get brought in, you know, water has to flow out. I mean, and that's part of the idea of estuary that the, the estuary actually shares an ecosystem with the walled garden so some of the you might be a successful pastor, but on the inside, you felt like you're dying because you're a captive to the walled garden, and you've gone for weeks or months or years without a satisfying conversation with with someone who, you know, not only doesn't agree with you in terms of your beliefs, but might even be hostile against it to you. And if you're high enough in openness, and secure enough in your own beliefs. That's not a, that's not, that's not something that scares you. That's something that energizes you. That's me. I mean, that is me. And that's why I, you know, if it's always a problem. And actually, on the discord, we talked about this quite a bit. It's a problem when we get too many Christians, because then it starts to feel like the walled garden again. So then we got to start, you know, it's like a, it's like a, you know, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, it's a problem. And so, yeah, Gary, even being who was a fellow missionary with me in the Dominican Republic who comes from john's neck of the one I know him really well. Yeah, Gary always would say to me, you know, Christians are like manure. When you put them all up in a big pile, they start to stink but if you spread them around a little bit, they can do some good. And so, and so that's another aspect of this that if you are a leader out there and you are a pastor and actually quite a few of them are in my network because they make comments and they listen and they watch carefully and and you look at your church as this constrained walled garden. Then I think john been dunks and I'll take credit for it to what are we naming this thing john. The estuary host support network, the estuary host support network. Not hose support not support hose network. We might end up calling it the hose. Support hose hose network. No, that's, you know, that's, I very much want to see, because, and they and that's actually part of the reason that I have always continued to reach out within my CRC circles because I know that there are pastors who got into this because they want They, they hunger for this, and their particular walled garden won't. I mean, I've had guys in the Chicago meetup, two of the guys that started that meetup, not not see it they went to their own churches and said I, I just want a room and two churches turned them down. And that, that made me furious and so I, I said I'm going to find you a place and so I you know used my own network of CRC pastors and my own influence and talk to one and of course their council was nervous they had to meet about it but then the pastor came to the group and brought people to the group and because I think in the heart of many pastors there's a desire. Because if you're going to live out this faith. You don't want it to be a hot house tomato. You want it to be thriving and moving out there in the wild. And so, no absolutely john absolutely. So, great point. That's why I keep john around he always has scripts and stuff for me but he has really good points and once I catch up I see the value of it. Yeah. So, number 12. There are people out there men and women who themselves are in the midst of a faith crisis. Who are no longer sure of what they once believed who no longer stand firm in what others may consider orthodoxy and who can fully relate to the swirl of conflicting ideas that are found outside of the walled garden, which is one way to view the church. They may themselves be hanging on to their faith, as by a tiny string. But they can come alongside others and listen well, and perhaps better than those who have to uphold the official dogmas of the church. And they're able to be transparent and authentic in a non manipulative way. And I think that those people. If they have a few other small group skills can be of great value in terms of their honesty in terms of their willingness to, to say hey you know I don't have all the right answers to all the big questions. Here is my tiny string, and it's working for me for now. But I can certainly understand that you may have been or are still on a journey of exploring ideas of orthodoxy or aspects of Christianity or a whole different belief system that that somehow, you know, you're trying to make it work for yourself, but I can relate to that because I am trying to make it work for myself. And so that that is a kind of a difficult thing to admit publicly. You know there's not going to be that many people who who sign up for that online and say, Yeah, you know I really don't. I'm on a path to deconstruction. At the same time, this estuary thing may be an environment where they themselves can can more meaningfully hang on by their thin strip threat. And, and, I mean, in, again, in all honesty, there is a part of me that is precisely there. I mean I'm not the most orthodox person as you well know. And yet, the engagement, I mean I have I have received an affirmative vote from the past the senior pastor and the elders of my church to do this. They know who I am. They know what I believe and don't believe. They have heard me talk about different things in different contexts. And so they, you know, I've tended to move myself to the to the edge of that community. And then, and then there are other people that say no, John, you're, you're not at the edge of our community you are an integral part of our community so you can well represent our church, even while you hang by a thin thread. So, I mean, you know your own role in that whole journey so if you want to say more about that, you know, that'd be welcome to hear that, but, but my point is that that that that you don't have to have the people who can give the appearance of having it all together to be the leaders that can in fact be people who are in John Sook's famous words. Not sure. Well, and part of. So again I stumbled onto my channel, and this thing sort of grew organically around me. And I saw I sort of began by noticing people coming back towards the church because of Jordan Peterson. And I listened to people I also noted that people who were, to what degree they were aware of it or not in their own psyches deconstructing. We're also listening to my, because many people that I've known who have been deconstructing don't want to deconstruct. They have some of them have grown up in the faith. They know the relational cost of abandoning the church. But in all honesty they have some deep questions and issues. And so they are hanging by a thread. And there was a there was an article on a blog that my niece edits called post Calvin who was this this this young woman who was out of Calvin just a few years and she's deeply disturbed by the number of Christian reform people who vote for Trump, and I was I was really excited to see that post because she's basically said you know my, my faith is hanging by a thread and. And now again there's a there's a political matrix there that you know a lot of my audience will bristle to because many in my audience are not the sheer diversity the political diversity of my audience is something that I frankly am proud of, even though both sides often want to purify it narrow it. Oh, is that not what we're doing right now. That's certainly not what I'm doing. I don't know about you. You should be proud of it, you should very much be proud of it. And, and I know that you know even some core people in my audience they would love nothing better than for this audience that then for for my channel to become, you know, politically partisan in one way or another I would absolutely refuse that not that I don't have my own political ideas, but the point is, many of the young people that are hanging by a thread, and some of the older people can spend donk, the doc has many things but young is not one of them. Young, it's pretty relative. But just had lunch with the 94 year old guy. I felt really young. And I think that young people there, they want to maintain a relationship to the church for whatever reason they want to maintain a narrative thread of faith in their life, and they're finding it exceedingly difficult. And they're often not places where they can talk about these things, they are places where they do smile nice for the pastor but then walk away with with their own misgivings or angry moments or what have you. And in my opinion an estuary group, the reason. I think it's in the interest of churches to host groups like this and if they have appropriate leaders for them support them is that the surest way to ensure someone's deconstruction is to show them that that cold gray wall of the garden and say, here's the line in or out. And to let them to let them talk to let them process to give them a place where they can share their heretical fears or misgivings or anxieties or even beliefs at some point, and bring them out in the open. And this happens in pastoral conversations if the pastoral relationship is healthy. And so I think it's in that way that the walls of the walled garden don't serve the, the mission of the walled garden and so for that reason again, you might be a person who has some small group skills, who has some reach who has, and for that reason you might legitimately say I shouldn't be an office bearer in church or I shouldn't even be a small group leader in church or you might have, you might have a social relationship or romantic relationship or a sexual relationship that one way makes you an in that disqualifies you from certain roles in the walled garden and you might not even have a problem with that or you might have a huge problem with that. If you have a huge problem with that you might not be a good small group leader because it's those huge problems that usually make for dogmatic. Yeah, defensiveness and big agendas but it might an estuary group might be an ideal place for you to be able to just continue to take in knowledge and information and keep an open mind even about the, the, the, the, the sprouting dogmatisms in your own reactionary self. So, yeah, no I agree with that john I think it's a great point. That's why we go through john's list he always, I forget these points and he has them written down, you know, the wisdom of paper and pen. Number 13. Oh that one's me again it's you. Yeah. I'll just read it first then I'll comment on it finally there are men, there are people out there men and women who like us are convinced that the changing of hearts is not something we mortals can do, and a very Calvinist point for john and don't know or we would be responsible for that that's God's job. That happens when the Holy Spirit shows up but when we set the stage for people to open up about what they think and believe when we create a setting for honesty mutual respect and acceptance. There's no telling what can happen I very much agree with that, and I've said so many times on my channel, part of. Because in the, in the form of ordination and the Christian Reformed Church, we as ministers of the word we very much do take on as part of our mission to be an evangelist. But in my opinion, evangelists are midwives, because it's the Holy Spirit that does the work, and it is God who does the quickening and the molding and the shaping. And if any careful reader of the Bible will notice that God. Paul participates in the stoning of Stephen. You know through his writings one of the most important evangelists of all time in Christianity. He calls himself the chief of sinners although other people certainly claim to give him a run for their for his money. So, this is, this is something, this is something important that the goal of an estuary isn't necessarily the agenda of the estuary isn't necessarily, we're going to bring lots of people into the church and make them believers. I certainly would want that, because that's what I want for people and I think it's the best way to live, but by no means an overbearing agenda and the real work of the group is process and sharing and relationships and and giving space for people to think about ideas Jordan Peterson has this great idea where part of the reason we have ideas is that things can die in our head without having to die out there in real life. And so that's part of what estuary is for it's a sandbox where people can play with things and you know they might come to a group one night and be all for something in the next month later they come back and they say you know what I thought last month, I was an idiot. You can do that in a sandbox. Yeah, and everybody in the group will say yeah you were, we told you you didn't listen. That's another problem you have, but you're still part of us, and we'll still be here a month from now to listen to your next idiocy because we know it's coming. I mean that's, that's those kinds of relationships that actually over long periods of time, help people to grow and mature and perfect and then become better people. So we've just gone through a list of about six or seven characteristics of the kind of leadership that we're looking for. And I don't know are you going to post this in the notes or parts of it, or all of it, because my paper that you have here. My next point says, if you read the above. Okay, I can imagine, or if you heard the above, Google has a limit of like 5000 characters in the notes. We could put a link to this Google Doc and people could read it if they wanted to we could do that too. Or you could distill it into just some bullet points. And I'll do that myself. Yeah. Okay. Okay. And you can send that to me. Yeah. So if you heard the above or read the above, and you imagine yourself to be one such person. Here comes the kicker. Then you probably are already involved in some activities that help you connect with random people, but not necessarily in any particular church context. You are who you are. You can't make this stuff up. If you are one of these people that we describe, you're probably are already doing this kind of thing. And then, and then I'm having you say and you may not feel any particular reason to become part of a larger context or effort. And that's part of the reason why, you know, this we stayed pretty loose with that. Yeah, because you know I was I was on the stoic channel, and he led off the stove and I thought why he's kind of doing what we're doing. And I think that's cool. Yeah. You know, and we should affirm and validate that wherever it takes place. That's right. That's right. Yeah, I want to see more of it and whether it's connected with me or not connected with me. I don't care. That's why it happened. Exactly. And so we're not trying to do any sheep stealing from any other estuaries. It's very difficult to make water from one river run through the other. That's going to be a bit tricky. But, but if on the other hand, you do get some satisfaction from sharing your insights with others who may be similarly inclined and learn from others who try to do what you do. Perhaps we can help make that happen. And this is where we're really talking about bringing together. Bringing together. Initially, online in a virtual group via zoom. We are looking to have perhaps a group of 1210 or 12 people who feel a kind of an affinity with this process and who want to encourage and support each other to do it better. We're trying to create a group like that, or perhaps two groups like that. And if this video goes out to 15,000 of Paul van der Klay's followers worldwide, and 100 people want to participate in this kind of group and want to be be facilitators of local manifestations or what you call instantiations of the in the flesh get together of people having these conversations. If there are 100, then all the better. But what we're trying to do right now is create one or two groups of 10 to 12 that I will be the host of online. I made a pact with Paul. Paul said, John, he says, this may sound all really good, but I don't have time to be to be the host of yet another one hour in X amount of time session and so and then I said to him, so well, then I will, I will be the host of that kind of a gathering. And we, we, we can fully expect that if these groups come into fruition, and they exist online, these are now estuary host support groups, you know, this is what we do online for the time being because we don't, we can't all be in the same town otherwise all these groups would exist in the same town. So this is really a way to to expand the reach of the support network which can now happen anywhere in the country anywhere in the world really. So then, then it's fair to assume that every once in a while, Paul will show up at one of our meetings, our virtual meetings, it's reasonable to assume that he will say hey how's it going guys and blah blah blah, you know, so so so so it's not that he is totally divorced from this effort, but it's just not something that he himself can be totally in charge of. And that's why I volunteered to do this. But the other thing. So, so our vision is in fact to to start a worldwide network of local estuary facilitators, people who have a passion for creating spaces for open open conversation and the open exchange of ideas. But what we want to do first is to create some groups of 10 to 12. And if 100 people sign up, we need to find a way to pair that down to manageable size. And to that end, we have come up with a questionnaire. There is an application process, we would like you to let it be known that you're interested by way of filling out the online questionnaire, the link to which will be in the in the notes below this video. And, and so we are actually asking our audience to do. Yeah, right. We're asking our audience to do very short questionnaire. Yeah, very short. And it's also very rudimentary it doesn't go into any anti any very deep questions but it is a way for us to say okay, you know, with with these 12 people we can start a group on Thursday and with these 12 people like can we can start a group on Tuesday morning or, or whatever. And so we, we, we probably should have added to the questionnaire. Some elements of when, when I'm, when am I most available. I forgot about that. But but that's that's the logistics of what we're trying to do here. And, and. Yeah, I mean, we are assuming that our audience is is that there are people in your audience Paul where when you post this on your channel, there will be some people there hey I want to be part of that network, and they're going to be some other people that say, I know just the person who would do really well as an as an estuary leader of a local effort. So I'm going to send this videotape to that person I'm going to send a link to that person, and then he can decide for himself, whether he is such a person he or she is such a person. And then, and then they can apply by way of the questionnaire to become part of the, of the conversation. Is that, is that clear or not? No, that's very clear. And I think, you know, so when I watched a job and David and Matthias on their on their randos video. What's the word john you're a European you can say it. Stuntish. Yeah, okay, I'm not European I can't say those things. But, you know, there's a lot of practical questions. And I, again, for me, I had a YouTube channel that was growing. Jordan Peterson was expanding I started, I subscribed to Jordan Peterson channeling about 300,000 subscribers, the book tour hadn't happened. I mean I was, I just stumbled into this bang. And so, starting a group for for other starting your group now. It's not going to be so easy gathering people. And so, you know, I've in the conversations that we've had at our local meetups I've had with other meetup people. And that has been an issue and again part of this, this is a support hose or a host support group. And, and so this is a place where. And again, similar to an estuary group, it'll be multifaceted. They can have practical conversations about what can I, what do I need to do to get my group going. And that's fair, or it can be probably some actually doing having kinds of conversations they will have in the group but just among the leaders, and hopefully in time it will become a, you know, they'll become groups that people value. And again, I'm going to send this to some church planters because if I were a church planter right now and coven, I would be all over this thing, because I think, probably, if I were to plant a church right now, I would probably want to first start an estuary group, and I would probably start a church alongside, because again, what you're doing in church is different than what you're doing but that anyway, it should be anyway, but the relationship between the groups to me is fairly obvious. And you're going to have people who want to participate in the estuary they don't want to go to your stinking church, you got other people who want to go to your stinking church and don't want to go to the estuary and you're going to have both groups and that's okay. Why do I say stinking with respect to church because, you know, this is a cool thing. We know. And that doesn't, again, that doesn't mean I don't love the church I do. Anyway, I don't have to explain to john I want to, I say that I john gets me, others of you out there and we'll he will see you in the comment section about this I know we will. But, but that's, that's the point of this and if, like john says you know if our first group say we were going to want to limit the groups to certain size because too many people, if you know small groups, a group doesn't function so if we have to start multiple groups then maybe we'll go out there and look for, you know, john and I have leaders that we trust maybe look for new leaders so that we can. We have no idea how many people are going to want to be interested in this it might only be six, it might be 12 it might be We just have no idea how many so we're starting and we're trying and like john said I'm, I'm very interested in what happens with this effort. I can't commit to, to being there at every group meeting but I definitely do want to pop in on some. And I think other people you know I don't know what Joey and Tyler are going to think about this or job I wouldn't be surprised to have job say oh I want to be a part of this or, you know, who knows we just don't know, at least people who have showed up on the channel, but no we're, we want to get started So let's just start in this way. And if there's one thing I know about john as a leader. He's very adaptive, and he's continually feeling out and john has john has an edge for growing things to part of what's john is also john also has a fairly entrepreneurial And he doesn't like to sit around I'm a lot more patient and well let's see what happens then john is john tends to be a little bit more, you know, let's let's get something going let's make something happen that sort of his temperament. And I like the fact that he's doing this because it's not something he's going to want to sit on and john also has, you know, you know me a lot better than you know john just because I'm not too dumb you're talking at you all the time, but I trust john deeply because I've watched john in lots of different settings and you know even though john has some theological points that probably mean he'll never be an elder of his local church. The reason they come around john and say no john you're part of us is because they do deeply trust him. And john because he was a Christian before minister knows where the lines are john will say yeah that's part of me is a little outside the line and he can be This is what the church Jesus this is what I believe john knows the map he knows the lay of the land, but he's also not anxious about it and And so I think in many ways, I think john is perfect to lead an effort like this, because, you know, I would, I can, I john is a Christian. John is a Christian with his own thoughts and ideas that have been matured and grown over. He didn't grow up a Christian he became a Christian he became a minister he stopped being a minister. Many points in john story, people can connect with whether that means going into the church as someone who hasn't been a Christian or leaving the As someone who has been a Christian even a Christian minister, and then yet again becoming and folded by his church. And valued by his church and I keep reminding john because john would always make these comments about he's, you know, this is his church and blah blah blah blah he's kind of on the outside I'd say john that's a load of crap you're nowhere near the outside of your church, you might have some ideas that place you in an interesting respect with the church but you are deeply loved and respected and trusted by your not insignificant church community around you. And so again for that reason I think john is is really an ideal person to lead this thing. And this also for me is an example of how there isn't the estuary there isn't one thing that Paul has started. So, Joey and Tyler and Rick, you know they, they're sort of core leaders amongst our local Jordan Peterson meetup they got the discord going that's going on over here, john van donk john you never see john on the discord discord's not his thing. I don't even watch most of my videos. I'll make reference to things in my john says I don't watch your videos watches some of my videos because the journey that I'm on that many of you are on john john's not interested in a lot of those details, john's john's he's got so much time left in his life he's that old that he's got to be efficient here to really prioritize what's most important to him so. But, but john is. Yeah. So john is going to, you know, this is an aspect that john is going to lead and and Hank and Sam and Chicago, you know they're doing another thing and you know others around the country who I won't name right now that I am in fairly I'm in conversation with, they are doing other things and, you know, it could be that at some point in the future depending on what happens with me, you know I'm, I'm again I'm going to see. I'm going to see if Living Stones church can be saved. And, and so that's, you know, that's a lot of my focus now maybe it can maybe it can't a guy named David snapper who's a friend of john and I who looks at church numbers he says your Paul your church is going to be a natural life cycle and probably just going to die and if that happens then you know who knows what I do next in terms of what relationships I'll have with a church and and whether there'll be more institutional forms that stuff might change, I don't know And now, I am very comfortable with an ecology of different actors who are entrepreneurial in their own way trying to establish something along the lines of the general vision. And I would rather start 10 things and have eight of them fail. And I would rather start one thing and to be white knuckled about it because everything relies on it so that's that's basically who I am in this kind of thing so that's that's why john I think is a great person to lead this and we'll give it a try and I also know john is not entrepreneurial enough if it if we try this for two or three or four months and he comes to me and says, the saint working, and it didn't work, and we try something else but I also know john is also patient enough and I've seen that in his meetup groups that I'm not bothered if numbers get a little bit small because he has a sense of the numbers are small right now but this is worthwhile. And I see potential in the future, I'm learning and the few who are participate, they find it meaningful to and so, like the, like the I decided to apply to a spot in an ongoing online zoom conversation which will be hosted by me about estuary groups like like ours, and talk about, like, how to start one, where we talk about the nuts and bolts of creating spaces for generous hospitality, whether they be in local churches alongside local churches or outside local churches as standalone communities, private confidential non recorded conversation. So, we are going to be on YouTube, these are not. These are going to be zoom sessions that will be private to the participants. They are not for other people to to comment on or view or anything like that we're, we're going to. I think it's an important feature to the to the thing that we that we, we, we are able to speak freely amongst ourselves to see how we might give shape to things in the future, without having the whole world looking over our shoulder, including you. So, I'm going to put the, the notes that I that we use the script, I'm going to refine it a little bit and Paul will add it to the video. And then also add it to the video will be a link to the to the questionnaire the estuary questionnaire. So, I'm going to quickly modify that a little bit, so that it includes a place where people can indicate their preferred timeframe. And, yeah, so I think we covered all the basis. Good. No, I like it. I like it too. Thanks, John. Thanks for, you know, continuing to be the entrepreneurial pastoral leader in this thing. And again, john's not on my channel that much. And, you know, there's only a few videos out there with him, but john has been a very big part of this thing right from the start. And I'm really excited about his willingness to, to lead this effort. And we'll see where it goes. Yep. All right, I'm gonna end the recording.