https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CLXPMVBUuxo

 We got this! Where are you here? Oh, there I am. Where are you? Got me? Oh boy. Come on, man. Walk with me. Yeah. Walk with my mama. Walk with my mama. Walk with me. Walk with me too. Walk with my mama. Walk with me. And walk with me too. Walk with my mama. Walk with my mama. Yeah. Jesus journey. I want Jesus. I want Jesus. Walk with me. Walk with me. Hold my hand, Lord. Hold my hand. Hold my hand, Lord. Hold my hand. All along this Jesus journey. Hold my hand, Lord. Hold my hand. Walk with me. You walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. You walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Yeah. Jesus journey. I want Jesus. Jesus journey. I want Jesus. I want Jesus to walk with me. Walk with me. Say the word. I like it, though. How y'all doing? Say walk with me, Lord. How y'all doing? Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. I'm on my way to the Earth, yeah. Yeah, Lord. I want Jesus. I want Jesus. To walk with me. To walk with me. To walk with David. little shepherd boy yeah you made him a great care I know David shouted for joy you walked with David and he's a little shepherd boy you made him a great care David shouted for joy so walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me all alone in the Jesus journey walk with me walk with me gotta walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me oh hi I guess I'm the only person here that's awkward oh Chad brought his own cage that's nice that's right I brought my own cage and it's Chad trick you guys you can't change your name what is this I'm terribly confused so Paul over on the discord there I have you all here now Chad where are you? all in one place don't you wish you knew I do you wish you knew Grim Grizz you called us here now what are you gonna do with us huh? well I have provided you with several branding like clips on the discord to explain what's going on here you'd have to open your discord and load them as branding though and that'd probably take forever otherwise I'm supposed to destroy you in this because once upon a time you had some Israeli professional wrestler on and he was talking horrible smack about kayfabe not even in character he wasn't even in character and he could have been and it was just such a missed opportunity well he didn't even like when I had his character on the thumbnail I had to change the thumbnail because he's a purist you think you're pure it's not right it's not right card for the show is the three of hearts ah the Trinity Andy Kaufman was a purist and apparently is a demon who possesses Jim Carrey now that's true now before we get started I just have a gift offering to make on behalf of myself to all of y'all as a sleep token of my appreciation for all of y'all I want to begin and don't worry your Tuscaloosa hearts no Trojan horses here sharks don't have fur here we have gifts for Christmas so first gift it goes to Mr. Gaius Griswold Grim III with honors it's not a voodoo doll it's not a totem for demonstration of my appreciation for all the larpin that you have done these fine many years can we get some wolf emojis in the hive mind chat now that's the first gift peace be with y'all the second gift the second gift this one we all know we don't need that one okay the third gift the third gift the third gift I have a totally new refurbished Dodge Colt 1982 with your watch store name written all over it Mr. Paul Van der Kley that's cool it's yours so we get a little car emoji for him maybe and that's been at least for Paul Mitzemmende he's a little worried on this stream just inhale and exhale all will be well y'all all will be well Merry Easter Happy Christmas and have a blessed Lent all of y'all that's all I had to say is it just me or is that moustache getting more and more ridiculous I mean it's getting longer isn't it I have no idea what emoji goes with that gift you're getting old Tommy boy you're getting old you're muted as well off the road cell phone of the evening what the hell are we doing here this is great it's Grizz or Chadwick it's one of the two of you who's in charge I don't understand whose stream is this this is on my channel everybody should be streaming it if they have a channel so it should be on the Friday Morning Nameless as well as the Griswold Grimm stream that was kind of the original notion was that everybody would have their own matches on their own channels and this happened instead I don't know how to actually stream my channel there's a button that says stream this to your audience yes that's the button you press and then you type in a little title and it goes on your own channel as well via the power of stream yards referral in the Grimgris stream description of the stream but I don't have like do you ever like make passwords and forget them that's me I have to remake a password every single time I log into anything yeah I don't like doing that and then when I make my new password it tells me it can't be the same thing as your last password and it really pisses me off alright what we're going to need now is some kind of emoji that the audience can use to indicate either positive favor for what's going on the screen or negative favor as was going on the stream as said in the interview working with the people that are also participating in the hivevine chat is part of how this wrestling thing works a carrot we have a carrot recommendation by Chris Howard as if things are going well that would imply a stick as the other way but maybe we can get a gong or some other what would you want people to like to put he wants us to cut this out that's a good one Lance oh Chad with the aluminum chair sorry make things happen Chad that's what you do this probably wouldn't have happened if it wasn't for you so thanks for that actually you know I just want to say something I actually just thought that this was going to be a prank and not anything happened so the fact that we're here I'm on behalf of my client lobster monkey Chad in which case he can't be here because well he was in a car accident over he was in a car accident driving one of his lemons that he purchased over at the Whitestone brand name car dealership so this is all that he can be here with today oh no say it isn't so he'll grow back I'm sure of it now is where we get the footage from live in the hospital bed waving around his stumpy claw oh you shouldn't have gave us full screen for that one so Emily I should get a restroom because it's on my wall I said how'd you get roped into this I have no idea well first I thought I have no idea and I've been texting people like so what is this thing what are we doing and nobody tells me anything he all just tells me we're going to have communion basically is what he tells me I'll just tell you what I thought so we actually kneeled down there the not sour dough kneel and myself had invited you to have a conversation first and then this thing happened and I thought well I don't want to back out on my commitments with food truck Emily so we thought you'd invite you on and you can ask us anything you want us four weirdos well I'm prepared with questions then oh I thought I thought I said this but clearly not food truck Emily's manager the lovely Chad Rick we could take questions from the hive mind and see who gets the most emojis in response to their answer I honestly I kind of thought I was like the token woman and like you know what I mean like we need some kind of like female representation you think we're a diverse equitable and inclusive place it seemed like it we're not trying to feign such things we are pursuers of truth and the good and the beautiful and we would never do something like include someone on the basis of their skin color and or gender identification well we're all the same skin color so there goes that I am blue miss that's right we don't quite know Chad's skin color also I have I have major Easter hangover I'm just gonna be honest I just did five services this weekend and Sunday morning I woke up and had no voice so I can't tell you how stressful that was but and I had a horrible sinus headache I thought my head was gonna explode almost passed out on stage at one point but I'm here well since I have to destroy Paul that's going to be that's what I gave you the clips it says it in them and you have to make sure this is something I never forget you made the thumbnail you're into it man I did make the thumbnail and I made the branding it was my first branding that was pretty impressive I can't believe I don't I don't think these fine people had to see what I saw when I saw the first draft of that that that's gonna come up in our match in our match but I think what we should probably do Paul is that put a 10 minute timer on it me and you drop out and let this first match begin okay that's fine but okay what are they talking about what match so I've got a couple of topics so originally we were planning on doing a Emily Chad Neal meandering that was the original plan and then Mr. Gaius Grimwell Grizz III with honors decided to invite himself and PVK and you can't have one without the other so here we are so we have our meandering so I have a topic okay this was a while ago this was maybe three months ago we had a meandering with Tayo and I ended that meandering with saying I think what's gonna happen next in the TLC is the art layer in that whenever a new movement occurs of anything it starts out as dream or it starts out as like bubbling up it starts out as like bubbling up unsolidified uninstantiated fragments little bubbles and then something happens it gets translated into what we call art and art's the in between between the dream and the reality and so I'm I'm seeing more and more signs of art emerging within the TLC we have this guy ship clerk who just put together a really cool montage everybody out there you can check out ship clerk and we have all these games what was that? he did a rando with PVK recently right? I don't think so he did it? yeah different guy different montage? you know we're playing all these games we're playing all these silly shenanigans so we're gamifying TLC but we're also telling a story it seems to me like we're moving in a particular direction with the flotilla so I guess I want to ask what what does this art layer look like if we go into something like that what is the the right that's the wrong way of putting it like what is our responsibility in relation to art that emerges from this place? like what is our responsibility? what is our agency or lack thereof? and that's another way of framing like what are we doing that we're always asking about the navel gazing but like I think we're moving into artistic productions coming out of this place and to what responsibility to what level responsibility do we have to bring people into this place? to what level of responsibility do we have to let's say properly preserve the spirit of this place in art like what are we conserving and what are we changing towards or into? you know what's the goal? what's the telos? I don't know the answer to that really I don't but I trust the spirit of this place but I'm interested in I guess the thoughts of the hive mind and also the two of you well I feel like I'm new to here so I feel like it's audacious for me to say what I think it should be and you know what brought I guess what made you decide Emily to come out of the lurk? like what was the precipitating series of and then building off of that what's the next step? well first because Paul kept referring to things and I could tell there was a video you know like he would and so I thought well and if you I don't remember which conversation but I could tell like there were images or there's something that he was referencing or people he was clips of things he was playing in the podcast and so I went to YouTube and then I started seeing comments underneath and I got tangled up in the comment section once and I remember like my heart racing because I was like afraid I was like I was making someone mad or something and then the conversation was super gracious and curious and I was like kind of surprised by the spirit in the in the comment section and so then the next time I was listening to one of his podcasts I was curious to see what the comments were again and I went back and then started seeing familiar names over there and then just kept like clicking around and because I didn't even know there were other orbiting channels and so then I started because I even was looking for a podcast of Chad the alcoholic I was like who the hell is Chad the alcoholic so I was looking for a podcast I did not find one and then found it on YouTube you know anyway and then girl country and well I just was like people were talking about things that I was really interested in that I don't get to talk about you know does that answer your question? It's almost like watching the story wasn't enough maybe you want to be part of it well yeah and then it's funny because like the first time I feel like I sort of barged in and it was that sense of like you barge into a room to say something and then you realize there's like there's like a whole tone and a conversation is already happening and then you just sort of you know and that's what I kind of happened to me and that's what I kind of happened to me so then I just sort of like sat down I was like I need to kind of listen to people first and so I'm listening and I started chatting then it was like addictive because I just wanted to keep talking to everybody well that was my experience I just barged in and said hi and been saying hello ever since yeah and to answer Neil's question I have no idea I don't even think like yeah I don't I don't know all I have is my experience and when all these everything that's happened I think as far as like my participation has been very emergent so it's just like I saw that they're making branding on Grizz's thing or like something like it and then one day I just was like I want to do more and then I kind of went crazy made a bunch of them and I really liked the I guess you could call it art I mean I think McMossive would call it outsider art in some sense but it's just it's just like digital collaging just like I was doing already and so I liked having the frame of remember and body there is no agency in what was best for you and that was the frame and then so anything can happen around that and so I might have a flash of insight of a theme or something you know one of them would and I don't even know how these things happen exactly so that's the extent of my art and then once in a while I get to make poetry and then try to make you know visual maps to go with it basically and then now what I'm trying out is taking excerpts from books and then putting you know images with that and then using that as a timer for the very beginning and all this stuff that I basically learned from the general grizzly grim and then added to kind of what I'm doing and just doing my own thing with it and probably terrible I don't know why anybody watches to be honest but it's an expression I thought about this a lot in relation to video games because when I was in my early 20s late teens like I was really into World of Warcraft and within World of Warcraft you have a concept called a guild and it's like it's all guys and if there are a few women who play World of Warcraft it's always a challenge because you got to manage the few problem guys in the guild that are super awkward and for lack of a better word cringe and they just mess it up for you know and but within the guild you have this kind of binding I would say around a common goal like you want to go on the quest together as like a group of 20 people and you want to vanquish the dragon let's say or kill the giant or you know whatever it is and it's a lot of fun for all these different challenges and to me what we're doing here feels very much in that same vein except we're actually binding around something that's useful and let's say more real you know it's not embodied in that we're not all physically in the same place however we are real people binding around real things and the vulnerability that we're sharing is real vulnerability so to me it seems like a step above like a step beyond or the next step of let's say a video game LARP because the video game LARP you're participating in the imagination of some person developer that's ultimately Luke would say mammonized right they want to keep you occupied with the money and here it feels I guess I trust the spirit of this place more like what we're doing more and it's also it's got a frontier spirit to it like it does feel like we're doing something that really hasn't been done before I've used the term bottom-up ecumenicism but like that doesn't really feed into the art of what I don't know any thoughts on that well I would like it to not be explicitly Christian because it isn't and it hasn't been and I don't think that it should be this is one of the criticisms I've seen and so I'm listening to the criticisms so what I've been recently doing is venturing out into into the known internet that we know and actually trying to find other live streams and other live streamers and invite them so far I've had almost like zero luck so it to be honest with you like I go and I listen to these streams and they're just dumb to be I mean it's just really they're not I know it's so funny because so I'm a complete outsider right but from the very beginning from the very first time I saw like Chad one of your weird videos I just loved it and I can't tell you exactly why except for maybe like what Neil said was there's something very vulnerable about it like one of them like you're just sitting playing your guitar another time you were just making up poetry off the top of your head while smoking in your truck and I was like this is the weirdest thing I've ever seen but I just loved it and like sometimes I would even start tearing up and I wouldn't even understand why like the same thing happens to me when I'm on girl country and it's something so qualitatively different than anything else that you see that so there's so much presenting and performing everywhere on the internet and I think it just something that I was hungry for that I didn't even realize I was you know because it's not even so much like oh I'm getting something just intellectually out of it which I am but it's like at the same time not it's not just it's definitely not that and there's also even even the way that people argue and fight in the comments sections and stuff like that I don't know there's just something very qualitatively different and so like you know you guys mentioned a lot of time about like Christian YouTube and there's yeah it's just something just so different I think I already said that about Christian YouTube but and the same like it doesn't need to be just Christian I think that just in general people just need to be making more beautiful art you know Well so yeah I think the big thing is so we can like do less of kind of what we're doing right now which is the well I'm okay with you talking about talking I like it it's fine but I know a lot of people not a lot seems like there's a handful of people who have their criticisms about it but it's like well what's actually happening is we're actually sharing a type of fellowship right now so that's what that's actually what it is But I do I do I am very interested in other topics so I would say for those that are critical of the talking about talking thing I would really encourage you to put in the comments topics because like it's hard to just pull a topic out of the hat for me maybe it's not for Paul or for Graves or anything but I have a lot of ideas and I have a lot of things I'd like to talk about but I'm not going to talk about that I try to reach out to Brendan Dempsey I hope he reaches out back to us because I really want to talk about some of the stuff he's working with on right now but I really want to find other players out there so I was at work early in the week and not this week last week obviously it's Monday so we're already early in the week Anyways I was on a live stream I clicked into a live stream and Oh Emily won this a long time ago I don't I don't want to hear a story about you clicking in the southern border live stream you're on a live stream right now Chad there's people watching there's people watching man Well I'm just saying there was another dude in the wrestling They sucked No you were on you were at the last few minutes of the 10 minutes with the real Grand Slam hit after Neil Bordas and Chad Raymond Naste And you were just like all right that's you know I was moved there's something going on and that's a good layer it doesn't have to be Christian and it just it was a nice sum up a nice wha pow not going to the park I'm calling the match for that We got we got people to dance for now come on guys It's my job to pull people out when you know it's like I mean is this is this a is this a tag team you know do you just go bang and then you know I want to see a PVK versus grim Chad and me kicked out go Not yet we got that we're doing like maybe at a whole hour I was planning at least which means like the me and PVK title match is the last 15 and maybe he slides Guy Landau a link in the last five minutes so he can come in and straighten things out We did you load up those clips pull in the discord in the DM from me to you are very relevant clips including one I'm going to bash you with in the match So if you would please load those up that would be great. He's got to go off to do it so that's that's nice it see this this place is a That we're seeing each other is the thing and like enough of us are willing to climb up on the fourth wall and pretend it doesn't exist and that's our this is playing together serious play sure but it's better than being in a Skinner box like you were saying you know because that's what video games are and if you don't know what a Skinner box is you should pay for our fancy pants defense against the dark arts premium course where we go over like such things such things have you seen the we started using the DNA bubble over on the Friday morning Boy how do you have you've made it dance I saw Yeah more like role And the whole thing you had Charlie Brown on today but you call them by some human name and I didn't know it was him until the very end so I missed it I haven't watched it yet why why won't you use people's stage names in that thing is this is the real vulnerability you're trying to establish This Neil Jordan's looking to make friends with people I had friends once I lost them so I came here Oh dang what is this What the deuce is going on here the man has turned into a bunny and she's put on her demon face Because I don't know what's happening I wear my demon face what are we what are we binding around Where all just tell us you need to tell us are the coming to come and burn you or something. Paul and I are here doing mission work which is our second conversation I get him to admit that he's got missionary experience in Haiti, but instead of in Haiti, we're missioning on to the internet that's why he says go to church all the time. That's why I say you're swimming in mind control. It's work. It's. That's my justification I don't ever plan on leaving. It's more like, you're not supposed to be here humans go back out into the real world and put things together. Leave the internet for the stunted people in basements. Go be human but if you know we're entertaining the people listening at work while it happens so be it so be it. What do you see us doing. These all these channels. What are we doing. We're seeing each other. It's like the difference between these channels and any other channel on YouTube is like we float together. And Chad's comment about looking for other people to play. I mean, I that that woman with the small channel you know I left the comment the comment disappeared I think she was like, delete the comment. I invited her and I even stepped over I even transgressed the grim gris DNA Benny Jesuit doctrine and got slapped for it and she still just blew me off so it's. Is she deleted your comment. I think so it disappeared because you can't throw an entire principality at an individual. You got to send out, for lack of a better word, an AP OS I won't spell I won't do the whole thing. You got to send out one, or maybe two, and they're gentle, and they call they cultivate, they. I mean, that is the usage of it is picked up. I can't wait to see how it goes terribly terribly wrong. Like some people, but because it's hard it's it's high of mind it's people enforced so like somebody can start using it and not make people feel virtually make them feel some other horrible way and then we'll have to figure out how to enforce it but right now. YouTube YouTube is full I just because once you of course algo starts feeding you things so then I just I'll go fed me a car a video about a woman who just made a little video and said you know well YouTube I've got a small channel and you should start a YouTube and the channel so there's you know as you guys were talking about it we are definitely just part of a far larger wave. I think we are much more self conscious than many others, many of the fire ants that are not clinging together they're just out there. I'm actually talking about actual other live streams where there are people just like this, but they're just talking about like nothing. And so, because I've been looking for them and you they just start popping up like crazy once you find them. Somebody even gifted me a membership to one of their channels I'm like what so I mean they're out there. I've been out like long time ago like pre Peterson. I've found places on the internet where like people just they're like video chat rooms it's some weird URL some thing you've never heard of, and you go there and there's like people that are streaming themselves sleeping to the rest of the world. And you go there and there's like people that are streaming themselves sleeping to the rest of the group, because people are so alone. That like, just like, I'll have my camera on so you're there with me and I'm not alone in this room. Kind of, I mean it's, I didn't say it was a healthy place I found on the internet, but that's the question. What I'm really asking is how do we incept curiosity, I don't know how to do that, like curiosity that there is something better. I don't know how to do that inception. My wife just. My wife picked up her master's thesis that she wrote 1215 years ago. It's about children's education and the whole thesis is about exactly the point you just made Neil. Because without that curiosity and then the after school video that I played that I pointed to in a recent video. It was all about curiosity because it basically said, you know, smart men smell their, you know, you know the old joke, but but you know people with high people with high intelligence, basically drink their own moonshine. And what's required is curiosity and humility. And how do you get that? Well, don't ask us. Yeah, my way of saying that is everyone loves the smell of his or her own brand. Yes. Yes. I got that I got I got an interesting comment. One of the more hurtful ones I've ever had recently involving cat urine. And then the end was like maybe one day streamers will encourage people to enjoy the scent of their scatological border markers. I really reflected on how like socially my scatological border marking is the Peterson kekhead and the pageau nemesis and the Weinstein telomeres. It's like that's that's my socially those are the things that nobody bothers those people about, but I won't let it go and I keep so that's kind of like a border. I don't know it was really thought provoking comment. I've thought about you a certain way, Gris, and I'll throw this at you. You're the lone wolf in Dances with Wolves. And you are on the border of edge and chaos of ordering chaos and you're patrolling this space for people to bring in people who are threats sounding the alarm howling when necessary. I think of the domestication of the wolf that happened. I don't know 10,000 years ago 20,000 years ago. I think you're you're on that edge. I don't know how spirit animals are selected but if I was going to pick one that shouldn't it wouldn't be a platypus. So run with the wolf one that's fine. I'll make it my spirit animal. That was excellent. That was excellent. I'd have to quit that if it weren't on my stream. Where's Kevin Costner I want some beans. That's my that's my cinema dad. But that's, I think that's why Dolly was so like Dolly when she met Gris was like, well, well, and I think she just knew there was something about him. He's extra spicy. Let's say when that person found my channel, I don't believe we've ever met. Oh, your dog. Oh, gris dog. Sorry, sorry. I know more than one. Mine is a DOLLY. Animals you that was a very strange behavior for an animal I'm usually the one of the animals is favorites because my soul is so beautiful and pure. She was like, There's a lot to that gris because you've colonized very effectively, and it is, I do find it very interesting that your channel is so small. And I think that has something to do with. I think the smallness of your channel is something to do with but I think your effectiveness despite the size of your channel says something pretty profound that you are on to a lot. And it's just kind of hard. I mean you guys were talking about art, a bit, and I do think what grim does is art. It's a different kind of art and it's an art that would make no sense if there wasn't set. So there's a lot that's interesting that's going on here. While I think I was paper general and leading an aggression of the first LARP ingression protocol, leading people through the LARP gate and out of the audience sedative capture state. Well, but the, you know, to dare to talk about the corner in the corner and commit that transgression now. Generally speaking, most of the people who have sort of bit hard here are misfits of one shape or another. I am a misfit in the CRC in some ways, even though I've got a name and an education and a reputation that puts me at the center. I'm also on the fringe. And I think I think many of us here share that in common. If we were really fitting into our spaces, we wouldn't be here because we would be in our spaces instead. And so now we're virtually not alone and we're finding a degree of a thread of commonality among the other misfits. And that thread is helpful, I think, again, back to the art conversation, because what artists do is pursue the liminal. Peterson in the video that dropped from the Catholics who are really trying hard to get Jordan to follow Tammy, Jordan basically tells them this is the first he said it just outright. He basically says, I'm a fringe guy. I'm not a joiner. That's basically what he says. And yeah, he said it was unlikely because they asked him, are you going to follow her? And he said, it's unlikely. I'm just being honest. Yep. Yep. And I thought it was honest, sincere. But I think the corner of the corner that we have here is very much that way. Well, that makes me a want to recommend the Google talk by some guy that I saw once on fringe networking, because that's where all of the interesting things happen. Aside from that, I would like to thank Chad Rick, Laps the Monkey, Chad's manager, Neil Daedalus, old Tommy Boy, something, something, something and food truck Emily. But we're coming to the part where I have to destroy Paul VanderKlay now. So, all right, we'll drop in them. All right, I got the branding. I got the branding all all here for you. I got the original brand. I think that's this. This is a message for Pastor Paul VanderKlay. I saw you had on your show this morning. The horrible things that man said about the cave fabe. And I just want you to know that I'm going to destroy you in the April Fool's conversation cage match. I will I will meet you. I will meet you on the first of April. Grim Grizz. Thanks. I will. I will meet you and you will never forget. Because you see what what we do here is is we manifest things by speaking them into existence. And while the April Fool's cage match conversation cage match isn't the thing, it can easily be a thing. And all it would take is for the other channels that wanted to be in the cage match to make one of these. I'm going to destroy you videos and tag that other person in it. And then then we can all have on April Fool's Day. We can all get in some big zoom like this one that Chad did. And there will be a cage match. You know, that'd be fun. Right. Are you having fun yet, Grizz? More than most times. More than most times. Now, I have this spoiler. Do I play that now or is loaded? It's loaded. All right. I just want this before you do the spoiler. And it's perfect because I think I let it go for about a minute and I need to grab some coffee. But the one of the things I think about this little corner that doesn't get enough shout out is this dash little dash corner dot com. And it is through that amazing utility by Ryan that I found the following clip to bring to our cage match. And it's the first reference it returned of the word cage match and a trip down member Berry Lane and a whole new light. And that's you know, I hadn't known much about bar field at all. And this crazy new life I'm living where one, you know, I start with Jordan Peterson. He's a gateway drug and be a Jordan Peterson. I find Jonathan Peugeot and I don't really understand him very much at first. I'm like, where's this guy coming from? And everybody's like, you got to talk to Jonathan Peugeot. And it's like, I'm not sure what we'll talk about. Maybe we'll fight about reform versus versus orthodoxy and we'll have a little still still cage match me and Jonathan. I'm a lot bigger than he is, but he's a lot younger than I am. So who knows? So but Jonathan's such a sweet guy and we hit it off and it's great. And the more I listen to his stuff, it's like, oh, wow, I'm learning stuff. And then Struan, who's watching my stuff, you got to listen to this verveky guy. It's like everybody's sending me stuff to listen to. And now suddenly it's like, oh, wow, verveky is really onto something. There's there's stuff going on here. And there it is. On the ropes. I am. Let's get ready to fumble. Mumble and fumbles here on the show. But that that was a nice little addition, I thought, because there's something going on here. And it's the fact that we're actually this is our real life. This is this dichotomy that the Internet and the real life, it's they were once separate things. But then since since money got involved, they began in together. And I don't know, I've come to see this as part of participatory ensemble television. What do you think about that? I think it's true. I just made a video that's coming out tomorrow morning for Homeroom that Peterson keeps talking about the presentational. And what he really wants is the participatory. That's what he's really looking for. It's a difference between covenant and contract. And I think that's part of what we're sort of scratching at here. It's the difference of whether or not you're one of the people in the aisles going. Or you're sitting there feeling awkward. And it's much better to be one of the persons in the aisles doing that. Trust me. Do you think? Have you in your life as a Christian? Have you ever been filled to the Holy Spirit to the point that you've spoken in tongues? I have not spoken in tongues. I do not have that gift. Yeah, if you had an experience, you would say is physical, physiological, recognizably being filled with the Holy Spirit. Like, is there a physical, physiological sensation in your body that? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. That's that's that's common. That that that happens a lot. When when when? Give me an example. Church, when I'm worshipping. Yeah, I give myself to God. Is it? Is that how much of it do you think is that participatory? Does it feel like it fills the room or you as an individual? And no, it's not an individual. It's transjective. It's it's us. I think that's when Christian we should, you know, when Christian worship really works, me becomes us the minute yourself conscious that this it's broken and and it's when you forget yourself. And there's lots of Christian songs that say so forget about yourself and concentrate on him and worship him. There's this old Christian campy song, but that is the heart of worship is forgetting about yourself. And it's the it's the heart of all sorts of things that are most meaningful in life. I saw I saw today Zizek's defense of Christianity. And he went into how Santa is a is a cave that we all LARP for those who can still believe in it. What would you say the people who said that's what people are doing in church is LARPing so others can believe in what they don't. And some of that can be what happens when a clergy member or a pastor deconstructs, if not that they start feeling that way. You know, the heart the heart of this, I mean, you're you're you're touching on it right here is the heart of belief is the lack of self-awareness and belief. It's just direct. The difference between a kid who dressing up like Superman and is out there flying down the street as happy as can be and someone who goes to the movie theater feeling a little bit like a little bit of a That's all the difference in the world. Give me more on that, would you? I don't think I got there. In thing after thing, it can be worship. It can be well, for Vickie calls it a flow state. The difference between faking it and embodying is the flow state is you forget about yourself. You are you are you have connected with that which you are at that moment, worshiping, giving it your full attention. You're giving it so much attention. There is no self-consciousness and C.S. Lewis when he talks about humility said that is what's humility. Humility is self forgetfulness. And that's and we long for that. I mean, Peterson lately has been going around saying, you know, you know, basically thinking about yourself is the definition of what does he say? Unhappiness? Hell? Yeah. Thinking about yourself. And I think part of so so we so set lures us the spell of set is that we are self forgetful and we are drawn into the screen. What what's happening here is that we are connecting through the screen and we are still self forgetful. But now we are connected to others. And and that's the way worship is. A worship service is not there is a lot going on in when the seeker church came and they start putting worship leaders and people up on stage for they did that because the people realized that people in the audience didn't know how to sing anymore. In churches that were pre seeker, you didn't need anyone on stage. The whole congregation just did it. The problem that happened was with seeker worship to a degree, people were watching and the real key to great leadership is get them from watching to participate and get them to falling in the aisles, get them to, you know, however they do it, their eyes rolling back or their eyes closed or whatever. So it's a really important thing to do. That sounds like an argument that the Pentecostals give good church. They do give good church. What else? Oh, I'm supposed to be destroying the last two churches. That's a good point. That's a good point. Yeah. So you have to be ready to start a good church. You have to be ready to start a good church. I'm trying to get you to come out. Emily, you want to come in? We're talking about worship. You're the worship leader. I'm going to I'm going to set up guy. What? What is ambushed? Ambushed? What kind of match is this? There's a tag team. I we're talking about worship. We have a we have a worship leader of one of America's top mega churches right here in the ring II tag her in Gris. She is going to take you out. Okay. Okay. We'll see. We'll see. I'll say I'll go. I'm going to go. My favorite. My personal favorite raveky quotes is uh your face is really large right now. Well, because I had to get close to the keyboard. Uh anyway, go on. Go on. So, as a worship leader, you manufacture participation. Do I manufacture my own participation? No, like that's what you're supposed to get out of your world. That's how you play. It's really interesting. I was just saying in the comment section, I think one of the differences like so I'm part of a church where we have people that come from outside who have never been in a church before. So, in a lot of ways, there is a sense that you're you're coming into a theater and they do play the music loudly so there's not the self-consciousness. You can kind of get lost in the environment like you're in a concert or something like that. So, the thing that I find so interesting is like before you all had a shared liturgy. You had hymns, you had songs that everyone knew everyone was used to and then your voice would be lost with all the other voices and that doesn't really have happened that often anymore. You know, I mean in in the kind of like they don't sing along. You don't lead them into singing. No, I do. I'm just saying like so if people come in and they don't know the songs, I I can see everybody by the way and I see like like so over the weekend, I have five services and I I was like, oh my gosh, every single service had such a different vibe of of you know, cuz we there's definitely a vibe of just the people that are in there like the attendance is self-sorted into sub denominations. No, I mean, it's I don't know how I mean a lot of it is people who don't regularly go to church and then so there will be like a oh the specials. I only go out and he says and you don't know who's going to show up to what you know, it's a whole lot of things. I was going to tell one story first of all is that one time I was not leading. I was actually in in the auditorium that day and the right in the middle of worship all the power went out in the entire so the lights the music everything went out right in the middle of the song. And all you could hear was the voices of people just naked, you know, just like the music and it was so moving and then you know like after a couple of seconds everything came back on and without skipping a beat like you you wouldn't even know like anything happened, you know now you can do that on purpose because you realize how powerful it is well like hey Mike at this part in the song cut cut the speakers the audience do that. Well, because I had so many I had so many like how powerful people felt like it was like to hear each other singing and like I know I'm like we're just being guys check it out. Maybe we should be able to hear each other. But yeah, I have definitely noticed that there's such a self consciousness of people when they come into services even when you're in a small group. It's like people are aren't used to even praying with each other anymore and there's something very intimate about singing with people. There's something very intimate about praying with people, you know and yeah. All right. Since I have you here and apparently you're something to do with megachurch something something let me talk to you about paintball for Jesus. Okay. I've never played paintball. Do I have to play paintball to understand this? No, no, you don't. You know, there are a bunch of children's that do nothing but video games all the time and the fun super fun scientifically engineered flow state that comes from playing those video games. The closest I've poised only ever experienced to that is on the paintball field playing the paintball and and it's semi combat training in case China sending an invasion force up through Mexico. So I thought it would be a great idea. Not going for Mexico. They're going to Panama. Remember if the churches would pay would set up a team sponsor a team six man teams in competitive leagues Baptist versus the Pentecostals we we fund all the church set up paintball leagues that they that the poor people can play for free if they attend the church and they can compete and beyond the team and then their families also start coming to the church and it it brings the blood back into the church teaches young men urban combat training instead of getting fat on video games and is a really great idea. The mega churches as I understand it are the most likely to be able to afford such things since they're mega and whatnot. So there give your church paintball for Jesus for me. So we're going to get six Pentecostal kids to face off against the Chinese. No all of the churches will be training their own young men competitively to fight the Chinese with paintball no they're playing paintball to prove that the clean life loving Jesus is great and when the invaders happen to show up those are the ones we're going to give the rain. I'm just praise the Lord and pass the ammunition. Perfect perfect. I've never gotten to do a full paintball for Jesus pitch on your channel Paul I'm saying I'm winning. I'm not sure how that works. I wasn't sure how the paintball for Jesus thing work but I thought we were going to have like a whole carnival thing too and the woody mammoth was going to be there and I was going to bring my food truck and I was going to serve Lebanese food to the Israeli wrestling dude and that would be awesome. This little circus coming to this little city near you. Oh I think it happened totally look at that the on screen debut of the of the lobster monkey goose fancy pants designer shirt one whereas the one with the bigger logo is the cheap person one this year was number 63 of a hundred and I was very happy to get it excellent thanks worth every penny. Can you tell me about the quality of the t-shirt because I've been inquiring with Graham about doing this using this. Oh it's what's don't brand name quality. Have you watched it yet. This one I have several times. Is it really about the shirt or is it about participation because I think it's a participation thing. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Alright. Grizz. Here you go. This is your big shot. What I just did what I just did was a classic wrestling trope. Which is I'm really delayed for some reason. Well you are like in Israel or something right. So there's there's actual lag. Watch it through Streamy are not YouTube there's a big delay between Streamy are in YouTube. Yeah. You still watching on YouTube like a noob. Oh. Yes I was in the my ring. You step into my ring like a word who sits on the camera with the little chart in the diagram doesn't even know how to get in the stream yards. Now ignoring that ignoring what just happened. I actually waited to come in like a good wrestler would to until I was called upon in the promo. So I was actually a minute ago was summoned. So here I am now grim. What I want to tell you is and by the way it is 3 a.m. here. So if I'm going to beat you now I'm going to beat you at like 10 percent. I'm just saying that you're framing of the question to Paul about Santa I think as something that you don't believe in to allow the people that believe in to benefit from is holy and entirely and utterly flawed because I'll agree it's holy. Nice. I think for both for belief and for Santa the literal you know the question of literality is not the right question to begin with. It's not it's a badly friend question because Santa as well as other divine concepts are hyper objects meaning that their realness has to do with how they manifest in the world. So the was the air quotes about realness that's right. Okay. We're vibrate bro. Well figuratively I can demonstrate to you that the word literally is taking a pummeling lately and I think I think actuality is the most appropriate replacement. Yep. I did the point there is though is like like even if it's not true everyone can see it'd be better if everybody believed it was like I what what does it mean for it to not be true if we're not talking about physical things to begin with true in your mind as your mind influences your behavior if you don't believe it like for example you might believe that the universe like for the when I discovered the Jordan Peterson had blocked me it's like he'd always taken a bunch of heat for like what do you mean by God and what do you mean by believe and I was like the the best definition I have for that is the the arena is a gentic and you can relate to it as a person and if that's true then you know we have 97 different brands of how to do it ways we think that it's capable of doing it or effective at doing it and thus far Christianity is on the top. Well I just I just speak from my own experience like I know what you're talking about like I as far as like I used to think that that's what people did is I'm sure maybe some people do maybe act as if or make it till you make it or whatever or maybe they don't believe it at all but they really like the lifestyle and it helps their family but like from somebody who has had an actual experience of something that they can't explain or talk myself out of like I don't know it's very strange. Does that mean that since I haven't had that I'm not chosen by Christ and the unalleged damned to hell? I don't think so. Do we spend our lives waiting for that sort of touching experience? I think Paul was making the case that if we practice something including the belief of something often enough that it becomes automatic and therefore one of our shadow axioms in our shadow axiom lanterns then the spirit of the thing can actually just like once we practice it enough that it'd be like you do training so that you don't have to think when you need your training and I think it's a lot like that. So that does play into what I was going to say which is essentially I think you're just putting too much stock in propositional belief because if you're putting the training there that's a deeper level of that kind of thing. That's a deeper level of belief or knowledge or however you want to call it. No, programming. It seems like you're waiting for that to be convinced of the sentence God is real or something along those lines where the way and that was sort of my epiphany that led me to now seek some sort of a religious path. The way religion works through you is the last place works through you is in your propositional thoughts. So, Santa is real because of all the presence. What? That's why I'm faking it until you make it works because like your mind has to interpret what your body's doing, what you are doing, it has to justify it and like as that's practiced it becomes your reality as the manifest of nature of free will in this realm. But fake it until you make it is still putting the make it as the goal to attain and make it in this case is have the propositional belief. No. Okay. Making it is having the participatory experience. I think for me what it was is kind of like this. So, I had this idea that the universe was for a long time was like something like a simulation. Now I know this is stupid but maybe not. But I had to be willing to be rid or lay down my idea of what simulation was because like that was a completely like when I would tell people about it they say it's not I say yeah but you're thinking about simulation from a certain thing that you probably see in a movie. But so like the weird thing is my actual phenomenological experience of having what I had is nothing like what I thought it was going to be or what I thought that those people were having. And so I don't know if I'm all for like practice so when I do theTM search, for me it's lucky that you are comfortable with just kind ofmudusted practices but be willing to lay down what you think, you know, and set it aside or whatever may happen. And, like outcomes, to me, outcomes were like the thing that would block me from probably what happened. And then, what I also found was it had you haven't had that experience, I don't. I think that this stuff is way more tricky than it lay out. And I think that way back in the day when this happened, I was telling Luke Thompson about it. And he said, oh, is that as if you're pregnant? And then you didn't know it. And all of a sudden, it sounds like something Luke would say. Right. But it made kind of sense because you have to kind of eliminate the timeline thing and the expectation. The timeline and expectation kind of go together and they can block me, right? Cuz I have a certain image of how things were going to go. And it was nothing like, I mean, it caught me off guard. You're lucky you had enough opening to grace to allow it to happen, as I understand free will. I guess I would ask you, Grim, what are you aiming for? What do you want? At the moment? Yeah, what is the goal? Approximately 1,200 subscribers or channel members. That's not what I'm referring to. In relation to an experience of God. But why? Why do you need it? It's suicide prevention mainly. At least it was for the first 40 years of my life. These last six, that's been off the table, but I still have to give me a reason. Part of the reason I see things the way I do is because a long time ago, I became a Karlinist. And that's like, I have no dog in that fight. I'll watch, I'll be entertained, I'll have opinions on it. But as for me, I'm not participating. And that's how getting out of deconstructing my Karlinism has proven very, very, very difficult. And by Karlinism, you mean George Karlin. Yes. How about this? I reached the conclusion recently that the only purpose of quality, the only purpose of qualitative differences that some things are better than others, is if consciousness is intended. So roll around with that one for a while. What about intentional instead of intended? And I do want to throw out this one line in case anybody needs it. Simulation theory is a mortality cope. It's... Yeah, I don't believe that. Everything that's ever been is gone. Everything that's here now will be gone tomorrow. Paul apparently is playing the role of the audience. I know. I feel that qualifies as destroyed in the cage match. Don't shoot. He who presses the button, he's the one who's going to die. He who presses the buttons, he who can destroy a thing controls a thing. I'm going to bring up my notes that I have for Tigrag. If I ever get the chance to talk to Tigrag, I haven't seen him in these paths recently. So I'm afraid we might have driven that particular individual outside. Maybe he went to church. I would love actually to have a conversation with Tigrag to sort of... I'm trying to practice my materialist translation of what we're doing here. The translation to materialism to sort of be... Because I actually have some friends who I've managed to explain to why I find people like Pinker and Ivano Harari. I have a... My friends laugh at me at how I have an irrational hatred for Ivano Harari. It's not irrational, sir. That is not an irrational hatred. You don't know how much I hate him, though. Okay, but having the hatred is not irrational. I agree. You're in an acute case that needs... But since you're here and we're talking and we're in a conversation cage match that I spoke into existence after seeing you on Pastor Paul, my question is how much more should we... Should at least some of the characters in the corner lean into the archetypal presentation? Should we do what they do in wrestling because we're up on this fourth wall? I proclaim does not exist. Would it be more effective and engaging the more we're archetypal and less personally nuanced? So let me just say that you can maybe lean into it more, but by the nature of the medium, you're already doing it. You're already performing by knowing what it is that you're doing. You're already performing and by performing, you're already putting out there some sort of an archetypal form of yourself without even being aware of it. That said, I think it would... It might benefit some people in the corner to lean into it. I think actually you're doing it really well. You're already embodying an archetype. And embodying an archetype doesn't mean you have to avoid nuances because the archetype can be an archetype of something that's nuanced. No, I mean more specifically, like inter-channel-wise and inter-character-wise, should we use some more of the techniques and known tricks or whatever? The schemata, the plot lines, that whole nature. Should we see this similarly to the way you've seen professional wrestling as an insider? Are you asking whether you should create storylines for the corner? Sure. I think you should lean into storylines when they present themselves. I think creating them would... So creating them runs afoul of the nature of this little corner, which is bottom up, because then you're imposing something top down. But if something presents itself, and I think this cage mat is a great example of that, then leaning into it can create magic and actually deepen the investigation. And by the way, for the people asking the check, because I saw some comments popping up while I'm not in character, it is 3.20 a.m. here. I am working on... Not dedicated enough to be in character at 3.20 in the morning. I want the Lenny sleeping cam. That's what I want. All right, Paul, you got to bring it. I'm tagging somebody else in. I need the five minutes off cam now. There he is. There he goes. So aren't those stories... I think that means Paul wins, because I just heard Grim Grizz tapping out. That was my interpretation of what happened. It's his professional opinion. Yes. In my professional opinion, Grim just tapped out. Don't try these... Aren't these stories already occurring organically? I've heard PVK use his Jobe story three times now, or four times. And those stories are only becoming more numerous. The stories within the corner. Do you remember the time when... I was there when... I was an OG when... That's all coming. I'm third generation, something like that. I'm proud to be third generation, man. So I will say that even... You can especially tell in wrestling. When a story happens organically... So right now there's something to actually... WrestleMania, which is the biggest event of the year, is next week. And there was a story that developed organically over the last two months that sort of just happened. When that happens, which is once every few years, those stories are consistently the best stories. The ones that weren't planned. The ones that sort of just... Actually, there was something that was supposed to be a one-time interaction, but there's something here. Let's just let it happen, play out and see what happens. Those are consistently the best stories. So yeah, I think that's sort of what I told Gris. You shouldn't plan out storylines. If you see a storyline, you should lean into it. In life in general, by the way. Can I give you the story of how I started Tom Lukson? I want to tell that story because it's exactly what you're referring to. So it's really quick. So when I was coming out of the lurk, I was thinking to myself, oh man, I could be friends with Chad and I could be friends with Luke and I could be friends with some of these people. And I wanted to actually make individual friendships. And I figured I'd plant a bunch of seeds and maybe a few would sprout. And that would be great. That'd be fine if only a few sprouted. And Luke's the type of person that he has a lot of friends and they're more like acquaintances because Luke just, whatever's in front of him, he just jumps on top of. He just wants to be friends with everyone, love everyone. He'd probably make a great pastor, to be honest. But I was like, how do I get... So I started thinking, have you ever seen the Peter Jordansson video? This came out ages ago. It was like four years ago. Yeah. And I still watch it. It's hilarious. It's just, if you haven't seen it, look up Peter Jordansson. And I was like, oh, I can totally do Tom Lukson. And then I would, and especially with the mustache getting longer and longer every single day. And he has all these Lukisms. So I said to myself, okay, this is easy. He grew up in South Dakota. I'm going to put on the cowboy hat. I'm going to... And then Chad, and I was talking to Chad about this and I was like, maybe he could be like a criminal defense attorney because in New Orleans, man, they're like ambulance chasers. They're everywhere. And Chad's like, no, no, no. How about a used car salesman? And I was like, oh, that's great. Let's do it. And then the Whitestone name brand came to my mind and I took a picture of a car dealership, like really close to my home. And I just like Photoshopped the name to say the Whitestone name brand car dealership. Then I record, well, Chad made his lobster monkey thing. And I was like, oh, I got to do... I had no idea that Chad was going to do that before. Like he did it and he just did it. And so then my mind is like for the whole weekend, I'm like, I got to do this. I got to do this. I have all these pieces. I'm at my daughter's dance competition that particular weekend. All I had was these like ideas pop into my head. I'm going to do this. I'm going to do this. Going to do that. And I put together the video and it was, you know, the way these things work is you put together a long video and then you cut all the mediocre stuff and then you're left with like the gold. And then it just is all natural, you know, just like Peugeot's hair, all natural. Well, I think that's exactly right. And when I look at everything that I've seen in this little corner, I've sort of related to what I've seen in church communities. Because this is how communities are formed. They're all the little stories. And sometimes they're the positive little stories. And sometimes they're the bad little stories where things really, but all of that is sort of the knitting together of a community. And I think what people do when, you know, one of the things that happens on YouTube and very quickly happens, oh, I want Jordan Peterson to talk to this person. I want Jordan Peterson to talk to this person. And they're also thinking, I saw my girls do this when they were young. They were shipping people. I'm like, what do you mean you're shipping people? You put them in a container? No, no, no, no, no. I'm shipping these people like Harry Potter and they're putting them in relationships. And there's just a natural building of a network of a community. And I think part of why this little corner has been fun is that, again, Neil, you decided you wanted to play. So you came out of the lurk. Now, it's not exactly, oh, anybody who wants to come can play. No, you're gonna have to bring a story and you're gonna have to find your way on. So that's what we've done. Well, I feel like that's what you did to me though, because I kept just sort of yapping at your heels about everything. And then you would just send me a link to something like, here, people are already talking about this over here. Just go see what they're talking about or, you know. Well, that's a pastor trick. Because what happens is someone comes into church, maybe they liked your sermon, and then they're like, I'm gonna start going to church. And me and Pastor Paul are gonna be best friends. And it's like... I wasn't trying to be your best friend. No, I know you weren't. I know you weren't. But the pastor trick is anybody who comes in, I need to knit them into the body. Right. And so that's why... If you hadn't done that, I didn't even realize there were all these other orbiting channels. And then I was like, oh, that's that person. And that's that. I mean, I just had no idea. I've never been on YouTube before. But that's also why I know you're not like a past, the internet pastor, whatever. But whenever I said like, you're more of a pastor than I have in my real life that I, you know, because I do that to my pastor, you know, or to the leadership. I'll be like, have you heard of this? I tried it with the Jordan Peterson stuff and the verbatim. I was constantly trying to... I was bidding for connection, I guess, within the community. And I couldn't find it. I mean, I tried with whether it was women, men, everybody. But yeah, but that's what you did. And unfortunately, I'm finding it online. But yeah, I was trying to talk to pastors around me and pastors I knew in my own network. And they're like, so you say I'm going to have to watch hours and hours and hours of this guy talking. Really? Yeah. And you're going to love it. And so that's how I got into the mix. I was like, I don't know. I was just kind of like, I sensed there was upon a change was coming of some sort or needed to happen. And I reached out, I found like stock Paul's email and emailed him and he sent me right over to the Discord. And it was like maybe a month later, I had... It was very similar to what Neil was just saying about the Tom Lukson thing. I was just like, oh, this should be like some sort of a hub where all these different channels can mix and stuff. And then that's how the whole thing started. And for me anyways, and for me, I love the whole for fun, for free thing. Like I'm not on the same run that Grizz is. But I'm very supportive of Grizz. I want Grizz to go up. I want him to go up in the hierarchy of salience in the world of YouTube. I don't care about that personally. I'm here for the playing with my friends. And so if I can be a part of doing that, that's what is valuable to me. And like, or having a dinner and do these different things or like having memorable moments like that. But it's weird because I was talking with my wife yesterday and she was discussing how she, it wasn't yesterday, it was a couple of days ago. She was having difficulty with some of her feelings about church stuff. And I was like, and we were talking about the same kinds of things that we talked about on here. And I was like, this is why I do this with these people. And she's like, yeah, but all you guys are all happy and stuff. And I said, no, no, we're not. We're not always happy. So this isn't happy crappy bullshit. People really wrestling with stuff. And like when Griggs says, you know, the whole idea of faith is attracted to him was initially attractive to him because of suicide prevention. I'll tell you right out. Like I've been, I've had this experience, I think three years ago now, two years ago, I can't remember. But suicidal ideation hasn't completely left me. And, and, but the difference is, is like, I, I just, I don't believe it. I don't believe every whim that passes through my ears, you know? And so I'm here to play with you guys. This is not bullshit to me. This is very real and very fun for me. And if I have to, you know, well, especially since doing like all the randos shit, like I don't even know what to make of that. It's hard though. I mean, the scheduling is difficult sometimes. No, yeah, yeah. Nobody wants to hear how hard it is. Nobody wants to ever hear how hard it is. I don't know how to tell that to you, Chad. But let's give them some saving throws against it. Paul put me up on the big screen. These are the April, April, April fool savings throws. You get to pick between survival, social wisdom or heart as the basis for your savings. Throw if the die rolls over 10, you take half damage. If it's under 10, you take full damage until you get your next set of savings throws and gosh knows when. Heart it up, y'all heart it up. Special thanks to Mark Parker and Sevilla for the hat tips over on my channel. Choose. Oh, survivalist with a vibe. Socialist hot Trinity for you. That's a three lovers of wisdom bringing in the big deuce against these mind controls. Heart folks though. You'll be fine. That's a 15 for you. Indigo kids. Oh, how nice of you. You made the net 20. So you got the show to die. Behold is watching you. Thank you, Paul. Unless the mustache dies. It does not bear much fruit. And it gets irritating on your lip after a while. All right. This is about all I have available though, guys. I'm going to dip out. Thank you for attending this first annual April Fools conversation cage match. Six years into the thing, we finally start doing. Nope. Thanks, everybody. So just to confirm, you are tapping out. Yes, I've been defeated. I've been defeated. Paul didn't do it other than like throwing randos at me until I crumbled. No, no, I did it. I did it with 10% of my capacity. Oh, oh, it was you. Ducks eat bread. They do. They like 10% of my power. All right. Cue the branding. Thank you all for showing. Oh, yeah. Something else. Yeah. Yeah, Chad. I wanted you guys to know that CW Weeks is so much more than Ducks like bread. I just want you to know that. I want to see the CW Sam Tieteman conversation. That's what I want to see. Oh, CW's conversations are something to behold, I'll tell you. I think I'm up next. So being the first one that I did with them, that was a memorable conversation. So that's definitely top 10 randos. So thank you guys for all coming. Guy, I appreciate you. Emily, great to see you. Neil, as always, and Pastor Paul. Bye, everybody. I'm going to sleep so hard. Oh, well, where are you here? There are you. Got me. Oh, boy. Yeah. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Oh, Jesus. Walk with me. Walk with me. Yeah. Oh, my mama. Walk with me to. And walk with me to. Yeah, she is a. Warren, I mean, baby hold my hand lord hold my hand hold my hand lord hold my hand all along this Jesus journey hold my hand lord hold my hand walk with me walk with me walk with me walk with me well Walk with me, Lord. How y'all doing? Walk with me. Walk with me, Lord. Walk with me. I'm on my way to the end. I want Jesus. I want Jesus. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with David. A little shepherd boy. Yeah, you made him a great kid. I know David shouted for joy. He walked with David. And he's a little shepherd boy. You made him a great kid. David shouted for joy. That's right. Oh yeah. So walk with me, Lord. Walk with me. Walk with me, Lord. Walk with me. All along this Jesus journey. Walk with me, Lord. Walk with me. You gotta walk with me, Lord. Yeah! That was rocking great, brother.