https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Vxb_XsnFH4Q

 There we go. Good. So, are you recording or not too? Do you want to record this thing? It looks like it's recording on your end, so that'll be fine. You can send the recording to me. Okay, that's cool. That's cool. Yeah, it's good to see you. We, you know, when I signed up for this, or at least agreed to go to the Arc thing, I really didn't have a lot of expectation. And so getting to hang out with you was a really pleasant surprise in addition to the whole thing. Yeah, I don't know why. I didn't expect, I didn't really expect to see so much of like the IDW world there, actually. I'm not sure why I didn't. But yeah, it felt like a huge amount of people who I pay attention to on the internet all happened to be there. So yeah, it was a real pleasure to just meet everybody. But in particular, it was a lot of fun to hang out with you and get a chance to get to know each other more. Like, you know, I had a lot of conversations with people that I think you and I actually kind of like got to know each other as human beings a little bit more. Yeah, yeah. Well, in physical space, at least we're, you know, and it was so I watched I put this in a video a couple days ago but I dated it to the internet. Dave Rubin did a talk with Philippa Stroud before the conference and she sort of laid out a little bit of how this conference emerged. You know, if, if, if, if me and a couple friends here locally get an idea to do something you know maybe we'll have a meetup but when Paul Marshall and Jordan Peterson and the Strouds get an idea, they have a, you know, I don't know, I'm sure that conference cost between five and six figures. They put that thing together. So, yeah, definitely. I would think six figures for sure. Yeah. Well, where do we want to start talking about this thing or what do we want to start talking about first of all. Yeah, I mean, I think I was interested in like, what, what were your big takeaways, like, and yeah, maybe we'll start there. Well, my take on the conference evolved during the conference, because I didn't quite know what to expect. When I got the app and started scrolling through who was going to be there. It was like, Oh, these aren't. These aren't randos and the usual people I spend my time with. These are these are people with titles and names and positions and wealth. And, and then when the program came out and it was like, Oh, we've got political figures, and, you know, people who are involved in international policy and all of this, I, you know, at that point I sort of got cold feet and wondered, Should I even be there? I don't know if this is this is my, these are my people or this is my jam but I, I was already committed to it and was like, Okay, well, let's, let's just go and see what happens. And then the first day. The first day. Yeah, when they especially when they had a lot of the political speakers and speakers I thought, I remember way back early with Jordan Peterson why he didn't like church or preachers because preachers lied and what he meant by lied where they said things that would gain them status and following instead of saying what they really thought and listening to a lot of the political speakers I thought politicians lie at least as bad as pastors. Yeah, and, and so then day one on one hand it was sort of. Some of the speakers just seemed. Okay, I can hear a lot of this stuff on the internet. Some of the stuff I don't really care to pay too much attention to it all, but then getting to meet the people sort of around this, you know, in the, in that area that that seemed really cool and important. And it was interesting that there were a bunch of people that were sort of in the Peugeot camp who were sort of artists who sort of felt a little out of place there too so it was fun to get to know them and hanging out with them. Day two wasn't really a great day but day three things began to sort of gel for me and I began to get an idea of, especially with Peugeot speech was like, okay, this is who are here this is what they are doing this is this is what what they're at least trying to do so. And it, the conference grew on me in terms of. Okay, this is this has value. And beyond just add some frustrations with the format of the conference but I can, I can sort of get a sense of what they're doing there are a lot of conflicted agendas here one agenda was sort of bring at least the willing remnants of the IDW back together, and that's a lot of who we saw, except it wasn't right. Like, I mean, the IDW was there, but they weren't speaking. No, right. Not that felt like pretty remarkable to me actually to have, you know, the Weinstein brothers Heather high, James Lindsay, Peter and, like, all of sort of, you know, Dave Rubin, kind of. It felt like a lot of Jordans allies in the original sort of, yeah, sort of idea of the IDW were all present, but we're not foregrounded. There was something very interesting to me about that very. Yeah, I don't know I. It was great for me. Right, like, because I got the chance to speak with all of those people. And I had really amazing conversations with all of them and the people I've wanted to chat with for a long time. It was kind of strange to feel this like the IDW was where the center of the energy was. And then it collapsed and in some sense it's like it was coming back together because Jordan I put this thing on, but it wasn't really back together it was like the bands all in town, but they're not together. And it was partly because Jordan sort of moved on from it. And it was almost a sense of, well, Jordan now has new friends. And they're all on stage, and the IDW who, you know, I've done some video work on Eric and Brett. And Eric and Brett are really not in sync with the rest of that conference. Yeah. They're not. I spoke extensively to both of them about that actually had a really particularly wonderful conversation with Brett and Heather. But I think that I was. My take on it now was that I think it was in some sense similar to you in that it did grow on me as it went. But my initial take was when I was invited to come, I was like, I'm not sure if I want to go right. Part of that was just because I've been, you know, there's been a lot of demands on me and I was very stressed at the time and I was like one more thing on top of everything else. But the other concern was just how much is this specifically a conservative event? And a politically conservative about the conservative. Yeah. And it's a funny thing because there's many ways in which it would be fair to describe me as a conservative. But I also am very much trying to actively escape the polarization of tribalism. And so I don't necessarily want to get captured in things that feel it's like I don't. I would I would I would hesitate to, you know, be featured on Fox News or hesitate to go to the Republican National Convention. It felt like the Republican National Convention on the first two or three speakers, right? Yes, it did. The old Speaker of the House and the new Speaker of the House and I was at that point so politically uninformed that I was like, who's that guy up there? Yeah. And I think it was Nathan James said he's the new Speaker of the House. I said, oh, wow, is this the kind of event we're at? Yeah, that's what I felt like. Right. I was like, OK. And it was that was particularly interesting because that was my first worry. And also a good friend, a mutual friend of ours. I asked if he was going and he said no because of that. And I don't want to necessarily get deep into that because I want to drag him into that into a fight or anything. But but yeah, it was like it was a hesitation. So throughout the event, I have this feeling that I don't know if this is like a new conservative movement and a new conservative alternative to a progressive NGO infrastructure or if it's a movement that happens to contain a lot of conservatives. And even the. That that seemed to be actively in tension amongst the speakers. There was a point in the energy and environment talk where Dennis Prager started just lambasting the left and Michael Schellenberger sitting next to him going like, hey, I'm still a liberal. And and I thought it was I thought it was really cringe, to be honest. I like I thought that that what Prager was doing was was actively destroying the potential for the type of coalition that can achieve the policy ends that the that arc is setting out. So there was that tension. And then there was this very interesting tension around Christianity within it, which So, you know, if we go back to the 1990s and sort of the moral majority and the kind of the the return of the right to a lot of political power, it was motivated by evangelical Christianity in America. And of course, you know, when America sneezes the rest of the world catches a flu. So, in some sense, our politics are downstreaming around the world. And I had the sense that. That it's not clear. Whether it's that there's a there's a sense that I think is fairly universal, though not even universal right because there's. I think everyone who's involved, there's the better story part, the governments and free market governance part and the social fabric part right there's three primary tracks. Everyone in the better story part in some sense was grappling with Christianity. But, you know, Alex Epstein doesn't care about Christianity at all. Right. Right. So and Bjorn Lomborg I don't think so either like at the O2 arena and Murray and and Peugeot and Peterson are batting these things back and forth Lomborg looks like he's just not in the right room. Right. Amongst the people within the better story part. What the actual relationship to what Christianity is and looks like going forward. It feels I don't know what I don't know what everyone actually means and I don't know if what speaker a means and what speaker B means are actually particularly well aligned. So I had a lot of, I had like, I'm having a great time, I'm meeting lots of people. This is cool. And if this is about a better story I don't know if the story is coherent at the moment. And at the same time, I also had that sense of there is that. I don't know if the format is fit for purpose. And this was informed by the fact that I had done the respond project last year, right with the crew who's trying to organize things around John Verbecky. Right. And so they had brought together the nine speakers and had us all sit down, like hack out, like, we all sat down and said what are the most important subjects that we need to talk about as far as building a wisdom ecosystem right. And then every, everything that was, we sort of like throughout all our ideas, and then they tried to recognize which ideas were the same, and sort of collapse them to a set of some, you know, more coherent ideas and then once we had a kind of workable set of ideas to to work with. We were given. We were basically rank order, which rich topics were most important to us. And then based on that we were assigned to try to do working groups. And then like three facilitators in a room, talking for an hour and a half about how to how to get a better wisdom ecology around existential threats or around the role of religion or around embodiment or around the environment. This is not scalable to 1500 people. And then we sat down in the room and saw all these people like an Eric Weinstein like a Brett Weinstein like a Heather high and said okay well, how much value is there for them for how much of the their potential to add value is harvested by them just being in the audience. And, you know, maybe this is is prideful on my part but I felt the same about myself right like I'm looking at it and I'm I I really enjoyed Peugeot's talk. And I actually got a lot of Ben Marshall and thought okay here's someone who I want to follow and no more Marshall Marshall Marshall yeah it's a commercial been. I thought it was yeah it's Paul Marshall. Yeah, I had no idea who he was and I listened to his talk about wow I was good. Yeah, I would I was surprised to hear someone be so straightforward. And so nuanced about the complexity he wasn't just hammering on capitalism or hammering for capitalism he was saying, we've got a lot of issues with our, with what we're doing with our economic structures. There are problems how do we fix them let's be honest about them. Yeah, so I like that but like, you know, listening to say Michael Schellenberger. Like, I think there's a lot of value in his message. Having him condense it that short and serve it to that audience made it less valuable for me than if I was to listen to a podcast interview with him, or just go read his sub stack right. And that was kind of how I felt about a lot of the speakers. Now, interestingly, the place where the conference hit was with pageau with Bishop Baron with Joshua Luke Smith. Yeah, with the music, because that's where the bonding, that's like where that that call to something higher was powerful you know and I like I was, I broke tears pretty intensely after after Joshua Luke Smith's last poem because it was about relationship to a to a dead elder in his family. And I hadn't just lost my father this summer and so like, I kind of, you know, was sitting at a table with you and then Eric came and sat down next to me and all of a sudden I was just gushing tears right. And that to me that that type of stuff. It's not going to be the same if you're not in the room. But I wondered like, with that much talent was that format really fit to purpose to energize people to help to actually solve a better story not just to propose a potential better story, but to begin sort of utilizing the energy of the people there the intelligence of the people there to achieve greater coherence, such that then they can go act it out in the world. I think those two points are really excellent, the coherence of the better story. And it's underpinnings because that's where the, the tension with Christianity is. And then the was the format fit for purpose, and I think, I think those. The first video I made after the first day was, we were hearing a lot of sort of, in some ways you could say, boy, the boy wasn't the British Empire great, we just got to get back to that. It's like, well, you know, I, you know, I'm not I'm not here for just the the facile anti colonial narrative either but there's a reason. There's a reason modernity is receding and liberalism is creaking, and it's being assaulted from the left and you're all sort of lined up to fight the the folks over on the left but the, you know, other critics from the left, let's say, you know the Weinstein's for example all of the IDW, why the IDW criticisms of liberalism are were sort of from the left and the right. And they're not just critiques of liberalism from the right. So, I think as the conference went on. And especially with Peugeot's speech, and and to a certain degree Bishop Baron speech, they were then able to integrate more of a little bit more of that critique there. And I think the, was the format fit for purpose I think is a is a huge issue. Because, number one, it wasn't that all clear from the format what their purpose was. Yeah. And number two, by listening to some of the speeches especially by some of the leaders. If in fact, you want to sort of create a network. This, this format really didn't make a lot of sense, because most of us. Either we've heard most of what was spoken before, or we can find it on YouTube if we want to go look it up. This isn't a case where you had a bunch of neophytes in the room and you're going to inform them about all these things, you had a lot of extremely well connected well informed people in the room. And you're basically having them sit in a room and listen to, you know, direct information and it's like, it's monological, it's monological, rather than, or sort of. Obviously there's a strong dialogical element in the networking that happens implicitly, but there's very little structuring of that there were the dinners right. So, aside from listen to the top speakers and then go talk amongst yourselves. There wasn't any facilitation of how that talking would take place, which, to me, I, I just think that that that that model doesn't achieve as much as it could. You had, when you think about the value of the time. I mean, it was a remarkable feat that you got 1500 people of that caliber in that space at the same time and you had their full attention for the most part. That is a huge accomplishment. But then you also have the responsibility to okay you've got that now what are you going to do with it and I felt most people probably salvage the time by doing a lot of what we did, which was okay they're not really facilitating networking here. So I'm going to go and do some of that on my own. Yeah, I ended up skipping. After talks on the second day and more than half on the third day to just give myself opportunities to talk to the people that I was interested in talk in talking to. And, you know, I'm excited to see in some sense all the talks come out because there's some of them you know that I maybe will benefit from but it just felt like, you know, My conversation with Bretton Heather was probably the highlight of my whole time over there, right. It was incredibly rich and intense and like the fort of my thinking in important ways. And so it was like, for me it was more valuable to go seek those opportunities, then to go to a talk that may or may not end up being really good. I think the, the, the, the inconsistency of the conference for me was really crystallized by Jonathan Paju and then I think it's. Yeah. Honestly, it was quite a preachers and the politicians frankly had a really bad showing at this conference a lot of the preachers to were just like, man, it was really funny to sit next to not all the preachers though but yeah. Yeah, I think it was good. Bishop Aaron was good. Yes, there's a Baron was good and Paul Stroud was good. Okay, I didn't see that one. And that one hasn't been on on YouTube yet he he and Philippa are really key in terms of understanding what they want to do here, and they're, they don't have the profile of Jordan Peterson, at least not internationally. The, you see, I probably should have. I didn't seek, I mean, thinking back on it I probably should have tried to sit down with Brett and Heather and, you know, I had a little bit more interaction with Eric but what I what I didn't want to spend my time doing was basically sitting down and because of a status differential just hearing a lecture about things that I've heard them talk for hours on YouTube anyway. And I don't maybe, maybe it didn't go that way with Brett and Heather was not that way at all. It was extremely felt like a peer to peer conversation that was really really rich. I had a I had a small chat with Eric which felt more the other way, and I lost interest in it because it was like sort of like, I, I know your rap Eric, I want to talk to you about it I don't want to hear it. Yeah. You know, and you never know what the circumstances are circumstances are they give rise to that and we've all got many demands on our attention so we all kind of go to tour default so I'd love to have a chat with Eric and future. But in that particular case I was just sort of like, I'm not here to do the king in this court with you like that's not interesting. But no with Brett and Heather was incredibly mutual and really, really, really rich. So, I wanted to go back to right now I feel like I'm mostly critiquing it, but I wanted to, like, so I had my critiques as the, as the event went along. And then this woman Christina got me backstage passes afterwards and I was, I was able to go talk to Jordan and Jordan asked me how what I thought of the event and I was kind of cagey I was like well I was great. There are some things that I think could be better. Right. And then afterwards I was like, it's probably not the right time to talk to him about what they don't like would have been better to just be, it was great. Right. Just to focus on the positive because I think he's probably just super, super exhausted by the end of that. I don't know if he gets exhausted. I really don't. I've seen the dude at times I thought you should take a nap. You know, like, when I've interacted with Jordan before he's been really really good at attending to who he's talking to and he did not seem like that in the green room particularly. And so that I perceived as like okay he's done. Right. But in any event, afterwards I was thinking about that interaction and I was thinking that there's a certain that we've sort of If you've been following Jordan long enough the stuff that he does and the stuff that happens around him, you can, you become a slightly habituated to, you don't really recognize how much of a miracle it is. And so I thought about it in retrospect and I said okay, yes, it had flaws there's a lot that I would like to give them feedback on on how to grow in certain ways. And at the same time, you know, we were in the O2 arena, and it's packed it's sold out. And you think about how in 2018. They did the O2 arena with him and Sam Harris and Douglas Murray for the first time. And it was astonishing like, like, it was completely unheard of in the history of public intellectuals, you know, at least in the last, you know, 70 years to have that kind of impact. And all of that was happening at the same time that the Gaza protests are happening in just a few streets away. And so to see the type of potential that has catalyzed around Peterson and his work and the good faith attempt that's being made to actually try to forward something that improves the world there is remarkable and, you know, I don't think that a kind of It's, it felt like a hybrid, I suppose it's like a hybrid between a pastoral convention, a political convention and academic convention. And I don't think that a model that's based on that can achieve what they're aiming for. But if you treat it as that, it was remarkably well done, for the most part, is my sense. I mean, there's too many of them. So I don't know how common that sort of very up and down nature of the talks is but I suspect that that's more than Norman than the exception. Yeah. Yeah, the kind of talks are never even. I mean, there's always talks that stand out. I think. I think if they. If this organization wants to really achieve some of their goals. I think you're exactly right that they have to think far more strategically about process. And the kinds of events that they want to create to create the kinds of outcomes they say they're looking for. Yeah. You know it with even just with estuary and the corner. We've done a fair amount of thinking about even though the events sort of happened haphazardly. Those of us who have been working on them especially putting together events like the Chino event have have done a fair amount of thinking about, okay, what's our what's our goal. And what kind of facilitation. Do we want to do in order to achieve that goal. And I thought that the. I was. It was remarkable to me. That with people of this caliber especially. You know, especially if this isn't just let's say politicians trying to do something because politicians don't necessarily. In my opinion, usually figure out the best kind of process things to achieve their goals they're usually just sort of hamfisted and direct. Whereas, in terms of pastoral ministry. Religious people are constantly at least Protestants I don't know about orthodox and Catholics but Protestants are constantly looking at processes. Yeah, about what outcomes do we want with people and this this to me gets more in line with a lot of the work that you do. Because your events are not here I'm going to rent a room and we're all going to sit in here and rave is going to talk to you for 10 hours about embodiment. Yeah. There's something there's something that betrays the, the cause and the approach like that. Well, so just take the idea of the better story. Right. Now, I discovered as a teacher, the stories are more effective in impacting students than facts are. Yeah. Okay, so I started to tell personal stories. And then I discovered Jordan Peterson's work, and I discovered archetypal stories and that these these types of stories can have even in some sense they have a different type of power and anecdotal stories they're both really powerful but together they play really interestingly. And songs tell stories and bring people into story in a really profound way. And what, but from the motor learning constraints that literature, kind of the idea that just states out is that the more that learning happens sort of internally, and the less it's the more you can get an emergent bottom up learning from the student, the more impactful it is. Yes. And so, at, at, at our, at our week long events, we have one night where we tell a story my friend Aaron, who's a story my friend Aaron Cantor usually tells a story that's come from the grim, grim fairy tales. And then he does some really amazing magic to make that story incredibly vibrant. And then we, we feed the story images and then afterwards we start to ask like, what lessons could that story offer us today. And so there's a there's a dialogical component that comes out right away. And then, then we'll do a night where we actually ask people to tell the story of their own experience at the event. Tell it as if it's an epic myth. And, and then it's theatrical and everyone has this incredible, it coheres people so powerfully it's really interesting. And then on the last day I will give the kind of synthesis, monological. This is all about this is the history of it right now but I still start with story right I don't actually start with theory I start with a story that that that kind of contains it. And then we have a question answer and dialogue session after that but that's after all this embodied work. And so I bring that up because like looking at this conference it's like, it would have been very interesting to be separated into groups I don't know how you would have done it with 1500 people, but to say okay, you've listened to the first three talks. What is the story of arc. What is the story of arc. Do you believe in the story of arc, what would you need to believe in the story of arc. What is the better story to you. How do we relate that to Christianity how to relate that to energy policy what is the social fabric we're trying to put back together. To me that would. That would stick actually much better in the heads of the people, and it would refine what the message is and it would also give a much better potential for feedback. If you're, if you're running arc, and you want to. You want to tell a better story sure but you want to also know that that better story is going to have an impact. So you don't just want it to be a story you want it to be a story that goes out and motivates actions. But then you have to ask, you need a feedback system that says it is or isn't, and these elements of it are working, or these elements of it aren't. And so if you engage the dialogical and you get all those people working on the ideas, then you create a valve that can go back to the top. Right, you could have a facilitator they're copying it down, you can collate it across all these things and then you can feed it back to Philippa and Paul and Jordan and they could be like, oh, this landed. This didn't. And then hopefully you know six months down the later, you'd say hey, you know here, here's the hyper responders to this message. And we reached out to them and talk to them and here's what they've done with their experience at arc since then, that accords with our goals. Here's what's missing, etc. And I think that it's very easy to imagine a lot of this dissipating without that kind of structure. It's funny because when the first interviews I listened to with John Reveke, he said, okay, they asked him about his relationship to Jordan's work. And I can't remember exactly what he said but it really struck struck with me but he said something like, like, okay I get it you have this proposal for pragmatic Christianity. But where are the practices. You do it, you accept a story, you accept Christianity is the best story. And it's the best story because it accords with pragmatic philosophy and evolutionary biology. And then what. Right. Even, even though there are, I mean if you, if you would look at the art conference especially the social fabric talks and well there were practices strewn throughout everything. The question about facts and stories really hits hard with some of the lecture some people just stood up there and it was just, they were just machine gunning facts at us and it's like, Oh, I know this. But the. I mean there there are there are practices that were highlighted, you know Warren Farrell was there about, you know, fathering. There are a number of practices. Okay, but no, but you have to. There's, there are practices and there are capacities, and a lot of the things that they're looking for are there they're trying they're saying we have lost certain capacities. And obviously in order to, in order to develop capacities that's one of the things that practices do. Yeah, they develop capacities. So, this week we're going to be recording a series of roughhousing videos. So, after my interview with Jordan, there was this huge hunger for this type of resource but we never put it up online. And the reason that we never put it up online was fundamentally that I, I think was too. I was too, my frame was too martial arts dependent. And because I was looking at the progression of skill into the martial arts. There's all these things that I need to know about a student that I don't feel like I can learn, be an online format. That means that they can be safe to actually take on the real martial arts side of it. And I think that's the same thing with Cantor I mentioned earlier he has more of a dance background, and just, he's just not some, he's done lots of martial arts but he just doesn't have the same level of competitive self defense orientation. And he's been really working on like what could I introduce to anybody. So we're going to do a series of roughhousing things one's going to be adults with adults one's going to be adults with children, and there's going to be intimate partners. This is the type of thing where we're so Lauren says, Why are fathers important. Not exclusively, but one of the one of the areas that he highlights is the importance of rough and tumble play. But ask around you. How many of the fathers in this current generation are actually roughhousing with their children. It's not that many. Really, no. Men, men have been scared away from this they had didn't get it themselves they have a wife complain but I did it anyway. Like, you know, if you, if you read through the comments on the, the, the, the, the, my interview Jordan Peterson there's lots of people talking about how their wife didn't let them roughhouse their kids and how that was destructive of their relationship, or, you know, you know, their mother didn't allow that in their life. And, like, in that, in that, in the, in the aftermath of it, I got like, we had a, you know, a funnel open for people to come to our retreats. So I took 80 calls and three weeks after the Peterson interview which was intense. And a lot of them were actually women who had little boys who were intensely physical, who had husbands who were incapable of, of engaging with them physically, and were desperate to understand where they could go to get support, because they're trying to roughhouse with their kids and the kid is too intense, and it's too physical and they're too scared and it's not working. And so they're like, who can I go, I have, you know, little ADHD boys all around the country right who I hooked up with a local parkour or martial arts coach to help them get a little bit of physicality. So, we that that's where the practice thing comes in, it's like, we, you. If the traditional role of the father is to roughhouse, but our culture has demonized rough and tumble play to such an extent that many of the fathers who are entering, many of the men are entering fatherhood. Don't remember what it was like to roughhouse have been told not to all their lives. Associated with violence associated with masculinity with toxicity. They don't know how to show up for their children like that. They actually need to be educated through a practice. So this is what I mean about practices like the only practice that only practice that I can think of that was in some sense vaguely hinted towards was go to church. Was that hinted at the kind of I don't know maybe it was I didn't hear I didn't hear it a lot. And some of the preacher certainly didn't encourage even culture. I don't know maybe it wasn't. I don't know. Yeah, I didn't hear that. And how to. And this you know like, this is why I want to talk to Jonathan height is why I'm gonna have a follow up conversation with Warren Farrell. It's like, the problems that you're highlighting really really important but it's not enough to say, stop, you have to say how do we grow a play culture. In the wreckage of what we've done. How do we grow. It's the same actually sorry now I'm ranting but hopefully it's interesting. The other area that I've been thinking about a lot is the relationship between men and women, you know, and that was very much a subject, right was that we need men and women to actually be able to commit to long term relationships and that's fundamental to a thriving society that's fundamental to the social fabric, and we need to develop, we need to figure out how to develop the capacity for that people enter into marriage with the desire to do so. But we have not worked on capacities for that. So how do we build that capacity and right and so there's, it feels like, I was reading Warren's book and I really like Warren, and I think there's Warren Farrell I think there's a lot of wisdom there but I think that there's a lot of 1960s programming there. And this idea that if we liberate both men and women from their social roles that it will enter a better, that it will just make things better. Right. Now he wants to liberate men and women from their social roles and also he wants to recognize the ways in which culture has traditionally been cruel to men and cruel to women. Right, he starts with cruelty to women now he moves to puts cruelty to men, but he's saying culture fundamentally asks things of men and women that are not fair, maybe. And then we should liberate and address the unfairness and then things will be better. I think that someone like Mary Harrington or lose Louise Perry. I think are now kind of on the other side of this liberation is is goodness, right. Yep, where they're like, actually, we tried liberation, and, and the only people who really benefited were narcissistic psychopathic sexual predator males, right. And we need something different and the way that I've been framing that is that we need an aspirational model of masculinity and femininity. And that model has to actually be like, like, Andrew Tate is putting himself forward as an aspirational model for young men. That's not a healthy model. A society does not thrive when young men aspire to be indicates. And Jordan is another aspirational model for men and women, and he. He's doing some really good work in describing his relationships, and his dynamics around relationships and how personalities work. Yep. I think there's more to be done there. Yeah, I think there's more to be done. Well Jordans also a rather extreme. I love the, the Pierce Morgan interview he did actually with Michaela there, or the one that led into Michaela because that yeah, Pierce Morgan asked him something about himself and you know how what he would say to himself or what he would think of himself and he said, you know, he's a little much and and then that way Jordan is, he's kind of a, he's kind of an extreme example but at least he has maintained marriage to his wife speaks with fondness and still passionate about his wife all of those things but you're right we need. And we also need models that aren't on screens. Models on screens that's all well and good. But the real models that people can actually interact with our models in your relational network that you can actually go up to and have a conversation with. Yeah, it's interesting because if we don't. We have no cultural model at all, like no broad narrative model. Then it's hard to recognize. I think one of the reasons why I became a conservative, let's say, when I was a conservative was because, because yeah I was a victim of the liberalization of sexuality in the, in the alternative, you know, in the counterculture community. I saw that basically, there were no men in my community, who I wanted to grow up and be like as a father, as a husband. Right. There's lots of other remarkable thing about things about the men that I grew up with as far as artistic mess and vision and even number of other things, but what they weren't was faithful, present, devoted fathers and husbands. I grew up sort of thinking of Christians as diluted, old fashioned, you know, kind of ridiculous people. But I kept running into these Christian families I started teaching gymnastics, and I would have these wonderful kids who came to me. And I'd meet their families and their families would love me because I was a great coach to their, and I spent some time with them. And I realized that they were, they were very devoted Christians, and I would see the sweetness and tenderness and care that was reciprocal between them, and how much the fathers were there for their kids. Yep. And I was like that's, that's who I want to be right. Like that's how I want to be. And it's funny because I was talking about life about this recently. I was in the Marines when I was eight years old, right. And Aragorn and Frodo and Sam, right. They become that model of aspirational masculinity. And when I, when I entered my 20s, like, I had this, I really in my teens I had this idea of myself as like this white knight, right, this knight in shining armor. That's who I wanted to be. That's how I wanted to show up for women. But there's not enough, there's not enough in, in just reading that literature to actually ground it. And I spent a year of being with my wife and I was like, ready to get married right away and I loved her and everything was great. But I didn't have a Christian community I didn't have anybody telling me this I, I fell in love with another woman, right. Totally unintentionally, she was my study partner in my math class, I chose her because she was attractive, which was a bad idea. But, but natural, but natural but I'm 21 years old right or 22 years old and and and so I get into class with this, this beautiful woman and and I tell myself that she is my friend, right. And we're spending time together and she's my friend and and then at some point, like, I realized that like I've been seeing her twice a week for an hour after class etc. For some period of time, or like six weeks, and I'd never mentioned that my wife to her. And so I'm like, oh, you know, this is probably on my head and I, I'm like, you know, I somehow spill the beans that I'm about to get married and she flushes bright red, right. Like clearly there was a mutual misapprehension of what was happening in this relationship, and I ended up feeling like incredibly confused because I just didn't believe that I was capable of feeling these intense feelings for two women at once. That just wasn't possible right that wasn't in my frame of reference that that was possible for me. You know and then get exposed to the Manosphere love economics all these ideas polyamory and I'm like I'm trying to be a monogamous stable partner, but there's always these ideas that are gestating around that that create tensions in the relationship. And so just within the last few years, even though I can't really say that I'm a practicing Christian at this stage, like I really adopt the idea that marriage has to be sacramental, you have to treat it as something that is sacred. If you, if you think about marriage from an economics lens. It's not going to work. And I think actually if you were if you imagine that if you economize sexuality to if you look at sexuality within that framework where you're trying to maximize in sort of an evolutionary psychology sense I'm trying to maximize, you know the the fruit of my loins, it's like. Yeah, that's, that's polygamy. And I was like, I'm curious about Jordan right back in the day when he was talking about how like the Darwinian frame is the outermost frame, we can't get past it was like well why do you have only two children Jordan. Right. How is that the outermost frame for you, you claim it's the outermost frame, you don't behave as if it's the outermost frame. I looked at that, you know, I was like, Why am I not going to sperm banks. Right. Do I want, like, am I optimizing myself if I have as many little gene copies out there in the world as possible. But when I imagine what it would be like to know that there were all these little children of me in the world that didn't that I didn't have a relationship with us. It doesn't sound like an optimum that sounds like a horror story to me. Yeah, yeah. Right. I don't know I feel like I've gotten a little off. No, but but when it comes to arc. I mean, that this gets into the question of the coherence and the definition of the better story. Because for at least many of the headliners certainly for the Stroud certainly for Peugeot, certainly for Peterson. This question of a certainly for Louise Perry Mary Harrington, this question of a preferential preferential position for monogamy would certainly be articulated that we want to continue to promote monogamy as our societal standard as our societal ideal. Yeah, yeah, we believe it is best for society and you know Louise Perry and others have have nicely articulated that monogamy isn't. If you're if you're if you're imagining we are ruled by the, the laws of the jungle monogamy is not sort of in first place, then you sort of have this, this situation where the alpha males collect most you know collect most of the madeable females, and then the the alpha males just become drones and worker bees. And as a civilization we have said, No, actually, part of what monogamy facilitates is that more men down the line actually get to be fathers and also obviously with polygamy. So are all of these offspring actually going to have the kind of relationship with the father like we were just describing with respect to rough and double play. You're not going to get that. No, no. I mean that nuts, you know, like that's the kind of. The big part of the point of both Louise Perry and Mary Harrington's books which I got to read earlier this year is, you know, Mary Harrington talks about the feminism of care versus the feminism of liberation. And the feminism of care is fundamentally that what what women uniquely bring to the world is this capacity for care, and that when their economic roles were cut down the meaning that they experienced in life was decreased as they were constrained. And there was one one reaction to that was give us all the freedoms that men have and the other reaction to us was celebrate us for doing what is most, you know, because it is that even if it's a smaller role it's still the most central role that exists. And, and so that, you know, like, if you start talking about Another book that I've been reading recently is called the Genesis of Gender by Abigail Favell, a wonderful book. Yep. And she talks about The idea that a woman is the top is someone who self identifies as a woman originates in nominalism. Yep. And that when we have only efficient causation, we don't have a way to think outside of that. But once we take on formal cause, then we have the idea that actually a woman is someone whose biology is organized around capacity to bring children into the world. And I know, right, I've talked to enough people who are strongly identified with feminism to know that a lot of them will balk at that and say, now you're saying we're just baby making machines. But for me you can't get to an aspirational model of masculinity and femininity that you want a child to grow into without acknowledging this fundamental reality that a woman's body is organized around the capacity to have children, and a man's body is organized on the capacity to provide and protect those children. Right, provide for and protect those children. And that if a man's life is not organized in some sense around being that provider protector for children. I think it's a failure. Right, it's a failure to truly launch because that's the highest purpose that I think we can serve. That's the instantiation of agape into the life of each individual. And we, we are in a social economic system that, you know, obviously when you when you hear this critique of let's say traditional masculinity and femininity. The idea is well we're going to have differentiation. Also, okay, how does that work, actually with bringing people and children into the world you're going to have one woman and one man give birth to 50 children so that all of the other people are sort of sexless we're not they're not actually sexless. They're, they're, they don't do reproduction but they're just all out as worker bees in the world. This Musk. Yeah. Well, and and instead of instead of this vision where the participation in the participation in the development of the next generation is something that is broadly distributed within the culture, which again has been the vision where men are workers but they're also fathers, women, often our workers to, but they're also mothers, always work. Yeah, everyone's working. This is something that I think is really, for me there's a frustration point in the dialogue around gender roles or sex roles, I don't like the term gender let's say sexuals is that there's a weird way in which it seems to have crystallized in the 1940s and 50s at an extraordinarily historically unique point. Right. The idea, the, the, the stay at home housewife, who doesn't have economic productivity is a post industrial idea, right, it's not. It's in. And so this is where I get. This gets to the kind of one of the tension points I think here right you have Warren Farrell Okay, we reached that point. Women need to liberation, and then many need liberation from the provider protector role as as sort of preventing them from being vulnerable, right. And I need access to children. And then you have the Mary Harrington Louise Perry are saying okay, there needs sorry, there needs to be. Have I lost you. I'm here. Can you hear me. I hear you. I'm gonna go ahead and hit this. Oh, here it is. Okay. As I was saying, one of these areas that I think. Okay, it's like bouncing around but right before we got on I was on Twitter, and Brett was talking about what he talks about which is this idea that okay the the traditional religions are metaphorical truths but metaphorical truths arose in an ancestral environment doesn't reflect the current environment. So we have to, we have to essentially evolve past them and develop new wisdom. Right, and Jonathan Peugeot said, truth is truth forever it's revealed not made right. And he said, he has a really important point, and Weinstein has a really important point, and Peugeot by going to revelation is actually preventing any bridge from being made there. Because, because Weinstein is absolutely correct that we don't exist in the past, and we face a constant updating problem. Yep. And Peugeot is right that there's aspects of wisdom that are passed down that are completely unchanging you, you never were never. If we remain human beings we will always have to do a sex, sex reality. So if our current wisdom doesn't understand the reality of sex. It's not, it's a failure right. So we can't just progressively update. But also we have to update. And I think, you know where we're for me Peugeot strongest case is, show me a story that reaches the limit of what Christianity reached as far as, as far as symbolically showing us the pathway towards pro social behavior. That's you if you can't get past it you sort of have to update off of it. Right. And I don't. I think that that is a killer argument, and the other one is just that we're not actually very good at reasoning our way towards better moral rules so we be careful. Because the truth is we don't. I mean this gets back to what we're talking earlier with respect to practice and theory. Yeah. We like to imagine we theorize the future and then act it out. The truth is, it's very messy practice and at some point, it begins to dawn on us that these practices are better than those practices over here. And so then we begin to sort of all migrate over to these practices, and then we, you know, and then the process continues again but this this sort of realization that no we're not theorizing our way into the future we're sort of bumbling our way into the future but hopefully with a little bit of a little bit of a, we would say we would look in theory and theologian a little bit of a hermeneutical cycle here, where we're doing some interpretation and recognizing, and then I'll always with. You have to be anchored in the past because you're your deepest reservoir of wisdom is the past. Yep. And, and so that's why you're always keeping an eye on the past and you're always looking, and you're always just going back and forth and back and forth. Yeah, I think that's, I think that's right and in terms of how we've sort of worked at this in the corner we've always sort of had Peugeot who's like the past, and we've had for vacay who's like the legacy religions, you know he's sort of a team Brett with respect to this and I'm kind of in the middle saying, yeah, me too. I'm not going back I'm not going to orthodoxy, not I'm not, I'm not, because I actually think orthodoxy continues to evolve itself. And the orthodoxy that we find in 21st century America or Canada is exactly like the orthodoxy we found in, you know, fourth, fifth century Constantinople. And so, you know, the author might be really fascinated by what he found, but he would also feel tremendously out of place, and probably really want to have some of what he enjoys in this world in that world so it's not so simple and so actually these two sides have to continue to talk to each other and work on this. And so, the past, the past is always the past and the future is always unknown and so we're, we're constantly working this. And I think Christianity affords that and, and I think part of what has part of why Christianity is so diverse within its traditions is the fact that we, one of the things one of the advantages that religions have, unlike most science is that religion sort of keep their legacies alive in broad communities, so that even the most crazy progressive Protestants over here every now and then wake up to something and say, Hey, wait a minute, look at that. That has value, and it continues. Interesting. Yeah, I can't say much about that because I'm not embedded in it. I guess to rewind back to that idea of the, the, the dialogue between the wisdom of the past and the problems in the future, you know, like, that was one of the really valuable things I found in Peterson when I first started his work was I do that's the fundamental conservative progressive dichotomy. Yep. And I was talking to, I had a really fascinating conversation with James Lindsay as well. And he was giving his, his sort of story of Hegel becomes Marx becomes, you know, all these things and it's really a religion. And I think there's a lot of analytical depth and brilliance to what Lindsay's doing but I worry that it starts to kind of become to spin off into a liberals are always wrong. And I don't think that that's useful, right. I think it's very very unusual, and just obviously untrue. Right. Bring the slaves was the right thing to do. Yeah, it was we can agree on that. Yeah. You know liberal democracy is better than the French monarchy was. But, but what was interesting was I was, we were talking about he was talking about the sort of sense that the liberalism, almost. Sorry, not liberalism, progressivism tends to sort of descend towards a kind of gnostic assumption. And I had this this idea that that it's almost a function of a misapprehension of what a developmental cycle looks like. So, and I love when, if you can, if you can get all this stuff down into the body to me, at least from my mind it works better right it's very easy to get up in these very very concepts between say hey, this is actually how you get better at kicking a soccer ball, and everybody can kind of viscerally sense what that is. But when you are learning to walk or when you are learning to throw a ball. You, you start by limiting the degrees of freedom that are available to you. So when a small child throws a ball they only throw it their arm. And over time they learn to incorporate twisting the torso coming up on the one leg, swing the other leg. It's my, my camera battery dying. You get a little fob for your camera to keep the thing running. Okay. Is there a thing for that. Oh yeah, oh yeah, there's there's things for all the stuff. When I'm up there maybe I should help you redo your, your gear here. That sounds good. Okay. As I was saying so you, you, a child starts to learn to throw by using only their arm. And then they learn to incorporate their torso, and then they learn to incorporate their hips and their legs. So what they've done is they've taken many degrees of freedom which the body has and they've condensed it to create something that's controllable. So, we, we like to think that development is linear, right, that today we can do x tomorrow we're going to be able to do x plus one, and I said we'll do x plus two. But for most of our process what we actually see is a process of progression stabilization regression, and then progress, just watch a child, just watch a child. And that that regression phase is actually when the nervous system has reached the end of its potential for improvement with this current degrees of freedom. So, you go up, you hit, you just can't get better without trying some new things. Then you open up okay so what if I use try to coordinate my hips opening as well when I'm throwing. Now, initially you're actually going to see a decrement in performance, your body can't stabilize and find the optimum yet with the new degrees of freedom, then you'll get you kind of get into the groove of it and then you keep improving and then eventually you need to add something new. So, I had this idea that essentially progressives always think that we're kind of at that at the point of, of, of stabilization and that we need to open the degrees of freedom in order to continue to develop and conservatives are always saying, No, no we're not there, we're going to, we don't want to go into We're not ready for the 40 years in the wilderness, right. But the, the where progressivism goes too far, is it starts to believe that all of the constraints are overcome, and in fact are evil. Right. That's the Gnostic tendency that's the tendency to say, In fact, any structure that I use to achieve something is somehow inhibiting my full potential. Right. And that to experience my full potential I have to get rid of all the structure. And, and the reality comes liberation ism that the idea is that the, the essence of progress is liberation. It's, and and what, and you very quickly learned that. And that's what you learn very quickly in a marriage that oh I want to be liberated from the constraints within the marriage. Like, well you can open your door to some interesting things with that idea. Yeah, and I've seen it I've seen it in real marriages, someone gets the idea oh we're going to try polyamory oh okay well I'll talk to you in about two years and you probably won't be together. I mean I've, I've been around polyamorous communities, you know, for since my early mid 20s right and I'm not impressed. I'll just say that. Right. I won't say that there's nobody who seems to be having a good time. But the closer I am to people who are in it, the less attractive it looks. Now take your idea, and instead of, you know, this is a, you know, this is a critique of Jordan as well the focus on the individual. And now think about, let's say the family as a unit and take that metaphor that you've just had and work that with the family. And then, and then the family's up there and work that with communities and and work that intergenerationally. And, and suddenly you begin to realize that, you know, that we are sort of, it's sort of fractaling up and down at the same time and and what you just put your finger on which I think is exactly right. We're also doing this together. And we don't even, we don't even know most of what we do we don't know what we're doing in terms of theory or consciousness, we are running through programs that have been inherited these first drafts that we've had. And, but then, and along the process we're trying them out, and, but I think that I think that dynamic that you just illustrated I think is, is excellent and it's an excellent illustration of, of this dynamic between, let's say, between, you can say progressivism versus conservative, but but but those aren't, you know, it's not just that. Yeah. So, Mary Harrington share this quote I can't remember the original author it's not her quote, but it's that reactionaries are people who chase shades on the eternal hills. And in that sense she identifies as a reaction. So, there's this in. So you could say, like you can you can very easily make a case that let's say that right now, everyone we know who is polyamorous is really struggling to have a relationship. But you could you could project a higher good, where you could say hey that's just the that's the regression phase before the next progress, and then we can actually progress to a state of greater peace, greater self actualization, more love in the world by by actually being able to stabilize at this higher degrees of freedom state that is associated with polyamory polyamory. So I think someone like, Daniel Schmeckenberger would believe that right. But then you could say that that the flip side of that is that there are control parameters that sort of show up in every functional solution. Right. And maybe monogamy is actually a control. There is no, like, once you accept that there are constraints that can't be gotten rid of. And then you then you have to sort of like dialogue between this. Are we opening up in a way that's that's opening degrees of freedom that can be opened and restabilized from or degrees of freedom that actually have no stable state that are just loss of something of value And then, you know, if we go back to this idea of the traditional wisdom versus the updating problem, the traditional wisdom represents some sense those bones that we can't you know you can't. You can't walk without the bones right. And so what I think is as as as as marries is as Louise Perry's is as I assume yours is is that is that monogamous marriage is one of these bones of Western civilization that is inescapable if we want to have the good things right that we, you know, just as like you need to throw well, There's no disassociation between the shoulders and the hips, and there's no, there's no pathway to throwing well we don't have both a force coupling between these things and the capacity to associate them. There's no pathway to really optimizing human relationships that doesn't rely on this, especially once we consider the interests of children. Yes, yes. And, but the core thing that I was trying to get at here is so the conservative tendency is to say, there is this truth in the past, therefore we need to adopt the past perspective in total. That's where I think there's a problem. Yep. And it's usually a conservative delusion. Because I find conservatives imagine that and I think you, you wouldn't you wouldn't stand, you wouldn't you would hate to live 300 years ago, you would hate it. Yeah. Yeah. So, so when I look at something like sex roles and sex relations. Again, like, right in that Peugeot Weinstein interaction right. Who was I talking to about this I was like, in this is a point that that that I got from Peterson actually that helped me in from place of pretty right wing alt alt right like, let's go back to traditional roles thing he says like, it is a better world when we have all the best potential neurosurgeons. And that means that you have to be able to search the female pool for neurosurgeons. If you get rid of 50% of the population of potential neurosurgeons, you just don't have as many neurosurgeons right if you oncology research, like, you know, cancer researchers, do you want to like just not have, you know, maybe there's an asymmetry maybe only 10% of the best cancer researchers are are women, but would you give up on that? I mean, you know, you're not 10% of your best cancer researchers. Right. Right. Is that is that, and maybe there is a case that it's worth it for the benefits to children, but it's, you have to recognize that there's a trade off that it's not so simple. And, and so there's this this reality and like I grew up with a father who, for all his wonderful characteristics fundamentally didn't believe in trying to achieve a middle class life he wanted to live as a subsistence drug dealing hippie kid right and my mom didn't want to do that. And, understandably didn't didn't want to live it right. Yeah, you didn't want to be cold all the time we wanted to be able to eat meat we wanted to do these things. And so she went and got a job, she became a massage therapist and then she got her degree and became a therapist, psychologist, right, psychotherapist. And I'm like, well, that freedom is really important. Right. I mean, I wouldn't be able to do the work that I do in the world. If I didn't have a partner who has been able to a wife who had been able to work at Google. Yeah. And provide for the family while I was trying to build this, this very bizarre and unique brand. And so that you can see that there's a clear and obvious good that comes to the liberation of women to participate in the economic sphere. It's a good that, that, that women experience through their own potential to protect themselves like this is something that I think the conservatives really really struggle with men and be predatory, abusive, controlling, tyrannical courses that the history of male male coercion around female sexuality is real and intense and something that I don't think Jordan Peterson talks about realistically I don't think a lot of people in that space talk about realistically. So, so yeah you want women to be able to say, no, I don't have to put up with you with marital rape, I don't have to put up with abuse, I don't have to put up with you drinking all the time, because I can go get a job. And you want them to be able to provide that for their children. And I think the vast majority of the culture has, despite the back and forth. Basically as agreed. I mean, the truth is there have been these changes that have happened. And I think the most of society says, you know we're better off women getting college degrees. We're better off, you know that they can participate in that system. I think you're right. And yet I also think that I don't see the conservative articulation of an integrated vision that says, this was good. But it's sacrificing this other good and we need to find an integrated place. I think they might not articulate it. But their actions are speaking louder than their words. That's true but then their words need to come to their actions in order in order to have a better story. Yeah, yeah. In order to be able to get to this next point because, because we're, it's it. You know, I feel like we're still basically stuck fighting World War Two, and the the 60s counterculture revolution we haven't learned the lessons from those two conflicts. And people are extremely alienated and hateful towards each other. Right. Because of those things. Yeah. And that requires, again, other processes. I mean from my perspective of the dominant institution. You know, actually I watched Dave Rubin's talk with Brett Weinstein that Dave, Dave recorded a ton of things at arc record a little talk with Eric retard card. And again, Brett is sort of full blower all of our institutions and it's like, no, the church is still out there and it is an institution and in fact it's there multiple institutions and these issues are very much being being processed by churches, as we go. I wanted to come back to one point that we're talking about with monogamy I think you know earlier I talked about the fact that part of the blessings of monogamy is that it affords a far greater distribution of parenting. You can have smaller families and children can have relationships with both parents under a system which is predominantly monogamous, but monogamy does have its downsides and struggles monogamy is aspirational and and both sides often struggle with it. And, but the thing I wanted to point out is that part of the vision of Christianity, which, which I seldom hear too many people preach about or talk about is, if you look carefully at the kinds of things Jesus says and notes and in fact, even in the life that he lived. And that's sort of what goes into Christian time telling so the Bible tells time in very different ways. So there's the present age sometimes the present evil age and then there's the age to come. And that means that I think if you if you read the Gospels and you watch Jesus Jesus is very clear about the fact that there are limitations of capacity. In ages so in other words, there are. We are only going to achieve certain things here and a lot of our discussion about, oh let's say polyamory or progressivism has to do with, you know, if we remove some things can we have capacity for more things. I think we've seen in the last couple of hundred years, a tremendous success with capacity, but if you listen to someone like Paul Kings North, then some of some of the downside is also highlighted. And so we are in this age within an age of some pretty significant trade offs polyamory if you decide you would like to sleep with whomever you wish. There are going to be trade offs with respect to that and those trade offs are probably going to be seen multi generationally, your children and your grandchildren will suffer. Because of decisions that you make and every, every parent knows that every parent understands that many of our decisions have trade offs which not only are realized by us in the now but realized multi generationally. And so the vision of Christianity is that there are ages, there is an age to come, where many of the limits on capacity that are imposed. And that's why we're seeing it now, basically due to the fact that human beings without limitation tend to be enormously destructive of themselves and those around them. And that is basically that in terms of Christian theology, as Christ and God works, basically with new ages come new capacity, and there is hope for participation in these new ages and new capacities. That's something that is not afforded in a secular frame, because basically, all you're stuck with is, let's see, my life, and perhaps that of my progeny, or maybe some theoretical visions of humanity must be preserved. So, I think, and I think that's an important thing to, to recognize partly because a lot of the changes that have happened in our culture have in some ways been leveraged by the inspiration of a multi age vision. That sounds super theoretical, maybe I just lost everybody in that. Well, I think, I think I see a through line because it was it was a little bit too theological for me for a sense there but. So you know I, I describe myself as a non theistic Christian or like a friend of mine is very kind of about Christian the park work for me asked me, are you a Christian. What do you mean by her and sort of Jordan Peterson, only in that way but what I would say is that I like I, I'm very much intentionally attempting to be a follower of Christ at this stage of my life, but I'm not a practicing Christian in the sense that I don't do traditional Christian practice I don't go to church. And I have tried and I'm not sure that I may try again but I'm not sure that the level stick for me. But also I don't like I, I don't. I think I'm agnostic in some sense about the some of the supernatural or metaphysical commitments right did. Did Christ die, and it was resurrected right like for me that's. I feel like he commit to a stance on right, like I think that is very clear from a scientific materialism standpoint, that that's a highly unlikely occurrence, right, they actually can't dismiss it and say that it's not possible at all. Right, it just. That's the type of evidence that could answer that question for us and the things that we have evidence for don't look like that's the type of thing that happens. Right. And I think it's really important to be able to operate within that frame. I think working on platonic realism and understanding what that means and the idea that there are things that emanate from above and all that and maybe maybe I'll end up somewhere else at the end of that. But, but that. And this is sorry. This is I think one of the really interesting things about the conferences. I and her see I we coming out for civilization Christianity. And, and, and Jonathan building a bridge saying, whether you believe in the resurrection, you have. We're at a point where we have to recognize patterns as real in some sense. And, and the collapse of the good to these underlying patterns that to me is such a profound critique and I think we've been kind of dancing around it right because I was listening to your response to art earlier and you're talking about how a lot of it's about recovering liberalism. But I think that we're, we're struggling in some sense because we keep elevating different goods to the status of highest good that end up becoming tyrannical. And I think liberalism is one of those things and I think that we're seeing the idea of you have to liberate everything. Right, queer theory, that's, that's liberalism is the highest good. And, you know, I made this point to you at the conference but they're, you know, there's so much worship of free markets in the arc space. A lot of it's appropriate in the sense that they're pointing out functions the free marketplace that things that have tried to replace it aren't doing well. And yet, the social fabric they're trying to put back together is in some sense, directly competing with the fundamental dynamics of the capitalist system. And I think that's okay, then we just have to understand that they're both goods that we need to seek. And there's a dynamic tension between them and realize relevance in the middle and we put something the highest above them right. But most people who are promoting free markets. They're not totally free. You want you want your, you want your government regulations and your central banks etc etc. I think there's a term of art in the IDW community. A few years ago that you liked which was Jesus smuggling. Yeah. There's a lot of Jesus smuggling in the good that we claim that we're trying to achieve but don't articulate in a lot of these spaces. I've lost my trans thought. You know, the. What Jordan does with respect to Christianity and the future is he tends to take it symbolically and in a sense the future is always either a potential for heaven or a potential for hell. And, and that tends to be the way that this flows and you can argue that part of what Christianity afforded, because it had a much more developed eschatology, then, let's say Judaism, especially in the, in the first century is Christianity And what I think is the key to the belief on Jewish eschatology in the first century and continues to develop it is the future. When we when we when we think about the future. We think, you know, it's difficult to know. It's difficult to know because you just pause it for one second. Yeah, a lot of my audience might be fairly secular eschatology is theory of the end times. The last things, it's sort of, it has to do with destination ideals. And part of the part of the dynamic of our ideals is that the ideals tend to have a gravitational effect. Now, if we have an ideal here they pull us towards it. And because our ideals are so often so future oriented. The future pulls us into it if we have this ideal of, let's say if someone has an ideal of a large. I want to have five children so that I'm surrounded by 50 grandchildren in my old age and, you know, I want to have a large house and I can watch them all play and they'll all have cousins. So it's this idea that sort of pulls us into the future and Christian ideals have been doing this for a very long time, and they have shaped practices. And the cities in the, in the, in the area established in New England were like New Haven, Connecticut, if you do some research on New Haven, Connecticut. It was modeled after this vision of the New Jerusalem in the book of Revelation. And so, this, this idea of transformational ages in the future has in many ways is very many ways the product of Christian ideals and visions of eschatology and that's why this culture war, these progressives are this is Christian progressive is a call it's all, it's all Christian heresy. Yeah. And so this this tension there between. So I've thought for a long time that that Peterson is a kind of actually a double edged sword, both towards the evangelical Christianity dogmatic Christianity that I experienced the child, and towards the dogmatic secularism of the new atheist. I think Peterson pulls his punches a little bit towards the, the Christians because he, because he's more. He's got more of an axe to grind with the new atheist. But I think that ultimately what he actually articulates is is radical for both. And, you know, I thought it was interesting in the Piers Morgan interview, when he's really pushed on what he believes. I think he ends up basically saying he believes more or less what we're making he believes. I think he describes, I wanted to send up to john and say hey this is an Jordan's just articulating on the isn't there. But I think that what, what are you saying is, we have to treat, you know, at the beginning of maps of meaning he's basically saying religious stories contain a different type of truth they don't contain objective truth we can't treat them as containing objective truths. And so, if we are. So I think you know if you look at a group or Miranda, you in, like, I think that when when I hear them what I hear is that Christianity that says, absolutely the resurrection happened. Absolutely, God created the earth in seven days. And in these other theories are are are are misleading. And that to me is not, it's not going to work. When I think about, like, Jordan talks a lot about the scene, the grand inquisitor scene, and dust and brothers care about stuff right where Christ comes in and he, he, he kisses the inquisitor and you know won't speak to him and they lose the conversation and not an idea being that, like, Christ message was not actually achieved by the church, but they left the door open. And so, as a, you know, my Christian heretic myself. I think that's a very political, non theist position. The way that I look at that message is sort of like, it's a mode of being, which reveals a kingdom of heaven in a functional sense. Right, not not in a, not in a. And this is that I that I dismissed the idea of a future time because time is weird when we get into physics, right, like, you know, there's a point at which like the universe is completely unrecognizable and we don't know how patterns persist across that or what it would look like on the other side of that. But that's all very speculative right. But the fundamental thing for me is that if you take on the idea of loving the world. Right. As, as you love something that by loving it you bring its being out forth, you take on that idea. That is the pathway to the kingdom of heaven it's revealed before you. Right. And that's why I think, like I, that's where I end up in a disagreement with Brett Weinstein because I do feel like, or even john because I feel like that is the limit case that there's not you're not going to get beneath that story. And that is ultimately how we have to act. And it was interesting I had this discussion with with Brett and Heather where we were talking about the all the energy environment talk and how there's a there's a tension between the pro energy policy which says hey if we utilize energy we can preserve the natural And the pro energy thing that says really we don't the only thing that we care about is how low humans are doing, and if the polar bears die, the polar bears die. And Brett was making the case that a kind of secular humanism orientation towards long term human flourishing recovers the need to preserve the orcas. And I don't buy it. Right, like I don't. I think there are some people for whom their innate sense of what a human flourishing looks like will guide them to that. But I think there are other people for whom it's impossible to understand the aesthetic drive to have workers. Yeah, yeah. And there's no way that you would sacrifice that right if you could have 10 million more humans who are living, you know, satisfying lives and And you're not going to have the orcas and not those 10 million human beings. That's not even a question in their mind. It's 100% what they're going to do. So I don't think that the secular humanist thriving recovers the orcas. I do think that if you say that the world is good. Right. God created the world and said it was good. And I think that's why we're tasked to, to, to, to guard in the world, the garden it, garden it. Care for it, develop it for it, and then our fundamental duty is to love. Yeah, right. Yeah, love even our enemies. Yep. That that recovers the orcas, because it's our job to, to be the custodians to be the type of animal that can love all the other animals. Love in a way that they can't even love themselves. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. To choose their capacity for being. Yeah, you know, I've been, I've said a few things about my dad in this interview that are probably not very nice writer haven't painted him in the best light, but my dad really was a brilliant man I just published a memorial to him on my sub stack. And what my dad said was, my dad was raised in the Catholic Church, and he left the Catholic Church to become, you know, a member of the counterculture he traveled in India and spent time in ashrams and, you know, had sculptures of Ganesh all over his house. But what he said it was that we are here to be gardeners of Eden. That was really at the fundamental aspect of his orientation. He told me once that he wanted to create houses that created more habitat than they destroyed. So he had living roofs on his houses he built things out of mud and straw and clay. Right. And he used found wood, right, as much as possible he was actually going out and taking wood that timber companies had left behind. And you, because it was warped and weird and deformed timber and then he was building these fantastic sculptures out of it. And to me that was like, when I, when I fully sort of comprehended that I was like that's, that's the vision. Yeah. And in some sense I think that that was Tolkien's vision. Yeah, Lewis's vision. Genesis comes from Genesis the book of Genesis that's the vision. That's the vision. Yeah. You know, it's it's the Christianity that I experienced was associated with this idea of human dominion. Right. And that everything that we did to the earth was sort of our right to do. And, and, and so it was pro, you know, wipe your ass with a with a spotted owl. I don't want to be anywhere near my private parts. There was a there was a coalition behind the sort of frontier extraction culture, the evangelical culture, the pro corporate and the pro hoc culture that was right when coalition of my childhood. Yeah. You know, and there was an eschatology associated with that as well. Oh yeah, yes the eschatology is it doesn't matter. Because the earth is disposable and the fullness thereof. Yeah, which I think is, to me it's really, you know, obviously I'm not nearly as deep in the style of the Bible as you are but it seems fundamentally mistaken it seems like what the Bible is saying is that this is it. Right. Well, yes. Well, this is it. And then, I mean, it's the more renewal of heaven and earth. It's the renewal. Yeah, it's not the disposal. Yeah, it's the renewal. Yeah. And that means that I think I think Lewis gets into that I think the, the best. One of the better works of if someone wants a good image stick primer and Christian eschatology CS Lewis's last, the last battle in the Chronicles of Narnia is in some ways the best. Yeah, because it'll it'll give it'll give an image of the fact that you've got old Narnia and new Narnia and there's a new capacity that comes with new Narnia, there's a new capacity that comes with the new heavens and a new earth and part of the reason for that capacity is that we have demonstrated Jesus says, you know, those who are faithful and little will be given much to be stewards of basically, and we have demonstrated our stewardship over this world and over our relationships with each other. And, yeah, God has good reasons to be a little suspicious about what we have done given our track record. Yeah, so, so the new, new humanity with a new heavens and a new worth is given more power not less, but greater responsibility not less, but that new humanity will have greater wisdom, not less that's all part of the transformation that we have to get into this new age that wisdom. Right. Yes. And to go back to the review of arc, right. I've thought about this idea of a mythos of escape and a mythos of recovery. This is where like I really like some of Eric Weinstein insights, but I think fundamentally he's within the mythos of escape, right that he's, you know, he sees the eschaton as, as, as the interstellar civilization, right. And I just don't think that solves anything about our stewardship of the earth. Right. I just I think it's, it's fine. Like I'm not against it. Like, okay, whatever. I just don't think that. I don't think that anything that you put on another planet would be human. It would be recognizable human. And it's so far away that it would have no impact on the lives of people who are here. So, we are we are I don't look like we're here forever. Right. Right. Human beings are Earthlings and can only be earthlings, as far as I'm concerned. And so we I don't we can't digitize ourselves and escape. Right. If we try to if we try to achieve the transhumanist goal of sort of altering ourselves beyond imagination I think that's, I think that's hell. I think that's a utterly destructive today. It's complete madness. And so what, you know, what Tolkien talked about among fairy tales, which I need to read again, is this idea that we go to those two for this idea of recovery, right, which is recovering the right relationship with this world. Right relationship between men and women between adults and children and between us and the earth. And I think that's the better story. And I think that what what was served at arc. It's sort of a cultural Christianity that's groping towards that, but isn't yet articulated a broken down modernized Christianity that really doesn't actually have much aspirational to it. And then, a yeah warmed up liberalism that doesn't understand the fundamental problems that are causing it to break down. And I think that for me I would like to see to see arc kind of continue to grow into the better story. What I would like to see is Charles Eisenstein and damage matter and Brett Weinstein and myself up there, communicating about some of those ideas And I would like to see a depolarization track, because if you're going to bring in all these conservative thinkers, conservative politicians, you're cutting off the potential for the coalition that can actually achieve these things unless you do something very proactive to counteract it. And the embodiment track. Well, I think, I think you can feel free to feel free to do the conference that you think needs to be done. I think that would be a good thing. And I know thank you. I'll get invited other people's conferences. I did a couple conferences they almost killed me. They are. They are. But I think I, I think that I was, I left less skeptical than I came to arc, because I do think there is just as Jordan asked you for critique and I think Jordan, with, with all of my conversations with Jordan. I mean, I mean, I would often see him after an event and he'd say what did you think of the event. I think he's, I think he's very much in good faith. I think he wants to, he wants to get feedback he wants to. I think the issues that that we're talking about are not. They're not unknown to some of the people that are developing this but the process of building coalitions and finding, finding partners that one of the things that I've been most encouraged about in terms of the creation of this little corner has been. We have partners who we don't agree with on everything. But we we at least create enough of a platform between us that all of us feel that we come from our we come from our conversations with even with all those with whom we disagree, feeling, I've gained more and, and I think fundamental to this is in fact I think the insight that you you've just highlighted earlier with respect to agapic love that in fact it is love. You go to a conference like this in order to love to love your those suit your rivals or your adversaries or at least those who you disagree with, and then to engage productively with them in order to leave then hopefully understanding them better, hopefully they might understand us better. And then I think it is in fact love that creates the capacity by which we can all together, move into the future, more productively and with less with less loss. Yeah. I'm just thinking like if arc had was framed around that idea. Right. If arc was the if there was like how do we love the positive of Western civilization better. Yeah. How do men and women love each other better how do men and women love children better. How do we love the natural world better. Yeah, how do we love humanity, and the natural world. Yeah. And how do we solve the tension between them. Yep, yep, yep. And if that was, if that was the frame. I think that'd be very very interesting. Yeah, I think that I think that would have. Because, because there was a sense of there was a sense of antagonism and rivalry and conflict. And I think if we had had love that could have sort of said, All right, we have differences but you know the truth is, every marriage has both rivalry antagonism, and hopefully love, and it is the love that helps the people work through their rivalry and antagonism. And that sounds strange to people because people say well don't you, don't you, don't you marry someone you love oh yes but you will find the rivalry and antagonism once you live together. Trust me you will it is there. So we have the challenge. Okay, what do we do now, and hopefully we all grow out of it. So, grow through it. That's a good place to land the plane, unless you had something. I had a thought, and I think that it's better to stop there. I think that was, that's the perfect place to stop it is well rave it you know it's been, it's been far too long since we've spoken and so to me it was just a delight. And again really part of the blessings of that conference where, you know, I got it we got a chance to spend more time together than I can't, I can imagine we ever would have, you know, otherwise, yeah yeah. Several hours of in person time was really cool. Yeah, and it's that capacity for connection and relationship that drives our, our, our ability to understand each other better show up for each other better in the world. Yeah, so thank you for being there and thank you for for inviting me on or me inviting you on I guess I will send this to you and. And yeah and then we'll then we'll see where this goes. Okay. Have a good day. Okay, take care. Bye bye.