https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mSiXzJkIj0c

 We are recording. Okay. Mary, you and I have done a conversation before. I don't know if you want to, but it's been a while. You were one of the first people I talked to. It was in December. Right, it was back in December. Yeah. Let's see, I think the third week of December, right. Okay. Right. And so since then I had some health challenges and recuperated from that. I've been super busy in my garden and outside. Wonderful. Because I was sick I couldn't do my fall clean up, so I had to do that in spring, which put me behind on everything. So I've been scrambling to get everything planted and now we're eating out of the garden and everything is going well. Good. So I'm really happy with that. Yeah. Good. My grandson's coming over in a couple days to help me put up a greenhouse, which I've been wanting forever. So I'm really excited about that. Good, good. Yeah, so things are going well. They're really going real well. Good. I had, you know, I sent you an agenda and I had a whole list of things that I wanted to talk about. And then this morning I listened to your conversation with Cassidy, I think. Cassidy, yeah. About cults. Yeah. And I was like, people keep talking about this subject that I don't want to talk about and now I'm going to have to talk about it. Oh, okay. Because I used to do a lot of talking about cults. I mean, I did a lot of public speaking about cults. I was on radio shows about cults and all this stuff, which I come by this honestly because I grew up a third generation Jehovah's Witness. So when I left from there, I asked a question that a lot of people who've been in the cult ask, which is, how did they manage to do this to me? You know, so I did a real deep dive on the whole cult phenomenon and became pretty knowledgeable and able to talk about it with a wide range of audiences. And I also attended meetings of the International Cultic Studies Association, which I'll speak to you about that a little bit later on. But I even gave a couple presentations there. So it's a subject I'm pretty knowledgeable about. And I thought, well, if this conversation is going to keep going on on your channel and people are going to keep bringing this topic up, I need to just step in here and say something about it from the standpoint of having that background. Not that I don't think that the things you said are terrific. I think they're very good. I have a little more. I can kind of expand or dilate on them a little bit. And I think that you'll like that. But I want to start off with some cult humor. All right. OK, so this is a guy that I knew a while back when I was doing a deep dive in this and he was too. And we came up with this thing that was in a riff on riff on Jeff Foxworthy. You know, you might be a redneck. And we did. You might be in a cult. If so, here you go. You ready? OK, you might be in a cult if AK-47s are standard issued to the ushers. You might be in a cult if you have a biting horror of having the number 144,001 tattooed on your forehead. You might be in a cult if there's more than one way to skin a cat is the line from your liturgy. You might be in a cult if coffee, tea, coke, they're all illegal, but Kool-Aid is OK. Oh, I'm wicked in it. OK, you might be in a cult if Armageddon factors very heavily in your retirement portfolio. You might be in a cult if all the books in your on your bookshelf are from one publisher. Oh, I've got a lot from Erdmanns. I don't think that applies to you. That's more like a Watchtower Society. Anyway, I thought that we could start with a little humor to get Paul Van der Kley's laugh going. My husband now, he has something he says to me like when he saw on the calendar, I had that I was having a conversation with you. He goes, Oh, you mean a conversation? Because he's always riffing on that Z that you put in that word. Oh, really? Are you where you do that? You call it conversation. How should I say it? Oh, no, no, you should say it exactly the way you say it. Well, how do you say it? I'm not your husband. Say it. With an S. Conversation? Yeah. Oh. You tend to put a bit of a Z there. So why do I do that? I don't know. I don't know. It's probably because where are you from? Is it from New Jersey? It might be. It might be. Who knows? I was born in New Jersey, but I don't. But I left there when I was three. Well, we say Z not New Jersey. I know. I know. But I'm not I'm not correcting you. So I'm just pointing out that that's something my husband picked up on and likes to kind of joke around about. People the word people mock me for if I say orange instead of orange, I say orange. Maybe it's Michigan people that pick up on that because I don't seem to have too much of a Jersey accent. That doesn't sound strange to me. But, you know, I grew up in Miami and, you know, everybody from Miami is from New York, New Jersey, Ohio or Pennsylvania. At least when I was growing up there, you know, it was like there were no natives. Everybody was from up north. So even though I grew up in Miami, which is way to the south, I didn't end up with a southern accent. Although that did change after I spent 20 years in Georgia. So I sound I probably sound like a southerner now, but I didn't I didn't when I moved here. OK, so let's say some of the serious stuff on cults. OK, so I want to I want to disambiguate a couple of things. OK, right. So this is for this, you know, for the sake of people listening. All right. The first disambiguation is between the word cult and occult because I find that sometimes people get a little bit confused between those two words. So a call occult means something that's hidden and, you know, practices that are hidden have been hidden might be spiritual practices or other practices. Usually refers to things like, you know, seances or divination or some sort of some sort of thing like that. All right. And then the word called though comes from a completely different route. And it's the same as like agriculture, cultivation, all of that. And you might wonder, OK, so how does it means a religious devotion? How does religious devotion tie into that? And it's because the origin of like the religious devotion had to do with agriculture, either, you know, propitiating the gods so that you get a good harvest or maybe in the sense of cultivation of something internally to the person. Right. So that's how that's all tied in. So it means religious devotion. So that's the first disambiguation. Then after that, you have to distinguish between good cult, neutral cult and bad cult. All right. So the good use of the word called and this is very ancient goes back to things like in Christianity, we talk about things like the cult of the Virgin or the cult of the saints. It simply means devotion to that particular saint or devotion to the Virgin or something like that. All right. And that's a that's a positive use of the word called. Then there's like the neutral use where you apply that sense of devotion to something that doesn't really have to do with religion. Right. Like talk about a movie having a cult following. All right. Or somebody might say, you know, the the anthropologist went to visit that tribe in the Amazon and studied their cultic practices, which just means their religious practices. So, you know, there are rituals and things. OK. And then there's the bad use. There's the kind of like the turn when we're using it, we're using it as a term of saying, OK, that group is a cult and that group is probably one that you want to stay away from. Or it's like a warning. OK. And I noticed you mentioned a Cassidy about the word sex. Well, just to make things more confusing, SECT SECTS. Yes. Right. In Europe, the word that we use for cults, we call things cults here. They only use the word sex for that. Really? In Europe. Yeah. That's interesting. Yeah. So because I think it's a historical historically because the groups that were considered to be aberrant were also breakaway groups. So the word SECT has to is related to word section. It means a break, you know, a group that's broken away. You know, right. Yeah. So anyway, in Europe, because in the International Cultic Studies Association, such as international, you know, we would get visitors from Europe, Japan, different places in the world. And that was one of the things that we had to be aware of that they're they they never use the word cult, except in the good sense, like the religious sense or the neutral sense. But when they talked about groups that we would call cults, they would talk about them as sex. That's fine. I didn't know that. So I thought I would go in a little bit to the kind of like the modern phenomenon. Like you talked about the United Community and that I mean, we can look back at different groups and say, well, they were called. But there's kind of a modern phenomenon of cults that started around the early 1960s and kind of came into public awareness because before that, people were not really talking about cults. All right. So what what started happening in the early 60s was this thing where, well, you know, the the baby boomers were, you know, they were at the top of the population, you know, was that youth wave. Right. And all of us. And also, it was the first generation where you had made a major part of the population going off to college. Right. So you had these parents who had these kids right after World War Two and had, you know, were very upwardly mobile and very interested in their education and their advancement and everything. Put a lot, probably the generation they got the most time, attention and and devotion of resources into them of any generation of kids ever. Right. And, you know, now is sending their their young person off to college with the ambition of becoming some, you know, lawyer or doctor or something. And then suddenly these kids were, you know, by kind of astounding numbers suddenly disappearing from school. You know, they might either just completely disappear and the parents have to go hunting for them or the parents would get a note or a message from the child or letter saying, you know, I'm dropping out of school and I'm going off with off to India or I'm going off to this particular place out in California. I'm going up into the mountains of Idaho. I'm, you know, following this guru or that religious thing or whatever. And it was that was a just astounding to these parents, you know, and when it of course, what it, you know, what happens one person and then another person, another person, you know, and it's kind of an isolated incident. People don't think much of it, but gradually it started becoming aware that this was happening to, you know, a significant number of kids, you know, college kids and the parents started putting their heads together to figure out what in the world was going on. Who are these who are these people who are taking our children, you know, and when you and when the parents would try to talk to them. It was like just a wall. I mean, I could not get through it all. So they felt like something had really happened to to transform their children's personality very suddenly and very significantly. And that they and all the plans what happens to all the plans, you know, the college, the future, the career, the whole works. It's all down the drain. So very upsetting and distressing as you can imagine with a parent with college kids how you would feel if you know that happened with one of your kids. Right. So, and this began to be written about in magazines and newspapers would occasionally have have articles about it and stuff. So this was this was alarming enough that the parents of some of the parents decided that they would, you know, go to the law about it. So they started going to the courts and saying something bad has happened to my child. My child has, you know, lost their mind. You know, somebody has has taken control of their mind. They're this person is not acting like himself or herself and they would get custody of them to put them into mental hospitals to have some sort of, you know, intervention done done on it. Programming. Well, at that time, it wasn't even called the programming because I really didn't know what they were dealing with at all. The programming situation came a little bit later as people started to get a handle on what could be done, how these how the communication could go. But this was just the initial thing of, you know, getting trying to get mental health professionals involved. Well, it didn't take long for the cults to strike back with the courts and say, wait a minute, you're talking about adults here. You talk about adults making a religious decision. What are you going to do next? Take the, you know, somebody leaves the Methodist Church and goes to the Baptist Church and you're going to put them in a mental hospital for it. So, you know, the the cults quickly won. So that avenue was closed in terms of trying to deal with the situation. So the second wave of response to this was the deprogramming. And the deprogramming initially actually happened with kidnapping. So the parents would hire somebody to go and kidnap their kid from away from the cult group and take them to an isolated place. And by this and by this time, there was enough kind of sense of how these personality transformations might have been might have been accomplished. That there was some sense of how a person could be encountered and kind of snapped back. And in fact, this is the language they use, snapped back to reality. And, you know, when I when I do talks on this, I go into more detail about that whole phase of it. But that didn't last very long. The reason it didn't last very long is very simple. It was an illegal thing. You know, you guys can't go into that. You know, it's against the law. Even if it's your parents, you know, they do it to you. So that that phase did not last very long. And so there there came to be another another phase of this, which was more stepping back, looking at the phenomenon and looking at it academically, sociologically and trying to figure out how to make a response to it. You know, that would be within the bounds of the law that would respect the person and yet could kind of get get them get people out of this and get them back reconnected with their families. Because one of the hardest things about this was that in almost every case, they completely disconnected from their family, from their friends, from everything they had in their former existence. All right, which was very difficult on people, as you can imagine. So because this was kind of in the news so much and being talked about so much, there there came to be, I would say, three definitions of cults that were kind of floating out there. OK, so the first one was the popular one. And this was based on the sensationalism of the of the news stories and stuff. And the in the popular mentality, it became an idea that that cults were number one, they were small groups. They dressed weird. All right. They tended to live in isolation, like live in a compound or something and be in isolation. given a compound or something, and be fanatically devoted to the teachings of one leader. And along with that, in the popular imagination, there was this idea that cults attracted stupid, weak-minded people. Now, that combination of things is very dangerous. And the reason it's dangerous is, number one, that definition of a cult is inaccurate. And because it's inaccurate, you're not going to necessarily recognize when a cult is actually approaching you. If you're looking for weirdly dressed people living in a compound, that might not, they might not, might be somebody else. And the other thing is that if you have it in your mind, and I've told this to many audiences if you have it in your mind that the people who get into cults are stupid, weak-minded people, that leaves you vulnerable, because of course you're not stupid and weak-minded, so you wouldn't possibly be attracted to get into a cult. That I think leaves people vulnerable to being recruited by cults because they have in their mind that they're not the type of person who could get into a cult. Now, at the same time, well, dealing with what was out kind of in the general population as they're thinking about what a cult is, there came to be a kind of a theological definition of a cult. And you touched on this a little bit, that there's a definition according to what they do and another one according to what their teachings are, right? So the theological definition was promoted by Dr. Walter Martin. He wrote a book called Kingdom of the Cults back in, I think it was in the 60s, which was really in the evangelical world, I think was the first kind of like big attempt to deal with this as a phenomenon. And based on his work, there was a group called Watchman Fellowship that, have you ever heard of Watchman Fellowship? Okay, so Watchman Fellowship was started doing education, like counter cult ministry and education in churches and things like that. And they came up with a formula for defining a cult. Kind of a catchy little rubric. It's an add, subtract, multiply and divide. So they would say, okay, a cult, and they were mainly, I would say mainly dealing with aberrant Christian groups, but they could apply it outside of that. So a cult is a group that adds to the Bible, either subtracts from the deity of Christ or from the Trinity, multiplies what you need to do for salvation by a lot of different kinds of works and divides the person from their family, their friends and things like that. So that's pretty simple. People could remember it. And it has certain limited usefulness. But of course, you can see right away if you talk to a Catholic how they could use that to say, oh, well, you Catholics, you add to the Bible either because they have the idea because our Bible has seven more books in it that we've added books to it because of course Catholics draw their Old Testament from a different Jewish canon than what Protestants do or because we have the Magisterium and the Bible, we say tradition and Scripture. And all you're adding to the scripture. So that so it was real. It was kind of convenient for these evangelicals to be able to sort of want the Catholics, Catholics in with cults. That's a really big old cult. Yeah. You know, if your definition of cult includes most of the Christians on the planet, it's probably a little bit of a problem. So back to that classical definition, this could get really ugly. Funny clothes. Well, you got to go on top of this. Yeah, right. This is getting all bad. Mary, why do you do it? Mary, you're making your case. I know jumped from one cult into another. Okay. So then, then there, you know, people started looking at it, you know, a lot of people started looking at it from a more academic standpoint. So you had people dealing, you know, psychologists, sociologists, academicians, people involved with the philosophy of religion, different things like that, ethics and whatnot, the legal, coming from the legal end, all that, looking at it. And they started, you know, to put their heads together to come up with a definition. And you alluded to this, that it's based more on the actions than on the belief structure of the group. And or the shorthand for that is deed, not creed. Okay. So of course, meanwhile, while all this is going on, the cults are saying, are saying that any any there's there's no such thing as a cult, you know, obviously, with all these definitions out there, there really isn't any such thing. Job is willing to say this all the time. There really isn't any such thing as a cult because, you know, everybody's got all these different definitions. So they could use that confusion to to their own advantage. Well, what the from the academic standpoint, a more scientific look at it, of course, what you try and do in that case is see if you can locate some models. Right. So the thought was, if we can find, you know, what what is this thing like, if it's like this other thing, maybe it's the same thing, or maybe it's involves the same processes. So this, of course, is during the Cold War. So one of the things that's going on is you have these internment camps in communist countries and you have these reeducation camps where they would do what's called thought reform and put people in these camps and change them from being sometimes from being, you know, having American values to being one of the communist comrades. So would Jordan say the universities have become a cult? Yeah, I guess he might say that. But this is the the communists were actually doing this in the communist countries. And this was known. Robert J. Lifton, I think, is the psychologist that did a lot of study on this thought reform stuff. So some people said, ah, well, thought reform, you know, this that the communists are doing, the the cults are just like this. They're exactly the same as this, except, of course, in all the ways in which they were completely different. And then, of course, another model that was invoked was the the model of the abused woman, or, you know, the person who identifies with the abuser. Sometimes, you know, Stockholm syndrome, though, you know, have call that right. And so some people said, ah, it's the same phenomenon as this, because it's exactly like this, except in all the ways that it's not, you know, it's its own. So although those were useful models to understand some things, they were they were limited in their applicability because because call recruitment and called involvement is its own is its own thing. Okay. So the International Cultic Studies Association, which anyone can look up and they have a lot of resources available on their website. That's run by Michael Angon or started by Michael Angon. He might not still be there. I don't know. But it's been a long time to contact with them. But they drew together a lot of people from many different disciplines to interact with former cult members. And that was kind of the key thing in all of this was to be able to bring in the people that have been through the experience, sit down with them and say, what was your experience like? How did you get in? What was it like while you were in? How did you get out to to begin to begin to see a pattern? So I, as former Jehovah's Witness, have sat in a room with 70 people who had been in all different kinds of cults, everything from UFO cults to science based cults to health based cults, political cults, various kinds of aberrant Christian groups, cults based on Eastern, you know, Eastern religions of various kinds, meditation, whatever. And just had everybody just tell their story, talk about their experience and what really is stunning was how similar all of our experiences are. Even though everybody was in such such divergent groups that you wouldn't think had anything in common. So that that leads us to be able to to say, OK, here are some characteristics that are in common with cults and how they operate. So let's start with that. You know, this idea that only stupid or weak minded people get into cults. All right. As though somebody wakes up in the morning and says, my life has been going to all I know what I'll do. I'll join the cults. I'll make everything better. You know, that's that's not how it works. Even though Nick may, you know, he might have he might have done that. Nick is that the name of the guy that went into the different cults? That's not the normal. That's not the normal pattern. OK. Normally, people do not go looking for cults. Cults actively recruit people and they do not actively recruit stupid or weak minded people because that's not what they want. They want people who are functional, highly functional. They want people who are capable, who have talent, who have skills, who have things that they can contribute to the group and make the group successful and also who can themselves have the have the capacity to go out and recruit other people. All right. So cults are not it's not like they're not going into the into the byways and looking for the, you know, I got a lot of people like to hear a lot of folks around. I could send them. I guess. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's that's kind of one of the differences. Right. And so the deception in recruiting is one of the key elements of getting people into of people going into a cult. And when cults, you know, cult knocks on door, I'll say from Jehovah's Witness standpoint, it's not like Jehovah's Witnesses when you open the door, they say, Hi, we are here to invite you to our cult down the street. So the way that cult recruitment works is I call it hijacking. In fact, my big presentation that I do about cults, I've done as long as four hours at a time, is called hijacked lives. Because the point is that you have a person who's going through their life and they have certain goals, interests, things that they're passionate about. And somebody comes alongside of them and says, Hey, you're interested in this particular thing? Well, guess what? There's a whole group of people who are trying to do the same thing. Come and join us. And then when they get involved with the group, the group takes them into a completely different direction. So when I was a Jehovah's Witness, and I used to knock on doors, one of the things I would ask people is what would make you happy? And people would say, and I really honestly, I didn't care what would make them happy. I was just trying to get the inroad and to be able to get them into the group. Do you understand? It's like, it's like it wasn't really an interest in that person's actual happiness. But I've never had a Jehovah's Witness ask me that question. Well, that's because they probably aren't as good as I was. Maybe that's just it. We do vary in our skill level. But anyway, anyway, that's, you know, that's the they will talk to you though about being happy and having life on earth forever, stuff like that. You know, they will make that kind of presentation. So they are trying to they're trying to attract you with an offer for some kind of happiness. I mean, every cultist, right? Churches do that too. Yes, they do. But the but the thing is that it's that individual and his development and his happiness, it really matters to them not using that person to further some different agenda. I don't know. I've seen some churches do that too. I mean, that's that's part of this. I mean, it's churches, churches sometimes act like cults. And, you know, usually not, you know, larger denominational. I mean, right. But churches can get kind of cultish. And well, pastors, individual pastors can get cultish. And and some sometimes it seems like they start out as churches and they wind up as cults. Well, and that's true. OK, so I'll show you this book. OK, this book is called Twisted Scriptures. OK, it's by Mary Alice Kronelager. And the cover, if you look it up on Amazon, is different now. I want to spell her last name because it's it's like Hungarian or something. So it doesn't have enough vowels in it. See, see, H.R.N. A.L.O.G.A.R. All right. And this is what she talks about is the way that some churches get used the Bible in a manipulative manner is an excellent, excellent book for anybody who's interested. And I think Cassidy might be interested in reading this book. OK, and actually has helped with the editing of this book years and years and years ago. So but I highly recommend this for, you know, on untwisting some of those little manipulative things that are used like when she talked about the gifts of the spirit, trying to make them happen, that sort of thing. There's some stuff in that book about that. The other aspect is then, as you mentioned when you talk to Cassidy, so we have deception and recruiting. We have manipulative control over members. And that's a big part of it. You mentioned that manipulative control really is taking an illegitimate amount of authority over the life of a person. And that was one of the things that dawned on me. When I left from the Jehovah's Witnesses was, wait a minute, all these things they're telling me to do, they don't have any legitimate authority to tell me this. You know, so that was that was kind of one of the things that was. So you would consider Jehovah's Witnesses a cult? Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. They use a lot of manipulative control over people. So I'll give you one example. Like when people come and knocking on your door, Jehovah's Witnesses knocking on your door, you know, they have to report to their local congregation. How many hours they spend every month talking to other people about their religion. They have to report that. And you're kind of rated and ranked within there on how much time you actually spend doing that. You know, that's a big part of their social rating and ranking. You know, so and there's a lot of other stuff. There's like, you know, the discouragement of higher education and all of that. There's yeah, it's definitely it is definitely a cult. So because I mean, to me, this is this is very, very interesting, partly because of the time in which it came up. I most often I most often consider cults. Usually, there's a usually there's a motive by the leader of the cult. It could be it's often, you know, like the Bogwan out in, you know, he had a very famous you can you can find this right. Right. Usually it's fine. And the poisoning of the water and all that stuff or something like that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, that if you if you have Netflix and you haven't watched, I think it's called Wild Wild Country. Yeah, it's I I I I. I know about that story. Yeah, fascinating the Bogwan. But usually there's a financial motivation. You know, look at Scientology. I don't have any problem calling Scientology a cult. I obviously don't look for weak minded people. They look for strong minded people and they dress well and they use status, especially in terms of Hollywood and stardom. You know, Tom Cruise, John Travolta, all of these. So but but it's very interesting to me that this, you know, something happened during the baby boom era in terms of, you know, I think people there's affluence involved there. There's there's a whole number of things. And obviously a group like the Jehovah's Witness have been around far longer. Would you consider here's another question. Would you consider consider the Church of Latter Day Saints a cult? Well, that leads that kind of leads to the difference between a cult and a world religion or a sect. Right. So what I would say about the Latter Day Saints is that I think you're right when you call them a sect of Christianity. They're definitely aberrant in terms of theology. One of the things about a cult is that a cult cannot cannot manage a civilization because because cults restrict the areas of domains in which people can operate. And in order to make in order to have a civilization, you have to have all the area, all the area. You have to have somebody who is a cop and somebody who's a soldier and somebody who's a painter and somebody who's a farmer and somebody you know, you have to have all these different domains. And what you find in cult is that they because they have so many restrictions on the individual, they have, you know, you might have some for I'll use Jehovah's Witnesses again as an example. You'd be amazed at how many of them are janitors. All right. None of them are cops. None of them are soldiers. Almost none of them are doctors. All right. Yeah. So so that's, you know, almost none of them are scientists, you know, so you don't have the full structure of a society that you can have now. Okay. So let's look at Mormons. Could you say that you could have a civilization of Mormons? And I would say yes, you can, because if they can have a whole state in the United States, that's bigger than some countries are, you know, and they have all the they have all the civilizational niches filled with people. Yeah. Would you call the Amish a cult? No, I would not call the Amish a cult, but I don't know that they punish people who leave. My understanding is that you're free to leave from the Amish. All right. I would say that they're very closed group, but I would not call I would not call them a cult because I don't think that they're engaging. For one thing, I don't think they're manipulate that they're engaged in deception to try and get people to join. I don't think that they're engaged in. I think there's a tremendous amount of social pressure, but I don't think they're engaged in manipulative, unethical control of people within. And I don't think they punish people who leave. So those are some of the aspects that would make a group of cult. I agree with those aspects of the definition and those come to me. I mean, I don't know. I mean, I never I'd always thought of the Jehovah's Witnesses more as a sect. Your point about restricting the domains in which people can operate. That's a very interesting point to me. And I'll have to think about that further. So I think the more I okay. So, you know, Hilaire Belloc and Chesterton, those guys, they thought of Islam as a as a Christian heresy. Are you aware of that? Okay. So let's say that Mormonism is a Christian heresy. I mean, theologically, certainly heretical. All right. The question would be, is it on track to become another world religion like Islam? And I would say that that kind of really depends on how they continue to relate or not to the wider Christian world. You know how integrated they become. And of course, that's that's real dicey, isn't it? Because how do we deal with them and how do we deal with their theological aberrations? But I would say that the more the lines of communication stay open with them, and the more that they're invited to, you know, enter into theological dialogue with with the traditional Christian faiths, the the the less likely it is that they're going to hive off and become a separate world religion. But and so I think it's I think it's definitely preferable from from many levels, from many standpoints to keep them as as being a heretical sect and not and not becoming like Islam and antagonistic to Christianity at large world world religion. Because the Seventh-day Adventists have very much increasingly become sort of part of the evangelical fold, whereas, you know, they I mean, the Jehovah's Witnesses, the Latter-day Saints, the Seventh-day Adventists, all of this all of these came out of, you know, the burned over district in New York and the towards the end of the 19th century. And a lot depends on sort of where they're moving. And we haven't seen any movement of the Jehovah's Witnesses towards any other group. They've for the most part remain in isolation and seem to want to remain there. Right. Right. And the the the the thing with the Seventh-day Adventists is very interesting. You know that they came out the Millerite movement and the Jehovah's Witnesses did too. So there's kind of almost like two two branches off of the same tree that those those two groups are. In fact, the the Seventh-day Adventists went through a period, a brief period where they taught that Jesus Christ was really Michael the Archangel. And that's Jehovah's Witnesses do teach that. Yes, yes. And but the but the Seventh-day Adventists, you know, repented of or changed that teaching. So they didn't maintain it. But it was during that time that the Jehovah's Witnesses broke off from them. And the Jehovah's Witnesses kept that teaching. Yeah. That, you know, the tremendous ontological problem of Jesus being being an angel then becoming a man then going back to heaven and becoming an angel again. So. Right. Well, the LDS has a huge has demonstrated quite a capacity to change their doctrines midstream. I mean, they've changed on a number of things just in the last 50 years. Right. You know, Richard Mao, who was a philosophy professor at Calvin College, he was president of Fuller Seminary, has had quite a bit of dialogue with the LDS Church. So it'll be interesting to see what becomes of them in the future. So. Right. I feel out west here, much more than where I grew up. Yeah. Yeah. We've just got a few more minutes, Mary. So it's this is. Well, thanks for letting me kind of lay that out. Um, I hope. Now Esther's going to complain because I let you colonize my channel and it is going to be very upset by that. I hope not. But I just want to let me real quick share a few more resources with people who want to do a deeper dive into the subject. Now, I haven't really been active in this space for a number of years. So some of these books are a little bit older. They're all at least like 10 years old. But I showed you Twisted Scripture. I want to this, this Releasing the Bonds by Steven Hasson, H-A-S-S-A-N. And he has another book that was prior to this and he's real good at exit counseling. And this book will be valuable for people who have a family member who's in a cult. Dr. Paul R. Martin. Now this is a Christian and it's the book is called Cult Proofing Your Kids. And he comes from more of an evangelical background, but he is also the founder of Wellspring Retrieving Resource Center, which helps people recover from post-cult trauma in Ohio. It's a Christian based and he combines the psychological and the Christian orientation. All right. Margaret Thaler Singer was a professor at UC Berkeley. And this book is called Cult in Our Mids, The Hidden Menace in Our Everyday Lives. Interesting. I noticed you talked about the difference between a cult and the monastery. She talks in here about that. And also she says, what's the difference between a cult and the United States Marines? But this is a great book, much more on the academic level study of the phenomenon. This one, Captive Hearts, Captive Minds. Captive Hearts, Captive Minds is a book that deals with survivors of cults, many different kinds of cults and their stories that anyone who's been in a cult and wants to get something that really they can relate to on an emotional level, this would be really good. And then Recovery from Cults edited by Michael Langone. This is again from the International Cultic Studies Association resource. And more again, an academic treatment that comes out from a number of different disciplines, from the legal, psychological, sociological, ethical, all that. So those are things if people have an issue, they have a family member they think is in a cult, or they themselves have been in a cult and are walking around going, how did this happen to me? What was wrong with me? And what I want to say is if someone has come out of a cult and they're walking around thinking what was wrong with me, that they were able to do this to me, is I just want to say there's nothing wrong with you, you were deceived. And that would be my bottom line statement. Well, Nick signed up for another slot, so I'm sure he'll watch this, or he and I talk. So another thing that I've been thinking about is getting a few people together for a conversation. And so we'll see maybe we'll do this afternoon. I'm hoping to have one of those set up. So okay, good. Well, I look forward to seeing that maybe participating in one of these days. And I'll leave a teaser. I'm talking to you again in two weeks. So I'm gonna leave a teaser for everybody. Oh, my. And I had put it in the in the email to you. So here's the teaser. I have figured out what the female equivalent of CS Lewis is men without chests is. And I'm gonna talk about that next time we talk. Okay, well, there's your teaser. All right, Mary, it's great to talk to you again. Great to talk to you too. Take care. Bye. Bye.