https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=RxiMNHKaJKE

 14 and 15 are pretty straightforward, well more or less. So let's open with prayer. Lord we thank you that we can meet together and we thank you for the gift of your presence and the gift of your spirit. We pray that you would be with us as we look at these last few chapters of the book of Romans. Give us your peace and be with us Lord as we continue on into new things coming in the new year. So hear our prayer in the name of Jesus, amen. All right so this is the last Sunday School planned. Come and for those of you online it's bad news I know because we don't film estuary. So actually have to be here to participate in that. And I know a number of you have requested that there be something like this but online and I'm continuing to think about that. I'll just have to see how time permits. But yeah, because I know a number of you watch this and really enjoy it and so you'll miss it. I get that maybe if we do something online it'll probably be an online version where we're together with Zoom or something like that. So we'll see how this goes. But this morning we are sorry for the interruption last week. If I had had the choice not to have COVID I certainly would have opted out. I wasn't, no there is Sunday School today, but there is Sunday School today, that's right now. But I had COVID and symptoms were very light but I just really couldn't come and be with people. So hence no Sunday School. I could have done it online I suppose but I also was sleeping in trying to get over it. All right, Romans 14 and 15. Now, let's start with the verse, let's start with the passage and then we'll contextualize it a little bit more. Except the one whose faith is weak without quarreling over disputable matters. One person's faith allows them to eat anything but another whose faith is weak eats only vegetables. The one who eats everything must not treat with contempt the one who does not. And the one who does not eat everything must not judge the one who does for God has accepted them. Who are you to judge someone else's servant? Do their own master, servant, stand or fall and they will stand for the Lord is able to make them stand. One person considers one day more sacred than the other, another considers every day alike. Each of them should be fully convinced in their own mind. Whoever regards one day as special does so to the Lord. Whoever eats meat does so to the Lord for they give thanks to God and whoever abstains does so to the Lord and gives thanks to God. For none of us lives for ourselves alone and none of us dies for ourselves alone. Where if we live, we live for the Lord and if we die, we die for the Lord. So whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord. For this reason, Christ died and returned to life so that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living. You then, why do you judge your brother or sister? Why do you treat them with contempt? For we will all stand before God's judgment seat. It is written, as surely as I live says the Lord, every knee will bow, every tongue will acknowledge God. So then each of us will give an account of ourselves to God. Therefore, let us stop passing judgment on one another. Instead, make up your mind not to put any stumbling block or obstacle in the way of a brother or sister. I am convinced being fully persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself. But if anyone regards something as unclean, then for that person, it is unclean. If your brother or sister is distressed because of what you eat, you are no longer acting in love. Do not by your eating destroy someone for whom Christ has died. Therefore, do not let what you know is good be spoken of as evil. For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. Because anyone who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and receives human approval. Let us therefore make every effort to do what leads to peace and to mutual edification. Do not destroy the work of God for the sake of food. All food is clean, but it is wrong for a person to eat anything that causes someone else to stumble. It is better not to eat meat or drink wine or to do anything else that will cause your brother or sister to fall. So whatever you believe about these things, keep between yourselves and God, lest it is the one who does not condemn himself by what he approves. But whoever has doubts is condemned if they eat because their eating is not from faith. And everything that comes not from faith is sin. We who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not please ourselves. Each of us should please our neighbors for their good to build them up. For even Christ did not please himself, but as is written, the insults of those who insult you have fallen on me. For everything that is written in the past was written to teach us, so that through the endurance taught in the scriptures and the encouragement they provide, we might have hope. May God who gives endurance and encouragement give you the same attitude of mind towards each other that Christ had, so that with one mind and one voice, you may glorify the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Accept one another then as Christ accepts you in order to bring praise to God. For I tell you that Christ has become a servant of the Jews on behalf of God's truth, so that the promises made to the patriarchs might be confirmed. And moreover, that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy as it is written. Therefore, I will praise you among the Gentiles. I will sing the praises of your name. Again, it says rejoice you Gentiles in his people. And again, praise the Lord all you Gentiles, let all the people extol him. And again, Isaiah says, the root of Jesse will spring up. One will arise to rule over the nations in him the Gentiles will hope. May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in him so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy Spirit. Okay, there's a long section. Let's talk about it. What do you think this section is about? Okay, getting along. The real question is, the questions surround, who are Paul talking, who is Paul talking about? Is this a specific thing to Romans? Or is this a general thing that he talked with other churches about? And where are the lines? Well, let's start. Does this remind you of anything Paul's written in any other of his letters? More like 1 Corinthians. In the church in Corinth, there is a dispute over, now there's meat sacrifice to idols and there's eating in pagan temples. And there was two groups in Corinth, and there was a dispute over meat sacrifice to idols. And there was two groups in Corinth. Well, there were groups that were divided over these two issues. There could be ceremonies or gatherings in pagan temples. The meat served at these temples. Now, again, bear in mind, many people in the ancient world didn't eat meat as often as we do, for example. You didn't have industrialized farming. Because temple service across the board tended to be often animal sacrifices. And I'm gonna actually talk about this in the sermon a little bit. An altar is in some ways kind of like a barbecue. And so what sacrifices produced was a lot of meat, a lot of cooked meat. And obviously also cooked meat keeps better than just freshly butchered meat. And so in the Roman Empire, as in I would imagine many other civilizations, a lot of meat eating was surrounded by these temple observances. Now, the Jews did not, the Jews were very scrupulous about these kinds of things. And so a good observant Jew, generally speaking, we believe would not eat meat purchased in the market. There was another issue with respect to that, if you recall. The Old Testament has very specific butchering techniques with respect to making sure all the blood gets drained from the animal. So both with the butchering techniques, the kinds of meat, so Jews could only eat certain animals and not other animals. And then also the question of meat that had been on pagan altars, Jews for that reason, generally speaking in the broader Roman Empire, did not eat meat unless they knew it was butchered in the proper manner, it had not gone to a pagan sacrifice and it was from the kinds of animals that would have been allowed to eat from. It was kosher as we would say today and those practices continue today. Now, one of the clues, we have a lot of questions, we don't really know who's fighting here. One of the questions, one of the clues here is eats only vegetables. Now, the Davis Church used to meet in what had been built by the Presbyterians and or the, I don't know if they're Presbyterians or not, but anyway, a Protestant church built the building. They moved to a bigger building, they sold the building to a Jewish synagogue, our church rented from the Jewish synagogue. And the Jewish synagogue had a rule with them, basically you can have food, food things for renters is always a touchy thing, you can have food here but no meat. And of course, that was if you just don't eat meat at all, you don't have issues with any of those questions. So it's kind of a shortcut to maintaining kosher. Now, it's also, can you think of an Old Testament story where the Jews become vegetarians in a pagan context? Daniel and his friends, Daniel and his friends in that sense only eat vegetables and therefore again, in a pagan context, no longer have the questions of meat sacrifice to idols, unclean animals, unclean butchering practices. I know the priest did endow the common people with some of the sacrifice he's been on. Good question. I would imagine that there would have been times that yes, that there would have been, that there would have been yes. I suspect so, but I don't know for sure. But the Jews certainly did eat meat. They, I mean, especially in the Old Testament period, a lot of them are ranchers, shepherds. So sheep, rams, goats, cattle, all of those things they can eat. So, but in a pagan context, being a vegetarian is sort of a safe way to not have that situation. Okay. And what's interesting also about this Romans passage where on one hand it bears a fair amount of resemblance to 1 Corinthians 8, where Paul talks about meat sacrifice to idols. There's no mention of meat sacrifice to idols in chapters 14 and 15, which is interesting. So that sort of leaves scholars kind of not sure how much this is Paul's general teaching and how much this is a specific teaching for Romans. And I don't know that we necessarily have to come to a hard decision on that, but that's one of the questions that's involved here. Now, another one of the issues involved is this question of weak and strong because right away there's sort of a hierarchy there because who really wants to be part of the weak group? Now that's sort of flipped on its head today with, you know, victim culture where if you can, there's sort of an inversion that if you can claim to be a victim status, you can somehow claim high ground. So then given that dynamic, it's hard to know whether the victim is strong or weak. But clearly there was contention, either in the Roman church specifically, or in many churches overall that Paul is addressing with respect to diet. And that makes perfect sense given the fact that in the church, you've really got sort of three groups. You've got Gentiles, those who have come into the church completely apart from any synagogue practice. You have God-fearers who were Gentiles that for a time had been participating in Jewish synagogue life. So for a woman to sort of become more of a Jew, she had to undergo a bath and accept certain practices. For a man, you had to undergo circumcision. And so many of these God-fearers were men who for, you know, it's obviously a higher bar of entry for men than it would be for women. Now all three of these groups become part of this New Testament church. And it's also quite likely that in any given locale, you're going to have different mixtures of those three groups. And the mixtures of these three groups are probably also going to sort of help determine kind of the local idiosyncrasies of that groups. Let's add to this the other variable that I know for us sort of looking back on it, when we kind of have one word, we think of kind of a monolithic, Jews did this, Jews didn't do that. It's quite likely in the Roman Empire that the Jews themselves were living across a spectrum of practices and observances. It's funny the way the voice is, I do a lot of talking during the week making videos, but still Sunday is a big talking day. So the Romans here, do you think it's primarily made up of Gentiles? We think, see we don't know. And so New Testament scholars tend to read the books closely to try to get a sense of what's going on here. So the main argument is, now if you go all the way to, this is something we won't be able to cover in detail, but it's a very interesting data point. If you look at Romans chapter 16, now it's generally common at the end of a letter for Paul to send greetings to a group from the people that are around him, and also then send specific named greetings to people that he knows are in the church there. And so one of the things that we notice with, especially the letters that we have a fair amount of data on and almost, so there are certain letters that some people a little skeptical, did Paul write these? Then there are certain letters that absolutely nobody has any questions about. And Romans is in that category. Romans, Galatians, 1st and 2nd Corinthians, nobody has any questions about those letters. What's interesting about chapter 16 is, right from verse one, all the way, look, greet, greet, greet, greet, greet, greet, greet, greet, greet, greet, greet, greet. I urge you brothers, watch out for those who cause division. So similar issue to 14 and 15, and obstacles in the way, they're contrary to the teachings that you have learned, keep away from them. Such people are not serving our Lord, but their own appetites. By smooth talk and flattery, they deceive the minds of naive people. So we kind of get a sense of weak and strong there. And then, well, Timothy sends you greetings to you as do Lucius, Jason, Sassopater, my fellow Jews, I, Tertius, who wrote down this letter, greet you in the Lord. So he's the scribe, the Immanuensis, who is actually writing the letter for Paul, and Gaius, who's, you know, so, I mean, look at all the names. Now, a lot of those are Greek names. And it's interesting that when there is something like this, my fellow Jew, when they are a Jew, it's often noted, but many of them are Greek names. Now, there's also a dynamic that I think we can tell that when you have sort of a, often it's a capital, but a city of central importance, in terms of a civilization, a lot of roads, you know, all roads go to Rome. It's a staying that even survives today. So Rome is going to be an important church just because by sort of the cultural gravity of the empire, people who rise in status hierarchies will get swept over to Rome. And people who have high status, let's say association with, let's say, the Imperial Court, that status, they'll go to other places. I mean, that's how status tends to work with human beings. So many believe that the church in Rome is predominantly and primarily Gentile. Now, we also have earlier in the book, when Paul is writing about Gentiles and Jews, he has a warning to Gentiles not to look down on the Jews. We also know that during the administration of Claudius, Jews were expelled at least for a time from Rome because they were fighting over Christus. So there's questions as to whether Jews and synagogues were having conflicts over Jesus and the story of Christ. We don't know that for sure. It's a guess. So the idea is that the church is likely predominantly Gentile. And the Gentiles, for that reason, and because it seems that the strong here are the meat eaters and the weak are the Jews, that that could be it. Now, part of what's interesting here is that on one hand, there's the historical question that we have, and it's kind of an interesting data point. And, but then there's all the filters that we sort of bring into the question. And these questions have to deal with, well, today, well, here's a question. Which gives you more social status today living in Northern California? Being a vegan or eating meat? Probably being a vegan. Why? Ah, yes. Vegans care for the world. Vegans care for the emotional state of animals. We have an entire hierarchy, kind of a moral, emotional hierarchy, where, well, they're a vegan. It also shows, it's interesting the way these things sort of move in the culture. It also shows self-control. And so while on one hand, we live in a very interesting cultural time. On one hand, there's a certain status hierarchy that one gets to being rather liberal in terms of their sexual practice, kind of in a post-Christian way. Oh, well, they don't follow all of those Christian rules about sexuality, they're liberated. And so sometimes the liberated have higher social status. I'm not talking in the church, I'm talking out in the culture. And increasingly that difference between church morals and cultural morals, that's been moving apart since the 1970s. So interestingly enough, on one hand, someone who doesn't follow traditional sexuality might be liberated and therefore have higher social status. At the same time, there's also the sense of someone who is self-disciplined also may in certain cases have higher social status. And that's kind of the case with a vegan. So if you're out to dinner in a mixed group and you don't, and maybe it's a work thing, or maybe it's a social thing, and someone is like, well, I don't eat meat. Oh, now this then becomes a little contentious in some groups, because some people, again, part of what's happened in our social context is that the whole inversion of victimization means that if someone sits there and says, I don't eat meat, there's a whole group of other people who are probably gonna sneer at them for being elitist. So there's a lot of social contention that goes around. And so on one hand, you can gain status by being self-controlled in certain ways. Now, maybe one that is less socially contentious would be, well, I don't eat sugar. Oh, okay, so they're trying to control their weight, yada, yada, yada. So it's funny today that we have all sorts of morality that has now come into our culture. And I think this is fairly new. Whereas in the past, anybody pretty much ate anything and people didn't necessarily say much about it or think much about it. Now, oh, I don't eat sugar. Oh, I don't eat meat. Oh, well, why? Well, and then you now have the carnivores who are eating only meat. And so we have this little culture war about what we put in our mouths. But also mentioned here is wine. And that's an interesting thing because now again, generally speaking, Jews had no problem drinking wine and they still don't. But you look back on Daniel and water and vegetables. And so you wonder to what degree, and Daniel was an extremely popular book in the first century with Jews. They could really identify it because here you had an observant Jew in the midst of the pagan court and he's victorious. And then you have the interesting seven through 12. So maybe there's some of this going on here, but it seems that in this case, those who did drink wine and those who did eat meat were likely in the majority and sort of had the ascendance, the moral status over those who didn't. And Paul's admonition again is very careful because and what he says is pretty profound when he says, for example, in verse 14, I am convinced being fully persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself. Now, given the context, it's clear he's talking about food and drink. That's a pretty big thing for a Jew to say, especially someone who had been a Pharisee. Now, a bunch of my Jewish friends today have questions about Paul's Phariseical status based on a whole bunch of things. But the truth is we only know so much about Jewish life in the first century. And actually over the last 20, 30 years, studies in second temple Judaism have been sort of the sweet spot for New Testament scholarship because figuring out how Jews more broadly than the church lived is really helpful for trying to figure out who Paul was and what these dynamics were in the very early church. And there's a lot we just don't know. And so I think we're best to take Paul at his word that he was an observant Pharisee. And I think if we look at the gospels, many of the culture war issues in the gospels with respect to the Pharisees, now the Pharisees really did sort of inherit the kingdom after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. The Pharisees were sort of the strongest party and the Pharisees really became what today we look at as Judaism. They were the ones who basically kept their culture together. And from what we can sort of imply in the New Testament gospels is that, the Pharisees, this gets complicated too because we're often talking about the first century church, but a lot of our views in Protestant churches are shaped by the 16th century conflict with the Roman church. And so often it's sort of read that the Pharisees are legalists. Now the difficulty with a legalist is, usually a legalist is someone who has rules that I disagree with and are willing to keep them. And so after the 16th century, sort of the Pharisees and the Catholics sort of got lumped together as works-based people, and then Christians and Protestants sort of got lumped together as saved by grace. Now that usually worked as long as the scope of reference was limited to certain things such as food. Because of course Catholics, Orthodox and Jews, but especially Catholics and Orthodox within the Christian realm, had a tradition of fasting and eating. And so the Jews were the ones who were the ones had a tradition of fasting and feasting according to the liturgical calendar that the Protestant Reformation criticized and did away with. One of the interesting things that you'll note about the Heideberg Catechism is, there are 52 Lord's days. And you know what the 52 Lord's days take zero into account of that you might've noticed at a Christian-formed church before the 1970s. Where's the Christmas in the Heideberg Catechism? There's no, I mean, Advent and Lent came into the practice of the Christian Reformed Church, sort of started sneaking in in the 80s, and they became into broader acceptance in the 90s and following. Before that in the Christian Reformed Church growing up in the 70s, I don't believe I ever heard Advent whispered in Patterson in the 1970s or 60s. Protestants celebrated Christmas and Easter, but the rest of this liturgical calendar pretty much stayed away from. Now, if you, now I know this being, part of what's happening now with the rise in interest in Eastern Orthodoxy and in very traditional forms of Catholicism is people are once again practicing traditional seasons of fasting and feasting. Now, these seasons are interesting to many of us Protestants because when I go back to New England, I often wind up going back to visit my mother sometimes during Lent, and Catholics aren't eating meat. And I'd hear that and think, oh, because my categorization is meat and vegetables. If it came from an animal, it's meat. If it came from a plant, it's a vegetable. That's not really how the fasting goes for the Roman Catholics because often they would fast on Friday and eat fish. And this goes back to Latin because meat was often called flesh and fish weren't called flesh. So I love going to New England during Lent. There's a lot of great fish on sale. There's a lot of great seafood on sale. I love eating seafood. And to me, that's like, wait a minute, you're fasting by eating lobster? That doesn't sound like fasting to me. That sounds like feasting because when we eat lobster, it's a feast, not a fast. And so then you begin to see kind of the different levels here. And this also gets into, when Paul talks about, one person considers one day more sacred than the other. Another considers every day alike. Okay, so liturgical calendars. How do we regard these things? Or obviously Jewish ceremonial days. If you were a Jew that comes to see Jesus as Lord, and we can see this often with Paul teaching in other places. Paul had a very interesting, how he managed this Jew-Gentile thing was very interesting because Paul did some things that for centuries have sort of raised eyebrows. You can read the book of Galatians and imagine Paul says circumcision is bad. Paul doesn't say that. And then Paul circumcises Timothy. And this catches everybody's attention because we sort of look at things in low resolution. Paul says circumcision is bad. It's very low resolution. No, Paul is telling the Gentiles that he's addressing in the book of Galatians that for them to pursue the practice of circumcision would be wrong. You have to understand that there's rather a complex matrix here that Paul is working. Paul, and for example, at the end of the book of Romans, Paul is saying, I'm heading to Jerusalem. And he talks about the collection. When Paul goes to Jerusalem, you can read this in the book of Acts, he fulfills a vow. That's a Jewish practice. It involved often fasting, hair cutting, a bunch of elements that we would label as cultural with respect to, and then Paul gets arrested because people are afraid that Paul is sneaking Gentiles into the temple. Paul's not doing that. Well, why was it, why did Paul say it's absolutely appropriate for Jews to observe holidays? For Jews to observe the dietary norms, for Jews to practice circumcision. Why did Paul say that it is absolutely appropriate for Jews to do these things, but for Gentiles in Galatians, he says, don't do it. Why, what's going on? For Jews, it's part of their spiritual heritage. And for Gentiles, they would just be kind of doing it by vows, and I would count the Jews first before the Jews. But wouldn't that be fairly to stick with that spiritual practice? Well, that's the question. So for the Jews, Paul says, Christ is the fulfillment of the story. And so to come to Christ, you don't stop being a Jew. You can continue to live within the Mosaic Code as it had been adapted throughout the years. You can continue to live in that code and be in Christ, because Christ is the culmination of your story. The Gentiles, and Paul makes that argument earlier in the book, come to Christ directly, apart from the Mosaic Code. Therefore, you don't have to worry about all of the Mosaic Code. You come in directly to Christ. Now, and that's why it seems, with respect to the Galatians, Paul had a problem with Gentiles saying, oh, I can become a better Christian if I do these things. And I think what is behind this is in fact the motivation. That Paul, that people are beginning to say, Christ isn't enough, I need Christ plus circumcision. Now, this is a really sensitive thing, because there's a few other issues that are going to come into play. Human beings always have status issues. We are always looking for better. We can't not look at anything and not try to figure out better or worse. And there's two dilemmas with better. One is, there's always better or worse. And the other is, there's never better or worse. And I think that's why we're talking about better or worse. What's the problem with there's never better or worse? Exactly, that can be a real problem. Well, I'll just do this. It doesn't matter. The difficulty is, sometimes it does matter and sometimes it doesn't. And the question with better or worse is, figuring out if it matters. So what do we mean if it matters? Well, if it matters to what? If it matters to God with respect to God's desire for us. If it matters to a cultural hierarchy, if it matters to future performance of something in some way, if it matters. So this is part of the difficulty. So Paul very much wants Gentiles to believe that Christ has come to them directly and by virtue of his sacrifice. Now I'm saying this for those of you who are watching, I know I'm gonna get comments. By virtue of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, we come to Christ directly. There. Paul would say the sacrifice of Jesus is the fulfillment of the sacrifices made before. So in this case in Rome, it seems the Gentiles perhaps have the upper hand and Paul is sort of saying that to them that, hey, don't look down on the Jews. And in fact, in many places in this, tells them again and again, one who eats everything must not treat with contempt the one who does not. In many respects here, and I think this is important to think about, the strong are those who have the upper hand at the local level. Because it could very well be that if you're in a church where observant believing Jews have the upper hand, they ought to be, and this I think is part of the problem with the Judaizers, part of the problem with the Judaizers is that the Judaizers are treating with contempt those who are not following the laws. Someone blowing leaves? Can we not do this right now? Keep this on this one. Yeah, after 10.30, you can blow all you want. Thank you, Ronnie. Ronnie lives on my street. He's disabled and he has a little bit of grounds keeping equipment and he knows me. So he thought that he would just come and do us a favor by doing a little landscaping. But yeah, Ronnie's a good guy. Ronnie's a good guy. Okay, so we're gonna go ahead and get started. Okay, so if you're in a situation where the Jews have the upper hand and they're condemning the Gentiles, Paul would say, no. And this is the problem with the Judaizers. So the overall flow of the passage is clear. And for many of us, especially Protestants, it's a fairly easy passage because we don't have a lot of practices around food. Questions are going to arise, however, with respect to, well, what practices? So this is the case with respect to food. Here's a question. Is it also the case with respect to sex? Because this text is used as sort of a major text right now in the current fight over same-sex marriage. So the clear teaching of this text is food and wine and observance of certain ceremonial days. But then the question in application is, how far can you extrapolate over this? Now, I have nowhere near enough time to get into the sex question. I'll just say a few words. It is very interesting that in 1 Corinthians, Paul does treat food sacrifice to idols and sexual practice in very different ways. And generally speaking, that's pretty much the way the Protestant church has gone as well. Said a lot of variety with respect to food. This is Christian sexual practice. So that's been Protestant teaching. Now, of course, this is part of the debate now with respect to the whole thing that's in the Christian-formed church and far more broadly beyond church. But here's another issue that was a very big deal in the Christian-formed church for a lot of years. Sunday observance. Because, and this isn't just in the Christian-formed church, but, Sabbatarianism in the 19th century was a big issue in a number of Protestant denominations. Now, it's just the case that, for example, in Grand Rapids, or we could say tobacco, alcohol, these kinds of issues tend to sort of go through cultures. And so in the Christian-formed church in the 1970s, you wouldn't go shopping on Sunday, but Christian-reformed people would smoke or drink. And then my in-laws who were Baptists, they'd go out to eat on Sunday, but they wouldn't smoke or drink. And so there are always these kinds of issues that are floating around. And so, and so in a lot of ways, this passage, on one hand, I think it's an important passage because I think it helps the church relativize some of these contexts, but the church is then always dealing with what can be relativized and what should be held firm to. And this passage is specifically about a few different things, and these things come up regularly throughout the church, and so now I think what's interesting is that we've now come into a different season in the Protestant church, in the Christian-reformed church, where, huh, now we've got, in the late, at the end of the 70s, but in the 80s, 90s and aughts, now there's a renewal of interest in the liturgical calendar. There's a renewal of interest in less than a year, and there's a renewal of interest in Lent. Now, many Protestants, or at least CRC people, aren't necessarily, aren't necessarily, they see Lent as a fasting season. In America, it's really hard to see Advent as a fasting season because Americans tend to celebrate Christmas up to the day. And maybe a little bit in the week in between to New Year's, but after New Year's, it all sort of falls off. Latins will keep it going until King's Day the 6th, which again follows the Catholic calendar more closely, and so Latins will tend to do the gift giving on King's Day. So here in a very multi-ethnic cosmopolitan place like Northern California, we were sort of used to being flexible, and this probably isn't too uncommon to a place like Rome, because Rome was the center of the empire. People from everywhere in the empire would be in Rome, making these two chapters rather important for the church because Paul didn't want, obviously didn't want, necessarily the church stratifying too heavily along a whole bunch of these lines that the church very easily could have stratified along. And so I think that's the best way to understand the historical posture of the chapter. And I think in an ongoing way, it's a helpful chapter for us in the church to figure out how to evaluate, okay, well, what are we gonna be flexible on, and what are we gonna hold to? Part of it's to evaluate, but then you don't need to part of the existential about it. Right. It's a fine line to walk to. It's a fine line to walk to, and what's interesting right now is there's always sort of a balancing, a reactive dynamic in any culture. And I mentioned already the fact that, okay, being a vegan both gains you status because of certain ideas in the culture. Well, we don't wanna be mean to animals. And hey, nobody here I think is in favor of cruelty to animals. There are moral questions with respect to farming, industrialized farming practices. There are stewardship questions with respect to that. And so a lot of ideas have moral valence depending on the things that they're attached to. But then there are also lots of, I mean, the thing that holds, let's say food and sex, sort of what do food and sex have in common? They have in common because both deal with appetite. And appetite, religions traditionally deal with appetite and regulating appetite because human appetite is both necessary for our survival. Human sex drive ensures that people keep making new people. Oh, but human appetites can tend to run amok. And when there's over appetite, not just for sex, but for food or for possessions or for pride or for almost any good thing, problems develop in a community. And almost the nature of community is sort of the regulation of appetites within the community. This person wants this, this person wants this. And so communities are all about that. And so this passage is really rather important where Paul sort of says, okay, with respect to these things that are almost always, that are often have moral aspects like food, especially with the Jewish tradition, we're going to moderate this. And again, in terms of Christianity, it's an interesting thing that with respect to Christianity, let's say there's what we, Judaism. Now again, Judaism comes from the Pharisees and the rabbis and really doesn't get going until, you know, the destruction of the temple and then pass there. Because once the temple is destroyed, you had to, and we're actually not going to touch on this in the sermon, we're going to talk a lot about the temple in the sermon. The Babylonian exile helps the Jews instantiate synagogue worship, which begins to create the way that Jews can become Jews without a temple. And Torah observance replaces temple practice. And so because of the fact that throughout, there was tension within the Jewish community throughout the Israelite community, got to be careful with that term Jewish because it's actually, we shouldn't look back too much with it. In terms of Israel, there's all this tension between local shrines and the shrine in Jerusalem. And then when Jerusalem is destroyed, then you have a question, do we go back and do sacrifices wherever we are to fulfill the Mosaic code or do sacrifices pause because we don't have a temple? Now, during that short period until a temple is rebuilt, there's, you know, that is present. But after that sacrifices, we don't really know because there are other possible competing temples like in Egypt that are not written in the Bible so most Christians don't pay any attention to them. But eventually with the destruction of Herod's temple, this tradition goes to be a no sacrifice tradition. Obviously Christianity from the start, well, once the temple gets destroyed, also a no sacrifice tradition. Islam starts quite a bit later, let's say the sixth century is really in many ways sort of an Arabized version of Judaism. Because look at, and it's very simplified, I mean, you have the five pillars of Islam, but look at the dietary practices, no pork, in their case, no alcohol. So again, you have a religion where you're, and then also no translations. So Christianity is a very interesting element of this where Christians use translations and Christians have dietary flexibility. That's a real advantage in terms of going to other cultures because food and language are two of the foundations of cultures. Now, the advantage that let's say, is that Islam and Judaism have is whenever there is loosening, there is always something to be gained by tightening. So, and you see that again in our culture, I don't eat sugar, oh, well, that's a tightening. And that capacity for abstinence and restraint of appetite throughout religions is often a positive if it's fitting into this other larger moral hierarchy. So that's why we see all of these different little fads in our own culture about eating and not eating, this and that, status goes up, status goes down. Right now in a very libertine globalist culture, it's interesting looking at the whole group of people that I've been working with online, people who have lived out in the world, ate anything, drank anything, had sex in any way, now are attracted to tightening religions. And you can understand that if you grew up in a home with a lot of chaos and very little structure. People who grow up in a home with, they feel like there's too much structure, guess where they go? Loosening. And so you see this back and forth and it happens individually, it happens culturally. Cultures that are like, you better believe that once the Islamic regime in Iran falls, there's gonna be a loosening. People are gonna say, I'm done with the hijab, I wanna be able to drink alcohol, let's enjoy the bacon. But in a very libertine culture where there's a lot of chaos where anything went and there wasn't a lot of structure, guess what people want? I want a religion with structure and rules. And now maybe I don't really see a problem eating bacon, but not eating bacon is a way that I can be a Muslim. I can bring a degree of control in my life and feel good about my control and have a sense of self-esteem over my ability to restrain my appetites. So you have a very psychological, sociological dynamic going on between all of these religions. And what's sort of nice about this passage is it speaks to that and it speaks to that by not saying all prohibitions are bad. Well, you just made a prohibition against prohibition. You see, you can't work these things. And it's not saying anything goes. No, because that doesn't work real well either. What you need to do is figure out what is helpful. And Paul, in fact, in other places, in Corinthians talks about this. What builds up? Well, that's a difficult thing. So now we're in a place in Christianity where there's a lot of popular Christian movement about spiritual practices. What do they mean by that? Giving up something during Lent, practicing the liturgical calendar. And again, I'm not going to pull a Paul move in Galatians. I don't think that's necessarily a bad thing for a lot of Christians who have lived in probably a context that's been a little over loose. But you can take these things and, well, our church fasts during Advent. Oh, congratulations. I'm very happy for you. That becomes their worship. Exactly. That then becomes this leg up over someone else. And maybe you don't need Jesus so much if you have your Advent practices. So, I don't know. This is an enduring issue in Christianity. And there it is in this passage. And I think it's a good passage. I think it's helpful to us. And I think, but the life of the church and the life of the community of the church is always, and we're having this discussion about sexuality. I think every culture is probably always having a discussion about sexuality. So anyway, there it is. We'll see what happens. So no Sunday school class for the next two weeks during the holiday. We'll be fasting during Christmas. But then in the, I think it's the ninth in January, I've already got it on the meetup.com, we'll start doing estuary during this hour. And if you're curious about estuary, please come. It doesn't mean it's not for the church people. It's actually for the church people and for the non-church people. And I think once you get a sense of the group and how this thing works, I think you'll enjoy it. Nine o'clock. Nine o'clock. Because that way, like, Kimo would like to participate. And he could participate from nine to 10 and then duck out a little early for practice. But yeah, nine thirty, ideally about an hour and a half is good because you usually spend the first 15, 20 minutes getting to know each other, getting settled on the topic and then the conversation goes. So usually I run it for two hours. You can do it an hour and a half. An hour's a little tight. So gonna start at nine o'clock and we'll see what happens. But I'll miss this. I love this. I really do. This is a highlight of the week for me because it's a lot of fun. Yeah. Let's pray. Lord, you are good and your mercy endures forever. And we human beings are complex and we have appetites and those appetites are good. They come from you and appetites that are satisfied in good ways are blessings to us. But Lord, it's hard for us to get things right. We overdo and we underdo and sometimes if we hold back, we use that as self-righteous clubs to bludgeon others. Help us Lord to figure out how to live according to your will, how to bless each other and to live out the peace and wholeness that you desire for us. We thank you Lord for this Sunday School class that's been a fixture for many years now. It's been a blessing to me. It's been a blessing to others and we pray Lord that as we try doing the estuary, weekly estuary at nine o'clock, we pray Lord that you bless it and that you bless us with new friends and that we can continue to just grow in community and grow in relationship with others who are at least not a part of us on Sunday morning. And Lord, may your will be done and your kingdom come. So hear our prayer in the name of Jesus, amen.