https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xnGOpswvyEw

 running. You care about the savings throws real quick. Yes, absolutely. Okay. Dare we do this without the savings throws, savings throws versus mind control and misinformation, you can pick survival, social wisdom or heart and they are as follows. 17 for survival. Two for the socialists. Not one for the sociologists. And five on the heart. So only the survivalists are going to make it unless they have a hat. Hi, everybody. I'm Grimgraves. And I'm here with Paul Vanderklay, who has loaned me his agency enough to encourage me to YouTube. And now here we are. I'd also like to try to try something if you're if you're okay with it, because we might be this could be a gathering. And the only way for us to really know is if we try to do it in Jesus's name and see if he shows up. Okay. So I'm pretty sure he's already here. So let me get the first thing out of the way. What happened to Noah's kid who pointed them out in for being naked? It was cursed. Curred. Okay, that explains a lot. All right. Let's, let's get into recently you did the Peterson demands too much of hope. Or the church doesn't demand enough. Yeah, I was like, yeah, they basically just want you to be Ned Flanders. And you're like, um, no, in the comments. So could you expand on that a little bit? Or where the disagreement we have with that is? This morning, I just talked with Parker said a key he has spoken with him before. He's the wrestler with a big mustache has his own podcast. And he said exactly what you just said, that even though he's he's a he's a big guy, he's a wrestler, he's into all kinds of martial arts and things, you know, he's a He's one of those guys. But he says, yeah, the evangelical churches wants to turn everybody into Ned Flanders. And the so when Peterson said that he wasn't wrong, but it deserves a lot more nuance, because the church is massive. And there are churches out there that demand a lot of people in their churches that demand nothing. And so it's part of the problem about talking about things that are too large for us to, to really be specific with or even to comprehend often. That's true. But there's no paintball for Jesus. And I, it doesn't seem to me that the church encourages its men to be civically responsible with as far as like, being involved in the city council to make sure laws don't pass, but hurt people. It's like all they really seem to want is attendance and worship on Sundays. And then, you know, like, I don't know, like you said, they they find little things for you to do once you start showing up. But no, I've seen churches that are much more demanding on people. And I think the Christian Reformed Church historically has been the, yeah, I see it, I see it often. But the difficulty has been that the church has lost a position from which to actually hold people accountable. When churches today, and I've had this plenty in my own life, when churches today want to really talk to someone about their behavior, they don't pick up the phone. They just they just ghost you. That's what happens in church. I had one incident once where I had to come in heavy on a guy and his wife, and they took it. But that's because they were both raised in the CRC. And, you know, I told him to get to a meeting, I told her to stay in a room, and they listened. And if it gets too rough, all I got to do is find a new church. Oh, that's exactly what happens. And so once churches became sort of voluntary organizations, and that really set into the culture, churches lost the capacity to hold people accountable to the things that the church cares about. Now, if there's a real sense of thick community, and there's any sense of you lose status for your poor behavior, but churches have taken a beating in the culture over that. In fact, churches are even sort of kind of keep a look over their shoulder about getting a lawsuit if they try to discipline someone because then it winds up in court that you've got a defamation lawsuit or something to that matter. So churches have been taken or have taken a real beating in the culture on this. And some are still in there swinging, but others have said, All right. But again, I have, you know, I remember one conversation in which one person was complaining to me about the church not, you know, holding someone someone in the church that this person wanted to be held accountable. And this person was just complaining to me, I says, Do you want church to be like that? Absolutely. I said, Okay, let's start with you. You want me you want to really know what I think about your behavior? out of the church faster than you could blank. She you know, this person wanted it for someone else, but not for themselves. Okay, let's talk about young men. Why Why would a 14 year old whose parents don't otherwise attend church? What does the church have to offer them? I had a third night she was probably 12 when she started coming here. She lived with her grandma. She was she had cut her grandma had custody of her. custody had been taken away from her parents. Her father who lived with her and her grandma and her uncle, her father and her uncle were both alcoholics. Her grandma was trying to do the best she can, but she was sort of crazy. And she and her little friend who was about eight years old started coming to church. And her eight year old friend sort of dropped off but that this young girl came to church all the way through her teenage years into high school, because she found in this church a group of adults that cared for her, treated her with respect, loved her and could be her family. wanted what's best for her. Yeah, and she knew it. And she was quite a remarkable young woman. And she's she hasn't been around for a while but she's and there are again there are ways she was a she was a bright student and we had we had people in church that were ready to basically pay her college, she could have gotten insane financial aid. And then her grandma says to her, says to her, nobody's gonna give you money to go to college. And it's like, the financial aid system will give you money to go to college. And then her grandmother died. So she was emancipated. So she had zero property could, you know, she would have gotten a full ride just about anywhere. And I still couldn't talk her into going to a four year college and the rest of her life, you know, and then, you know, so even then, it was tough to really get a good start. It's life is hard. You know that. But so and so then helping people. But no, she she started coming as a 12 year old girl. And, you know, she came almost every week to this church just walked up the street because and I know others who have similar stories. So it does it does happen. Okay, but All right. What does take up your cross and where's where does Jesus lead when you start following? Oh, part of the difficulty we have with all these questions is we want to ask them and answer them in the abstract. And none of us even though all of us have to deal with the abstract, none of us live in it. And so I've known people that have gotten to a point and they sat down with their Bible, and they said to Jesus, Okay, I'm yours. And their life fell apart. And then you've got stories like Michaela Petersen, who, you know, she was facing a mess of things. And someone said, Why don't you ask God, and everything sort of fit together. And so she starts on a path of discipleship. For some, if you look at a religious layer, sometimes people say, okay, and then they they get into the church and let's say, a pastor or an elder or someone in the church is going to lay out a discipleship program for them. And it goes great. I know people who have been in jail, and the preacher, usually in a small Pentecostal church or something, or preacher who's been in jail will come in and say, Alright, kid, I'm bailing you out, you're going to come and live with me. And that's going to change that kid's life. And I know stories when that happens, and it blows up the kid's life. But so what does following look like just going to church and asking for direction or going to your closet and praying and asking for I mean, there's he's not here to follow technically at the moment. No, but people follow all sorts of things anyway, even without a physical person. And even when you have physical people in your life that are giving you direction, that still doesn't get it. It's obviously, to a degree, a metaphor about trying to figure out what Jesus would look like somewhere approximating your situation and figuring out this is what Jesus teaches us. And I know full well that across human history, people have tried to follow in lots of different ways. And some of them really screwed up. You know, I know all that. But what else we got? That reminds me whatever happened to what would Jesus do? Yeah, yeah, they had those little bracelets and then all of a sudden, nothing. I think it was armed. You know, when arms he had the bracelet thing too. And of course, that didn't go so well. Oh, Lance Armstrong, Lance Armstrong, live strong. That's how they get that's how they beat that. With all the bracelets. Maybe someone figured out that they were cutting off circulations and hands were atrophying or something who knows? You want to do pornography or revelation next? It's your choice. Revelation. Okay. Why is it not a big deal to you? What do you mean? I mean, my vibe from from every time I've poked you about it is like, yeah, that was kind of that's kind of Constantine. That that happened in Constantine. It's not really applicable today is the vibe I catch is that I'm not guessing I'm misinterpreting that can you spin me or take on it with the church is sort of stuck between the preterists that said, well, it kind of preterist. Said, well, it kind of preterist sounds too much like pederast. So could you clarify that for me? Preterist. The preterist believe that when you read the book of Revelation, it's speaking about events that were more or less concurrent with the writer of the book, or within a few years, at least. And then there's the perennial. And so Peugeot is a perennial list meaning like the perennial flowers come around every year. The pattern, the book is about patterns. So is the book about singular events? Or is the book about patterns? Or is the book about the future? The church has always tried? Well, the church has always kind of held all three of those things together. And so you can sort of flip back and forth if you want to when you're dealing with the book, which is kind of a cheesy way of being a weenie. But there's really no other answer. Because if you say the book is only about the future, that meant that the book was meaningless to the people over the last 2000 years. If you say the book is only about the past, that ignores the fact that so many of these patterns seem to come around again. So the perennialism also sort of has a futurism built into it. A lot of people have, I've also lived long enough to remember, in the 1970s, when people mapped on to the book of Revelation, the Soviet Union, the state of Israel, and I watched people just running around playing that game. And then when 1980 came around, or 1984, and Armageddon didn't happen, I would have expected them to stand up and say, my bad, and they never do. So at that point, I realized these people are playing a game, I'm not going to play along. It's kind of a chump game. And then when you look at the history of the use of that book over church history, everyone has sort of understood that, that Martin Luther was expecting Christ's return to come quickly. I remember in the 1980s, my mother in law saying, I, I, Jesus has got to come before the year 2000. So all right, but now, now we're looking at you can't buy or sell unless you take something. And the wars and rumors of wars were pretty close to touch, not the oil and the wheat. Yeah, why aren't there more Christians flipping right now about it? And what I like, I am not a professing Christian. And yet I'm flipping out about it. And a lot of other people are flipping out about it. But everybody else is like, Oh, that's okay, go ahead and take it. Well, I listened to the I can never remember that dude's name on Rogan a few times ago. And he was talking about this digital currency that the governments are going to have. And, you know, you go into the store and you want to buy your alcohol or your sakes. And it's like, No, you can't buy any more alcohol or sakes with your card this week, because, you know, yeah, so that's very much on the forehead number 666. You can go all there with that. But there's, you know, this was said about social security, the social security numbers, the number of the beast. People played that up. And so Christians, again, Christians aren't dumb. They've gotten spanked for a bunch of these things before. And it's kind of like, gonna kind of measure my words this time. And, you know, COVID, a lot of people sort of freaked out about COVID and COVID passports. And, oh, yeah, are they putting together the machinery? Quite possibly. But then again, maybe not to you know, what's on the front of your credit card, there's a number. Okay, but this is the first time Americans have been denied privileges if they don't take something as far as I can remember. Have you been in jail? No. I've always been the good boy. A lot of Americans have been denied a lot of things for a lot of reasons over the years. So now granted the possibilities now given the technology we have and the fact that that curve is increasing, it's scary. They demonstrated it with Trudeau's truckers. Yeah, it's it's plenty scary. But you know, you can only you can only live so long screaming your head off and people will stop listening because they say you always scream. So you're waiting. You're waiting for it to start screaming yet. And I'm also personality wise. So I'm watching Zelinsky and, and this Ukraine thing. And on one hand, like I said, in my video, it's really easy to boy, that's inspirational, you know, sign me up, I'm gonna go, I'm gonna go fight the Russians. You know, I feel that in my heart. Another part of me has lived long enough. And it's like, where's this gonna go? Zelinsky sort of setting up total war. Once once Ukrainians start taking pot shots at Russians in civilian clothing, or the Russians going to start mowing down civilians? Is this going to be a good idea 10 years from now? These are hard questions. And but the thing is, you see, you also see enough popular enthusiasm. And I've seen enough war start to know that when the war starts, you just look at the pattern. When the war starts, everybody signing up. Because while we're going to stop that, we're going to stop the communists in Vietnam, send me Okay, Vietnam didn't go so well. Was that what was that going on? So the world is real complicated. And so, you know, I I'm a person that tends to sit back and I have my feels. But I also watch myself because I've gone down some roads that later it's like, wish I hadn't gone down that road. Would you would you do us the kindness of telling us the story of the war? Oh, I don't know. I voted for Ralph Nader. I'll give you an idea just how you know, Al Gore was too, too conservative. Remember Ross Perot, though? I didn't vote for Ross. I didn't vote for Ross. And I finished that was that was about the time I became like politically aware at all. So in that way, I'm sort of classic IDW. I mean, I have my the magnet on my dishwasher, you know, you have kind of the dirty clean magnet on your dishwasher. I've got Bernie and Hillary. I mean, that's how that's how leftist I've been. So and, and I think back and I think huh. And I think about I love your you know, part of the reason I think about you is because you're I love your you know, part of the reason I, you know, really respect a lot of what you've done is because you're you're very clever with language. And, you know, your your conversation with Savillo I thought was really excellent. And yeah, I've been programmed and sometimes I look back on the way I've been programmed and I'm a little I'm a little suspicious of being programmed again, but I also know that I'm always programmed. So that there was let's just go into that then. Why is it okay for you to watch Netflix when they do shows like euphoria? I thought Netflix was on HBO Max. You mean euphoria it might be. It might be I don't watch TV anymore. I actually I actually don't watch any Netflix hardly at all. Unless someone points something to me that about the only television I watch right now is survivor with my wife. With my wife, which has been interesting. And then once a week, we'll watch the bachelor or bachelorette with my daughter. And that's kind of a hoot because we bring my son and my son's girlfriend and we kind of have a good time talking about that. These poor people and what they're how these both both of those shows are all network torture of individuals for our amusement. It's Hunger Games on TV. And that's about and then if someone says, Oh, you got to watch this. So I watched that that vampire show on Netflix, the mass when you did this. Yeah, so I don't really watch that much TV. I just don't have time for it. Well, yeah, there's plenty of plenty of other sets sets in our hands. Now we don't need the altar in our house as much anymore. Okay, that's that's Papa Peterson talk then. Why you do understand that he's the metropolitan of the Church of not following stupid rules. I love how you made him the metropolitan. He made himself the metropolitan, sir. I can show you the video footage. He got himself ordained as that so he could marry his student friend or whatever. He can perform the ceremony. And everybody's like, when's Peterson gonna go to church? He started his own already. Yeah, yeah, it's true. It's true. It's like naked in the tent stuff. And I'm cursed for pointing it out to people. Rephrase your question. I'm not exactly sure what you're getting that. Like everybody's like, Oh, is Peterson gonna go to church? Ooh, but he's already started his own. Yeah, yeah. He but people. Now you're not married. But marriage, it's a big deal when it comes to church. And if his wife starts going to mass, she's gonna start to lean on him. That's that's, if he's if he starts going to church, that's probably how it'll start. But she split between him and his wife. And he's like, Oh, I'm gonna go to church. And he's like, Oh, I'm gonna go to church. And he's like, Oh, I'm gonna go to church. And he's but she split between the the rosary and, and Sam Harris is meditation app. So it's an in people's people's religious lives are eclectic, and usually not terribly rational. People are not rational, hardly at all. It's very unusual to find a rational person. It's dangerous when you do because they're cold and calculating psychopaths that run the world. Why do you think psychopaths and sociopaths do not run the world? And where's your evidence of such? Oh, I don't think if you look at well, who's running the world is is Putin a psychopath? I know the puppet, you you're not going to know the names of the people running the world. Paul, come on. There's a lot of truth to that. But there but there see, and this is where this is where we sort of get the one level up conversation because what's running these oligarchs, people, even at lower levels, you know, even as a pastor, you get into a church and you very quickly realize that you're sort of hemmed in by a whole bunch of things as a pastor of a church. Almost any position of responsibility, you're being impinged upon by all sorts of forces. And there's usually no one individual that's a puppet master running the thing. It's much more like a Bilderberg group or or a World Economic Forum. There's stuff running them and they're not and it's one level up. It's spiritual. It's not because because they because they hold each other into it. Okay, how about we go desecration of the womb? Are you in? You want to talk about that a little bit? Go for it, Chris? Am I? What's your take on it? I think that's what's happened. That is what's happened. I just had a friend of mine tell me that the pill has spoiled womanhood. Motherhood, perhaps. Well, womanhood, because even those who have not born that the the breaking in the rhythm of family and childbearing means that there's there's the population of women are different. And that's going to impact the next level up in terms of how all women see each other. Can you unpack that a little? So so this person was talking about a woman that he knew that that that was basically predatory of men. And you can afford to do that. If you have your contraception under control. And the so so morality is always tied to ambitions and dreams and glowing narratives that are that are sort of above us. And so the ideal woman, and even the values that sort of point to that get shaped by by experiences of women. Now you can either imagine that coming from the bottom up, or coming from the top down, probably some both and. And so what if you have fewer and fewer women having fewer and fewer children, that's going to change how society defines what a woman is. And the same true for men. So that's, that's working on people. So it's not just that like the hormone, the pill is you lying to your body that you're already pregnant. And those hormones shaping. There are so many factors in this. So that's that's surely we, you know, when Papa Peterson talked about the fact that we've only had the pill for 4050 years, we have no idea what this is doing to us. And he's right. We don't. And that we're getting we're getting a clue real fast. Yeah, we're getting clues. But there are many, many layers to this. One, you know, one person who works in the area of psychology told me that, you know, they did a study of women who could now humans to the best of our knowledge don't have pheromones, but we still do have smell. And so they had, they had a bunch of male garments from actual men, and they had women smell the garments and basically rank order them. And then they would have them rank order them five by photographs with looks and there was a fair amount of correlation between them. And then they had women who were on the pill, do the experiment, and they couldn't rank order them by smell. So we don't know. Now, the pill today has less hormones in it than it used to. I mean, they keep tinkering with it. And so the pill today isn't the same as the pill 50 years ago. And so, you know, it's this massive experiment that we're running. And we don't know where it's all going. And the fact that married women taking the pill and single women taking the pill, those that's a significant variable between them and how many years they took the pill and, you know, and we're just we're just making stuff up as we go along and paying the price. But that's the human story. Speaking of the human story, I personally think that the meaning crisis is a lack of a species level telos right now. Yes, it's good. It's a good way to think about it. And I don't understand other than like, gives lane and her terramar. We're not exploring the oceans or anything. Space is completely fake. We can't get past the Van Allen belt. I don't know why they pretend we can. But there's the paths I see for humanity that are viable are like Amish or crawl into the internet and disappear forever. Yeah. And, and less Christ comes back. Where this is like nowhere that nowhere for a person to try to push. Well, so and what you just said, fair enough, but take it back a thousand years. Most of our pushing conceptualization was basically what our tribe would inherit other lands or I mean, what games were we playing then? So humanity has a pretty remarkable way of narrativizing its world and and seeking things We're a pretty restless group of creatures. So I think I think you're right in that the that's what for Vicky says, I mean, it's the breakdown of the great religions that causes this because those religions provided a narrative telos that that pointed us towards if the religion had anything worthwhile to it towards decent things. And but that's we don't seem to be we don't a lot of people are quitting the game when a million suicides a year, something like that, but out of 8 billion people, I'll tell you if if I wasn't kind of scared, like reincarnation was true, and you get worse. If you take the easy out, I don't have much reason to be here. Hmm. But now, okay, so let's look at proximate proximal issues. So I, I do have children, I do have a family. Now, none of my children have as of yet reproduced, I hope they do. So one of the things that I have seen, and I've seen a decent number of people who have left their faith is, I can appreciate the fact that people have left their faith, because they just didn't simply find themselves believing anymore. But I also haven't seen how a lot of people throwing away their faith has helped them. I've seen them to be more anxious, less focused, more prone to seeking out distraction and disillusion. And so I continue to be a promoter of the Christian faith for the betterment of people, because I think it helps people live better, happier, more purposeful lives. That's that's the argument for the 14 year old kid, the young man coming into manhood, like the competition between the faith and the rest, and secularity is FOMO. Like, why should I be going to church and living clean when I could be out banging all these ladies programmed by set? Because that sounds like a lot of fun. And I'm going to miss out if I go to church. And nobody seems to care if they crawl into video games, and the population one VR. I wouldn't say nobody seems to care. Nobody's a pretty big group. Well, they don't advertise it. And then the marketing for the people who care about what happens to our children seems to seem to real bad. Yeah. And but there certainly are people who care. But but even for even for I don't know how old you are, but even for your age, I and again, belief is involuntary, I fully appreciate that. But one can self program. It's a little trickier in terms of a meaning crisis, too, because if you know yourself programming, you know, am I really you know, but I there's a reason church is full of old people. And it's not because past not only because past generations had more faith, I regularly baptize and bring in senior citizens who have baptized two people over 70 in my tiny little church. And these were people who grew up in communities where they surely could have been baptized as teenagers. And so people do come to faith late in life. And it works for them. Well, churches are wonderful for old people. But are they wonderful for young people? Can be. It's trickier. I so you know, I was before any of this YouTube stuff, I was quite involved with church planting here in Sacramento and recruiting young pastors to plant churches and they've they've had a far tougher time because you know, marriage is breaking up. People having fairs. I mean, it's relatively easy to pastor people from 60 and beyond because they've sort of they've had their two or three marriages, they've done their drugs, they've, they've sorted out alcohol and they haven't sorted it out by now, they're probably not going to be there at 60 or 70. So older people are a lovely group of people to pastor, even though you know, you'll have to bury them. And younger people are tougher, but life is a challenge and life is hard. And again, most of the difficulty that I have with younger groups is that they, you know, when they come to me and say, here are the challenges, and I say, the bitter pill is that these challenges probably need to be met with greater challenges still, because those challenges are saying no to yourself. A lot of people check out, and they'll might check out for a decade or two. And after the damage is done to their children, to their lives, when they're 50 or 60, they come back and they're ready to listen. Missionary church planning skills. What are those? What does what is somebody trying to plant a church need to know what the missionaries need to know? They need missionaries need to be on a mission, they need to be driven, they need to they need to believe in what they're doing. And they need to, they need to be extroverts. And they need to talk with a lot of people so they can have a sense of what's going on in the group of people that they're trying to unfold. And so it's a lot of conversations. Is your YouTube channel missionary work? Yes. What makes it missionary? I'm programming people for Jesus. For Jesus, that's a paintball, but because it's a little it's a little virtual. A lot of virtual. But it's like, this is this is a place that you're going to Yeah, glad you see that. Yeah, and the so when, for example, a buddy of mine who planted a church not too far from here, it was pretty standard protocol with church planting that he would just see how many conversations he could have with random strangers. And he'd have like four questions, he'd be like, if you sit down with me here in Starbucks and answer these four questions, I'll buy you your coffee. It's like, hey, seven bucks, you know, times are tough. Bring it on. And the four questions were not intrusive or invasive, you know, they didn't have to, you know, reveal how much money they made, or what porn they're looking at or anything like that. They're just four basically meaning of life questions. And then that would engage them in a meaningful conversation, the people usually enjoyed it. And of the many people they talked to, a few of people would say, you know, when you start doing something, let me know. Now, there's real issues with the kind of programming that church has done, in that it's, it's tended to be passive. Here's a here's a fun little book, why nobody learns much of anything in church and how to fix it. And by Tom and Joni Schultz, I mean, churches, churches study the heck out of themselves, people don't recognize that. But this kind of these kind of books are always being put out. And even though, on one hand, churches keep sort of the main thing going, they're always experimenting. And that's actually a super smart way to go about things. Because you have to sort of, you've got a lot of people on the ride for the main thing, but you've always had need experimenting on the fringes. And so basically, what's happened with a lot of my Randall's conversation is I'm doing exactly like a church planter. Well, it's kind of like, hey, would you like a sample of genuine human connection? Because otherwise, you're probably not going to find it out there. You know, I've been having been going back and forth with someone who's written me and this person. I don't know this person at all. They don't live in the US. This person describes themselves as autistic. And just by the virtue of the messages this person has been sending me, that person has some real challenges in life and the degree to which I can actually help this person via, you know, messaging on the internet, almost nothing. And, but then again, ideal, I'm, I'm neck deep with people all around me that there's fairly little I can do for them. So I'm used to, I'm used to living with a lot of failure. My whole life has been a lot of failure. I mean, people sometimes will be, well, if you if you did better, you'd have a bigger church like maybe probably but I'm not failure doesn't bother me. Maybe that's a problem. I don't know. But I also know that our evaluations of success and failure are not so easily. Or not so easily. The significant the narrative significance isn't immediately real. Right isn't immediately obvious. So, you know, I, you know, I, I completely understand when people come to me and say, you know, I tried Jesus and it didn't work. Yeah, well, you know, what did you take it for? Yeah, an aspirin. I get that. But I also I also live and work in a place where I see it does work. And that's, you know, when you ask me what it means to follow Jesus, I guess the best answer I could say is, that's what I'm trying to do. What does it look like? Well, in terms of, you know, a Dutch Calvinist in his late 50s, it looks like me. What is the most miraculous thing you've witnessed personally? If you can share it. Boy, that's a hard one. Because, you know, I have friends and I know people who have gifts of healing, of insight. I don't really witness them personally. But like you saw the lady that wasn't walking and then you saw her walking or something. Yeah, no, I haven't had well, see the difficulty with miracles is time frame too. Because when you in a lot of ways, the really big miracles are someone, someone who you look at, and know, boy, if it's really amazing that they ducked that kind of life over there, and we're able to live this kind of life. And we don't look at that as a miracle, because there's not this little interchange. So I, I know, I have a friend who he was a pastor, actually, and he had terrible back issues. He had had surgeries. And I mean, he had he had gotten to the point that he had to preach sitting down, he could only preach half of the year. Missionary came back from Africa, and, and, and basically said, you know, can I pray for you? Yeah, you can pray for me. And and then after some time of prayer said, you know, you have you have some unforgiveness in your heart about this relationship over there. The pastor didn't want to hear that because most of the time we refuse to forgive someone. Because we don't want to. And there's reasons we don't want to. And and this pastor, to his credit, confessed, agreed. And that guy's back problems went away. And I know this, I know the guy is actually no longer alive. But I have another friend who he's got a church of mostly young people and people come from usually nine Christian places, and they've got all kinds of messes in their life, all kinds of stuff in the past, and he'll pray for people and God will God will show him. God will show him scenes from their past, that he has absolutely no way of knowing and he will tell them, this is what God showed me. And, and God has done some amazing healing with people in his church through that. And yet this individual has a has a child with a significant disability that this person has prayed for his whole life, that God doesn't heal. This, these are the kinds of things I see. And we tend to think about miracles, like we think about a pill. And it's never that way. And so, you know, I, I'm not skeptical about God's ability to do things that don't fit into sort of our scientific framework. I'm not I'm not skeptical about that at all. The hard things are always the things with God. Like in my friend's life, you you, you use this, you use this man to heal all these random strangers of horrible things in their past, but you won't heal their child. Why does God say no? Why does God say no? And that that's a find it in Second Corinthians 12. That doesn't go away. So we're always looking see part of the difficulty is we're always looking for the trick, the angle, the fix the cure, the the thing that will put it in our control, that we're always looking for dominion that I can somehow, I can I can talk people into faith, I can fix this thing, I can end this war, I can, and God does not give us that dominion over the earth. He doesn't even give us that dominion over ourselves. That that's, that's my favorite line from the Gospel of Thomas is, is that bit about if the man eats the lion, then the lion becomes a man and blessed is the, you know, that one. I don't know. I never read the Gospel of Thomas. That's not in my Bible. You know, he was the doubter. So it's a that's very resonant. Very, very fiction. Yeah, fan fiction is fine. But it's fan fiction. But it's like, it's like the beast inside of us. If we can, if we consume the beast, then when what's up with the fasting? Why would Pagio say it damages somebody's soul, but like, totally endorse other things? I don't I didn't I didn't hear him say it. So sir, sir. I can't watch everything. I pointed you to that one and you saw it afterwards. Well, then I forgot that. Okay, okay. Let me take it some place else. What's that grim gris talks about the shadow matriarchy? What is that? What's he even talking about? Women have power. And there's something about feminine power that prefers to move unseen. It's a renek power, more than a gentic power. It's in the shadow, you can't see it. But it's a hierarchy and its power. Okay. And that's that's, you know, it's, it was interesting, because Pagio shows that a couple of interesting conversations about the feminine. And I think Pagio is right when he says this is something that you can't talk about the feminine power. And I think Pagio is right when he says this is something that you can't talk about everything. Because there are things that are best left unsaid, and things that you just can't, that you just can't bring it into reality with words. And there's something about certain kinds of feminine power that is that way. But it's, you know, and this is where the evangelical world has been in knots over women, women's leadership in church. And it's like, well, women have been leading church communities for a very long time. And they have tremendous power. It doesn't. And like you said, just looking at everybody who's sitting in the chairs with the with the titles and the offices and the names never tells you anything about who and what's guiding the organization or the future. So like irritate the wrong life and see what happens, right? Hey, I've told the story before where, you know, pastor would be in the cat. This is a church only men and counsel and some some some elder very sanctimoniously says, Well, I'll have to pray about this. The pastor slides up his cell phone and says, Call your wife right now. Let's get this vote done. Pastor new pray. It's fair enough. Mama ain't happy. Ain't no one happy, right? Oh, let's see. I gotta I gotta come up with something big to end this on. It's not easy. What is living water? Well, sometimes in the Gospel of john, it's it's the Spirit of God. But what is the Spirit of God? And what is spirit? So that's how it's used in the Gospel of john. But anybody who has a spirit of God, you know, without running water or refrigeration or bottled water or thermoses or anything like that, if you have a cistern, which has basically been accumulating water, and that animals can fall in and, you know, or if you have a nice babbling brook, it's no contest, which one you want to drink from. Did you? Did you watch that short thing I sent you the in the Twitter, the bread one that I put out recently? Let's say is you you were I don't know if it was your I think it was your rough draft for the sermon. Uh huh. And then like something happened outside. When I was doing my rough draft. I don't see the only thing I see in the DM is Oh, our daily bread. Yeah, that's one. I didn't watch it to the end. That to me, like that really spoke to me is because you were you were talking about I don't know what is it? What's I don't know the line of the bread, as well as the water one. What was the what's the line you were going over for that one? Like, I know it's please, sir, always give us this bread. Oh, yeah, that's what the crowd wanted. But it was I am the bread of life. The bread of life. That's what it's called. See, it to me, you that happened in that in that video you recorded. Like, your face got really irritated that you got a loaf of it. But like that you were able to like go help an actual human being in their actual real life. That, to me, it just struck me as the bread of life. I'm trying to figure out who knocked and why at that moment, somebody was yelling outside. I don't know if anybody knocked or not. You could hear him on the mic. Well, it could have been that they sometimes parties develop outside my door while I'm working. And a party developed last night. And I posted pictures of Twitter. Oh, what kind of party was cereal involved in an upside down potting soil? Yeah, I saw that. Maybe maybe Billy will clean it all up before he he's I've got him trained now to pick up his bed and put it away when he leaves. So I don't have to stumble on it when I go home from work. But no, it's you know, and my relationship with the bread of life or am I am I off base on that? What? Like, what? What I do with people? Yeah, is that the bread of life? Sometimes, sometimes not. You know, it's so hard. I mean, this is part of technology has ruined us not just the desecration of the womb. Technology has ruined us in some ways, it's it's changed our expectation that we think that there is a simple solution to anything as complex as a human being. It is true that I mean, you can have maybe a surgery, or a splint or something to fix something in a human being. But most of our problems are so much deeper. And I like the one of my guys, I took to the mental hospital three weeks ago. Now he's been in a while. He had been in two and a half weeks before that was only at a week and he was already messed up again. And so I took him back. And, you know, I've I've I watched my father, you see, this is the thing. This isn't just one lifetime for me. I watched my father do this. And I watched my father wrestle with people and their demons for decades. And not all the demons were lifted. And I know that when I deal with people, and especially the homeless people I deal with, many of them, you know, and I've been doing this for 25 years now, a lot of the people that I knew well, 20 years ago are dead. And I never got to do the funeral. They're probably buried in some potter's field somewhere around here. They're not they're cremated for sure, because the state is going to do whatever is cheapest and most expedient. And so who knows what we're done with the ashes or, you know, I think about Larry, Larry, Larry used to sleep under a, under a pomegranate bush out there in the backyard. And he he was a painter, he's always wearing painter clothing, because some guy who owned apartments would pay him cash to whenever you know, you'd have to repaint the apartment after somebody left. And so Larry would go in and pay cash. And if the weather got real bad, he'd get a cheap hotel room for days or weeks and the weather was bad. But most of the time most of his income he wanted to dedicate to beer. And I remember one day he sat down in my office, put a can of beer on my table and said, my life is in that can, you know, and he was at that point, he was in his probably early 60s. And he had been living that way for decades. And you know, he'd sleep over here for a while, and he'd sleep in the bushes in the church across the street, then he got hit by a car. And he's living in the bushes with a walker because he broke his hip. So you see him walking around, okay, so now he can't paint those rooms anymore unless his hip heals. But how well is that hip going to heal mostly on a diet of beer? He had a family that lived not too far from here. A lot of the homeless people have family that live fairly close. So you know, I love to help the man. You get a win every now and then? Well, you know, the little girl I told you about. Well, I mean, more like the old homeless that you deal with all the time. Any of those ever pull out? Yeah, there was another Larry, who used to sleep with Linda under the eaves over here and he was doing, they were both doing a lot of drugs. He pulled out, he, he was a vet. So he was able to get some, you know, medical attention from the vet. And, and he got his life together and he got back into a place and he got a car. And he would stop by every now and then and we'd have a nice chat and he mostly had his life together. And then he died. I don't remember what he died of. But you know, you put miles on your life real fast. Living that lifestyle. I mean, you'll get some kind of hepatitis at some point, you might get AIDS. And but he, he pulled out and Linda's still on the street every now and then she'll knock on my door for bus fare, something like that. And so I've known her. I've known her 22 years now she's her kids are all grown. Her mother was raising her kids at that time. She had a couple of nice daughters. So they're adults now. But that was the same way with my father. Some pull out and have something, you know, I knew another guy who he had lived a rough life and he had he had gone into a coma. And God came to him in the coma and basically said, it's time to clean up your act. So he came out of the coma and shows up at my church one day, throws himself headlong into every Bible study, every service, older African American always came, you know, would come dressed for church had a relationship with two or three women that he had to kind of sort out and, you know, really enjoyed him for about a year. And then he had another major stroke. And, and that finally, that finally put him under. So but that was that was the that was the story of my father's ministry to people will people will live certain ways and then maybe towards the end of their life, they, they kind of, they kind of realize their face in the end, they pull their shit together, they clean up their rooms, and they and they'll have a season of joy. But they'll wrestle with you know, and when this guy's when this guy died, you know, there's a lot of conflict between the various women who had had various children with and then other ones showed up at the funeral and gosh, was what a mess. But, you know, he had he had a good year at the end when he could come to terms with a lot of the things that he had done in his life and straighten himself out and get to do some things for his kids and leave them a little bit of wisdom and go out, go out with some dignity. So yeah, there are wins. But they I can't take credit for them. No, but I was hoping you got to see some. Oh, yeah. Another guy. He was a he was a he was a rough man. And he had grown up on the streets and see was 13 involved with gangs, all of his brothers were incarcerated long term. He's really smart. Couldn't read very well, but very smart managed to stay out of it got into the trades, but had up and down relationships with with different women and had some kids. But, you know, I baptized him and his kids, and eventually went on to, to a church that much more majored with people who had done a lot of gang time and done some prison time. And he's, he's had a rough life, but he's, you know, he's, he's, he's trying hard to be a disciple. And he, you know, there's a lot of old habits you get. And you got to break them, usually relational habits. But he's he's working it. I mean, like, that we get smacked on our ass when we come into this world. And, you know, it never stops. It doesn't stop. That's life. So and a lot of us who are middle class, educated, wealthy, affluent, comfortable, we can afford a degree of denial about that. But usually that stuff is then under the covers. Because again, as a pastor, you begin to know that, oh, yeah, wait a minute, you how many times were you married? I had one woman, she was a dear saint came into the church. We all loved her. I did her funeral, looked at that looked at the looked at the obituary written by her daughter and her daughter looks at me and says, Yeah, she didn't want you to know just how many times she had been married. There's accomplished woman, accomplished woman, great, say, but life, you know, life is hard. People mess up. And and, you know, what the church can be is a place where people can honestly be real, and maybe help each other along and have Jesus help get them through here. That's what the church can be. Well, Paul, I want to thank you for your time and attention. And I want to wish the best to your congregation, your shadow congregation, and your missionary work. Thank you. I'm stopping recording. All right.