https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=o6cgNDY-5R8

 uh give me gentleness but then but I missed I missed a bunch. I just went to the office and talked to the wife and she just went to work. So, um the freedom when the wife isn't around, you can just get online and talk to all your online friends. Yeah, except they have this. Oh, look at him. I want your attention. I want your attention. You can't be given attention because you're a service dog. You're to receive no love so that you can be a service dog. People out there. Puppy. I expected an automatic just add on of like a bunch of views, a bunch of viewers. There's 25 now. Puppies and PBK and it's just like boom, blow up. There's a there's a great video out there with basically a pit of puppies. That's hilarious. That would that would be great. People love Count Reeves. There you go. Alright, well, Paul, what do you think about Christianity in America? Orthodoxy in America? What is America? Well, you know, um yeah, what is America? That's that's a that's a lot of things you're not allowed to do. Alright, see, this is why I don't do videos at home with the puppy because he jumps on you constantly wrestling the puppy but now got the puppy's food that's going to distract her and I can have a few minutes of thanks for that. She's so excited. That's time of day. So, this Christian, great comment. I love it. You had me nodding. Yes, I quote, Christianity has never taken deep root but then that scales both ways. I like it. So, you know, it's the funny thing about human beings and here's the, I mean, you asked the question about larping and I often answer the question with respect to why don't I become Orthodox? Um you know, I'm Dutch Calvinist. Now, I'm Dutch Calvinist. Four generations. What were we five or six generations ago? Were we Jews? Um I go back and and which is my father's tree. I've got my mother's tree and you know, one of the things so I was just with the with this Korean classes and you know, I'm always thinking about all the things I'm thinking about and so we start devotions and there's um you know, we're singing this one praise and worship song in Korean and we sing two hymns that are in the hymn and and then they have a report from Synod and the delegate basically goes off on the whole same sex marriage thing and you know, we have to and so we we as human beings are enormously um colonizable. I mean, that's one of our, I mean, I'm I'm spending all this time trying to train this dumb dog. It's a very smart dog but we can train dogs to an amazing degree but we as human beings are totally um renewable by the spirit and if there's anything that we should learn from the growth of the church in the Roman Empire is that God's spirit can just like Jesus says God can raise children out of it. Children of Abraham out of the stones. Yeah. So, um I think that that is true that orthodoxy in America, especially for a while with converts will be a LARP. The real question is going to be you know, in some ways, it's okay. Orthodox in America. Talk to me after you have three or four generations of of that development because you know, one of the right away, the early church had the church in Laodicea and the orthodox sort of keep that tradition alive because you sort of have churches within within areas and that's sort of within nations and so that each church within a nation has its own spirit in a sense. So, you know, uh Richard Roland said something about orthodoxy in America which was very ambitious but at the same time, fairly true in terms of, you know, talk to me in 200 years. Um but of course, we'll have to see. So, I don't II hold I hold nothing against orthodox converts in America and imagining that as sort of a LARP because that's all you got. That's all you can do and um so I but at the same time, I think it's helpful to recognize that it is it is a short time thing for America for any Europeans. It's a short time thing. Right. So, I don't know. I had so many comments sharing human beings don't know dogs do. I mean, kind of this. So, part of that gets out what I was trying to talk about with Barfield is that I think a lot of, for example, I think a lot of cradle orthodox and I, I mean, I've had conversations with orthodox people about this and I think they largely agree with me but they also degree in which cradle orthodox people who've just been thoroughly ensconced in that tradition have grown up with it have just have loved it and embraced it. They don't they're in I was talking about this earlier in like an original participation. They don't they don't know anything else in a in a way they can't have the fullness of the Tim shell he mayest of choosing it because they haven't fallen away from it. So, this this dance that we're doing between the individual and the person and like freedom and what is freedom like these are questions as old as time but I think we're working that out right now and like that's where this is happening I think is in the West a little bit and so I don't so in that sense like I would say dogs know in like an original original participatory kind of a way but they don't know in the kind of way that I'm trying to figure it out. Yeah. I mean it's a different thing. A lot of people you know freak out about deconstruction and deconversion. Now I'm not going to say that that for some people isn't a path to hell. Yeah. But for many people it is a process from original participation towards final participation. Yeah. Because they it is it is a process of making it their own. Now those who those who can let's say return back to their native church let's call it have certainly have an advantage. You know I know from how many conversations with people around the world that you know when they say to me things like I just can't get my mind around the resurrection. Yeah I get that. And I in some ways don't have that problem because I never I can't remember a time in which the resurrection wasn't a part of my worldview. So but yet there is a there is a view of the resurrection and you see this with converts. Converts have a particular zeal a particular knowledge that cradle Christians don't. And so there's right there's trade offs on both sides. And I think this is where God calls us and we're you know we're finally his and he you know hate to hate to quote Romans nine. But what does the pot have to say to the potter. Yes I really want to encourage you to watch that thing with Jordan Daniel would because he talks about it in a technical you've heard me say all my things about that. I watched your sermon by the way sermon or the Sunday school class the Sunday school class I guess. Yeah I should watch the sermon too. But yeah Nate said this so like even the resurrection this is what I would without going down the Calvinism track but the resurrection is one of those things that I think you can believe. You can believe in a saint like as as I would believe the creed and this what I was saying in the last live stream as a symbol of the faith it is this simultaneously emanating an emerging thing. So like what do I and it's fundamentally mystical because like what the creed is doing is being like not here not here and like leaving a little bit of a fuzzy fuzzy middle. And so because like you could just sit you could you could unpack the Nicene the Caledonian Nicene creed forever and you could write about it forever in the same way people do with the scriptures. And so it's not it's being careful not to him in those things because like even what the creed says about the resurrection you know he was you know crucified under Pontius Pilate sovereign was buried in the third day he rose again according to the scriptures. That's not a lot of the ways that people want to talk technically about the resurrection is not in there. So like what is Jesus's actual resurrection look like. What is a spiritual body versus a physical body. You know eating fish appearing and disappearing in the like that's all stuff we're like I'm just like I don't I don't pretend like I understand that in a simple kind of apologetics kind of a way. I really liked the conversation that that Nate hosted on his channel with Daniel Wood and others about the resurrection. I thought it was a good conversation. The resurrection. See us Lewis talks about real things. This is part of the reason he eventually went for Christianity instead of in a Hindu religion was real things scale. And so the resurrection is apprehendable at the most basic level with the women outside the tomb. Yeah. But it's also cosmic renovation that can't be reduced just to the physical departure from you know one GPS coordinate. And and that's where you know these most real things then have a gravitational pull that tends to restructure everything around them. And that's the resurrection. Yeah. And so you know you're right and that we we can't spend I mean what what the apostle Paul says about angels with respect to the gospel how I mean epithumia in Greek tends to be a negative word often with Paul. It's over desire. It's it's succumbing to our desires. But then he has this interesting phrase where he uses it of the angels. And this is how they feel about the gospel. Angels can't stop looking at it in a sense. And I you know this week I'm preaching on Colossians to about which is a the end of Colossians one going into Colossians two which is an incredible passage. And I'm really racking my brain how to communicate this to the dear saints at living stones who aren't particularly esoteric. They're fairly straightforward people. But this you know this cosmic Christ that inhabits the world and how Jesus basically colonizes the principalities and powers. And this is what we've seen in history since the resurrection that Jesus has slowly been colonizing the principalities and powers when Eric Weinstein was having his conversation with Ross Douthat about you know I think Jesus would get memed to death and it's like you don't understand Jesus has been owning the memes for 2000 years and even the other religions via secularity have been so impacted by Jesus and by the resurrection that if you have eyes to see you can really see how in fact the resurrection has been retooling the principalities and powers for 2000 years. Now it's not complete but that process is is well underway and it's going to reach a culmination. So yeah but you know again if I talk like this you know to people in church you know they know me and they trust me and so they'll just kind of do this. But that one of the most one of the most important parts of Sunday is the Freddie and Paul show. If Nancy's there when Nancy gives her sermon review because it's super important because I get to hear what Nancy heard and usually it's you know it's tremendously humbling as a preacher because it's like I didn't communicate at all. Maybe you maybe Nancy speaks my language. Maybe I could talk and Nancy would just like Paul shows out there to see but this is where you know the the sacramentalists have a real point in the Eucharist. Yeah. That you know someone who is not terribly mystical not terribly esoteric very basic and unsophisticated Christian let's say which should by no means be any kind of slight against anyone. They appropriate Christ via the sacrament directly and it's all us thinky talky big frontal lobe people that sort of you know have this mess. Yeah. Somebody was asking when LARPing is which I barely know. So I'm putting it in here. Jason. You make it you know. Would I be allowed to speak at your church Paul. Gosh I don't know that my church would have any concept of what to do with you Luke. I don't know that I've ever been allowed to speak at any church. Yeah I don't know. Yeah I don't know I'm trying to I had the thought the other day and I sent it to Sam he never responded to it or got back to me but he but I was like maybe the maybe the most maybe the truest Christian American Christian expression expression is the charismatic Pentecostals you know the kind of like what is if I try to really think about you know true American culture and true American music you know and stuff that we're doing like there's some kind of bluegrass music blues we have a lot of entertainment and musical things but then like with church I don't know I equate kind of the South Appalachia snake handling charismatic movement as being kind of like a strictly American phenomenon but well the I think that's right I've been reading this American Nations book which has been really interesting Mark the favor recommended it to me and it's been a fascinating navigating patterns navigating patterns right approve approve by Matthew Peugeot yeah absolutely and I think you're right in that in many ways Pentecostalism I think is America's contribution to world Christianity and you know it it arose what's really interesting about that is that America was in the 18th century and 19th century the most possible exception of Germany the most modern country and Pentecostalism is just an F you in the face of modernity yeah it just isn't taking anything from modernity in some ways well and so like this comment I want to get your thoughts on this because this is my buddy Jason and Cal he and Cal and I talk a lot and Cal's been meditating on this about Jason because Jason's background is more kind of like Pentecostal charismatic and and to the point of what he's just saying in this comment Cal will often say like the kind of Pentecostals or Charismatics are almost like fundamentalists that are like going out to Walmart and trying to do faith healings and getting people to walk like those people believe it like they're just not sitting around and white towers talking about it you know and they may be and like even your your thing on Bethel not Bethel but you know and praying for the baby and like it didn't happen but um there's something that kind of super radical faith I mean I resonate with it like it's back in my like way of the master Street evangelism days yeah like I'm that guy so no that's right and it's very American and it's it's certainly Christian it's like all like all so so in some ways Christ plays in 10,000 places but he's in some ways like this Horcrux that is distributed and it's only at moments in time I love this vision that I got from Keller who got it from one of his teachers at Gordon Conwell of what happens in revival is sort of with Voltron all the lions come together and and it's it's it's liturgical it's sacramental it's Pentecostal it's all of the things of Christianity sort of merged together and that's when you know the the church just takes this great leap forward and you know it's it's it's incredible the way the Spirit has decided to manage the church in time that's how the church grows and I think that's connected to me with what Lewis says about life in this age we don't in when I read the Gospels I hear that this current age can't fully contain Christ and so we see parts and he continues to conquer but it's not until the next stage that in a sense you things really come together now what you know what God will do with all of that none of us can know or articulate but that and so when you ask you know what is kind of authentic American Christianity well Pentecostalism but of course there is Christ has been weaving his church together you know started with obviously with the fabric of Israel and then wove the Greco-Roman culture in and every time Christianity goes into a new place you can look like areas you can go back through this there was puppy action every time Christianity crosses a new cultural boundary it starts to conquer and but but yet all of this is still very much in process right and it has to conquer and maybe it conquers by force initially but then we all have to get to that point of freedom where we you know the he mayest all the way down to the person we're like for that to be full or real or completely actualized the Christ in me like I have to acquiesce or submit or agree to that you know that's that's part of what the fullness of that thing is I think yeah well let's okay what else we got comments I appreciate sounds like PBK should talk to Chris Green about Pentecostalism that would be a fun one have you talked to Chris yet I haven't talked to Chris yet now I mean this puppy just sort of ran a truck through my channel yeah your your um yeah your content has gone down I was waiting sometimes I know that you sometimes Sam is the true American Christian sometimes I know that you'll release your podcast on Apple or something like that so that's I was in the morning while I'm wait you know making coffee I'll look to see if the podcast form is out first but just this puppy he's he's ruining our community really well it's really you know it's really about the wife I mean this was her project and I got to support the wife you know it's what you know that I do I do the only reason that I've done two live streams is because my kids are at school and my wife is out of town so that's why I'm that's why I'm doing that right now but I should probably go soon because I should go be doing other things too because if I don't do some of things that I'm supposed to be doing and then she's like oh what do you spend your time on and then she finds out I did like you talking with those randos on the internet yeah exactly we don't think about the Roman Empire we think about randos yeah there's something I don't know we were talking about this too recently because I've been doing more thinking about this little corner the internet and what it is and what I've been doing paying attention to this for like the last however long it's been five years and it's this ongoing discussion I brought this up an estuary and being well contrary to what all this means like I used to be kind of Luddite inclined and I still have those inclinations like I'm I'm strongly considering getting a dumb phone because when I get a new phone and and just trying to trying to integrate more of this into my life like the way that I always illustrate is my wife and I talk about these Venn diagrams of life and where we have all these circles and we need to bring those together because sometimes it can feel like you can't have a circle this way over here that is taking up a lot of your time or else it just becomes impractical or inefficient you know and so you got to integrate a lot of these things whether it's kids and school and their activities and church and work you got to bring these things together or like online little corner life you know if that becomes an increasingly big thing and it's not somehow integrated into all the other circles like it doesn't work and so I don't know I don't know I don't know exactly what this is I don't know what it means for me going forward I don't I'm gonna be an empty nester in six years like what what should I do do do what are these do I have skills what are skills what is this you know I don't want to do chemistry I know that so well I you know it's interesting how right from the start a big part of this movement has been about men and the first some of the first sort of ladies I'm not excluding you in any way but some of the first Jordan Peterson meetups I did were men saying I need somebody to talk about this stuff with and I you know I can't find anyone and that of course the internet is perfectly tailored for that another thing I've been thinking about lately even though you know I'm not I'm not put I'm not moving away from any of the things that I said I talk about the priority of in-person etc etc the church also has somebody mentioned earlier you know so the the Catholic faith sort of has the you know with it's it's not national which is yeah a super helpful aspect of the Catholic base whereas the other end and so what the church is always trying to do are transcend these borders in a healthy way and I think perhaps in some way the internet and this little corner is a an expression of transcendence we are deeply ecumenical I think in the healthiest way that I've ever participated in we are deeply missional and again I think the healthiest way I've ever participated in and so you know we all of us thinky talky people we do the thinky talky stuff because we're trying to wrap our minds around what we what we the real things that we're experiencing and so I think this little corner is a very real thing and I think it's good to have those yeah you know I can't spend all my time with Randall's on the internet I have to keep priority for local church local estuary local friends but this also has a place and is an important thing and depending on where people are at in terms of what they have locally I mean I'm oh here's Sam so there you are depending you know and I think Sam's a great example of this because I mean anybody's a stakeholder in this corner at Sam but Sam has struggles with I love how Sam is just like telling us to pause he's just like you guys don't speak while I figure this out I was my headphones weren't plugged in but I think Sam you know is a great example of I think what we all are in some ways because I needed I mean I started making videos because I needed something more than what I was getting locally and that isn't to say anything about the Saints at Living Stones but I they I'm I do different things than they do and I need that and so this affords us a degree of transcendence and I think it's good I like that you call the people in your church Saints they are that's what the New Testament calls them I like that they're messy bunch but they're saints that's why I mean people I mean the Freddie and Paul show is sometimes just absolutely unwatchable which is why Rick brought the 10-minute hourglass in but it's it's a vital part of the channel because again about a whole bunch of us need to make sense with all this stuff up here but they are all working it out on the ground very real way and the unbearable lightness of being you got to have that that levity you got to have that silliness you got to have the you know whatever because I mean that's that's true I mean it yeah you guys know that about me I don't I like the playfulness I like the silliness like if it's all just straight it starts to feel like borderline sorry forgive me for this term but borderline borderline autistic you know like it's just like too intellectual all the time it's a I start to feel like we're just like you know AI philosophy theology robots you know that are just trying to figure this stuff out and I'm just like we have fun and also like the whole randos thing the whole thing with your channel it's the personal stories it's the testimonies that's the heart of the whole thing you know like it's just the the thought group that's a question in our local estuary because we've had some people come in who are not really familiar with this little corner and then they just show up in the estuary and there's a lot of in speak and there's a lot of context they don't get and then they're just like and that's because that's something where I'm trying to figure out in the local estuary is just like what is this because for me and back to the men's illumine conference like I value that I value that very deep transparent part kind of conversation stuff like that to me is essential and it's really important like that's a circle of my Venn diagram that I definitely want to increasingly pay attention to the the merely thinky-talky stuff I don't really care about you know like I want to talk to people that I've had ongoing relationship with and like like I love talking about Sam about the Trinity and whatever because we've have such a long history and context that a lot of the conversations that we can have about that intellectually I can't have with other people but yet I also like talking to you because I know you and I know aspects about your life and we've been friends you know and so that's a huge part of that. So at my council meeting one of the elders basically you know named the elephant in the room at Living Stones and she's like what are we going to talk about the fact that we don't know if we're going to be around three years from now. It's like and so I said and so then they kind of trotted out some ideas that church members always trot out when they want to rescue the church from decline and none of which work and probably shouldn't be tried and so then I said well there's one thing that I think we could try which would be very appropriate to everything which would be the Sunday school class for as much as I love it and as much as the people who show up love it is you know has three to five people in there and isn't necessarily getting us you know isn't exactly missional in the kind of way we probably need it to be right now. So what we're talking about is having at 9 a.m. estuary every week before. So services worship is at 11 and the next door would be at 9 o'clock and I don't know how that's going to go. That's going to be really interesting to see on one hand 9 o'clock on a Sunday is kind of a prime time for a lot of midtown young yuppie types. That's yoga class. That's yoga class. That's exactly right. So well so I'm going to go head to head with yoga. What you're doing in church anyhow right. It's yoga. That's what yoga means. So it'll be it'll be interesting to see what the way that experience I have our estuary meeting tonight at Living Stones and really looking forward to it every time we do it. It's just like wow this really works. This is amazing. Keep talking. I got to get the dog. Yes Sam we brought you in the your message but oh that thing that thing. We had a record number of people at the Chicago Estuary meeting last week which is 15. I think it was that's really like it's starting to get like at that point it's hard to have one group discussion. Hi puppy. I'm not supposed to like you because you're making it harder for Paul to make videos. Yeah I love hate you puppy. You are pretty cute though. She's very cute. She is very cute. I had a yellow lab growing up. I still have a soft spot for labs. I'm mostly not a dog person anymore but you can't have a dog at your house Sam so that when I come and visit I can stay with you. Right. I'm allergic to dogs too. If you're allergic to dogs. Yeah. Dog allergy people. Like there's just some weird thing in our culture about dogs at the moment that's getting a little out of hand. I think. But that doesn't mean that there is an able yeah but they're more valuable than people. They're baby replacements for too many people. And my my town is just having like the biggest argument ever and it's not over like I don't know LGBTQ stuff or culture war stuff. It's over whether or not we should have the park next to the elementary school be a dog park or a people park. And that is bringing up feelings that people did not know that they had in themselves. Wow. Because some people some people are like oh man you know my dog would never hurt anybody. It can be next to the elementary school you know like my dog is this perfect wonderful Rousseau you know farting rainbows thing. And then other people like kids are more valuable than dogs. We should kill all the dogs before any human gets harmed. What are you doing putting it right next to the elementary school. Yeah. There was a disagreement and it got dialed up to an 11 as the same two years ago used to say often. It this disagreement like it because it's like puppy feelings versus baby feelings and that's a really strong source of disagreement. And you can't do both of them together. There's no neutrality because the dogs can potentially bite the children and the children. And they have. I don't I don't want to reveal which side I'm on. I am an elected school board member so I have to have some amount of neutrality and perspective. But this is the biggest thing that the school board is dealing with at the moment is the dog park. And truth be told dog parks are all dogs behaving badly. You know part of the part of the agreement with this puppy is no dog parks. Oh man. It's a I don't one of my beefs with pets is it's not so much the service animal thing if it's a legit service animal I can understand that. But it's the emotional support animals that people are not aware of. Emotional support animals that people get to like take into airports and on airplanes and into like every store in the world. And then they try and they get awfully litigious or threaten being litigious. If you say like if you had the courage to maybe say like maybe you don't have the right to bring your dog everywhere. And that's exactly what's been going on. Yeah. Well, Sam, you know, see how good of a politician you are. See if Hank wants to elect you to a higher body. Hank might will be my political promo man. Did we figure out whether Western converts to orthodoxy or LARPing? What is that, Paul? I don't know. The puppy found it in my son's stuff. It's kind of a shark. Is it a shark? A shark? I think it's a shark hat. I think you should keep wearing it. That will definitely it helps with the LARPing theme. I don't know. It somehow looks like a LARPing wizard hat. You know, the pope hat is a fish head. Oh, man. Rick showed me that one. I think we decided that everyone's LARPing. Well, what is LARPing? Live action role play. Yeah, exactly. But before we say that orthodoxy is LARPing, what is LARPing? I think to some degree, I think another way you could just say it is fake it till you make it, right? Yeah. But like LARPing, they're not expecting to become a wizard. You were right. Maybe. Maybe they are. I don't know. I mean, I've never been deep into the LARPing. Wait a minute. This is why I joined the church. Is that not the end? We don't get to become wizards? I thought. The New Testament language is you put on Christ. Yeah. And there's an element of there's something of LARPing in that. I mean, you put on Christ and that's putting on a mask, putting on vestments. Playing a role. Yeah, playing a role. You could almost say it's like when CS Lewis talks about acting like you love someone. If you don't love someone, they're acting like you love them and then you'll find yourself that eventually you will love them. I think it's like that. It's behaving in a way that, you know, somewhat it's what it is a subsidiary focal integration. It's Michael Polongri. It's focal integration. Classic TLC thinky talky move there. But it's like, I think it's the habitual learning of any practice by attention and focus and so like you act in certain ways and then those things become habitual and you build neural networks and then you subconsciously act those ways. It's like saying a prayer over and over and over the Jesus prayer. And then pretty soon you're doing it unconsciously and you're praying without ceasing. But LARPing, there's an element of mutually agreed upon pretend, right? In LARPing where there's, it's as vervecky says, serious play, although maybe it's not even serious. I actually don't like serious play. That's not my favorite verveckyism. But there's something about LARPing where everyone has kind of, everyone knows it's not real, but is agreeing to act as if it's real. Well, but don't you think part of that though, is the balance of becoming and being, or it's like, it's playing house when you're a little kid. Yeah. And then, but there's a question of like, why is it that adults are doing this playing with each other? And like the sort of weird extended juvenileization of humanity or something like that. Like, yeah, I play with my kids all the time and, you know, it doesn't take very much to set up a pretend world with them. They almost do it just like automatically. But like when people are LARPing or going to Comic-Con or something like that, no one thinks Spider-Man exists or that you can become Spider-Man or whoever. There's sort of like this self-acknowledged this gap between what you're doing and what could actually be real. But don't you think that's kind of changing? I mean, we have furries. Yeah, it is supposedly getting weirder. So what, so maybe it's the orthodox are just furries. Paul currently has a shark hat on, so make it that way you will. Oh, man. No fur here. Sharks don't have fur. Yeah. You convert to Eastern orthodoxy and start to grow a beard and long hair and change your name to Vladimir to make it right. Yeah, I mean, that's what I was talking about with like the romanticism and the fetishization of whatever strand of orthodoxy you're coming out of, which isn't what American orthodoxy is going to be. I mean, part of that is like we're figuring that out. Because if you're converting to American orthodoxy, you probably shouldn't get Vladimir as a name. You should get like George or William or John or something like that. Or Muhammad Sam, you ethnocentric. Well, I mean, ethnocentric. That's kind of that's part of what I'm saying is that each of the different branches of orthodoxy are ethnocentric and that it's a little bit weird to convert to Russian orthodoxy in your nice, cozy American suburb and suddenly think that your name is Vladimir. Like that is kind of larpy in a way that I think is not like a going to lead to an integrated self. They let you guys have cameras. I'm beginning to question YouTube's quality control standards. Jed, I love you. Now I need two compliments from you so that I feel better about myself. Even Roar Corps bishops are speaking against this. Well, I'm not quite changing your name to Vladimir, I think. So like for me, for example, that's what I do with my priest because you could come into the church and just be like, well, what's your baptismal name? Which, you know, if you don't have a Christian name or something, you could do a little bit. But then my priest was like, how about we go with Luke? And do you get to pick your own name when you go through this process? There's something weird about self naming that is related to like trans questions also. And like trans could also be brought up of is trans a LARP? You know, are you LARPing as the other gender? Sam, you're so much fun to talk to. You just, you like my life. Basically, orthodox is trans is I think what we figured out. Orthodoxy is trans and orthodox is furry trans. Furry trans, yeah. I think that so well, I'll just jump to the end of where my intuition goes and then we can work our way back, which is the Whitestone name is self naming. Self. Explain what you mean by that. So do we get to pick our Whitestone name? Yeah, but Hasn't a Whitestone name been written since like, you know, before the foundation of the world or something? Yes. And so will eventually become the person who would pick the thing that was always true of us or something? It's like, so again, I'm going to pump, pump the and promo that Jordan Daniel Wood one combo in four parts, but he talks about this, particularly in the third one when they're talking about determinism and Calvinism and Arminianism and freedom and free will and what all those means. And it's this, it's this contrast and this binary between the ability to choose or the ability to do otherwise. What does he, I'm going to look up because he sets this up as a contrast of these two different things. And I made the helmet so didn't I? Dang it. But essentially, yeah, it's the idea is that it's not, we all know at the end, like in the final analysis or in heaven or whatever, there isn't the freedom to choose contrary to your own good. You know, like we're not gonna be murdering each other in heaven. Jesus doesn't have that freedom. So like when you choose in the end, when you choose your real name, it, you'll, you'll just see it for what it always was, which is what you always were. I'm picking up what you're putting down. Yeah, that in our fully the, the whatever theosified theosified will. We pick the name for us. That's always been true. Grail country left a long link. If God is going to deify everyone anyway, why not deify everyone immediately? Who said God was going to deify everyone? So remember, I'm still an annihilationist over here. You got to either get deified or you can't last forever. That's, that's why I, that's why. Also that conversation is really great on universalism and why it's probably talked to Jordan Daniel would about that night. One nice thing about having Jordan Daniel would on his chat on your channel is that his videos have a long tail time. Um, what's that mean? Like a lot of videos, I bet Paul knows what I'm talking about, you know, like three, four days and then they plateau and then like maybe like one view a week or something after that. Um, because your regular committed, excited listeners listen to it and then it's basically done. Um, but then some videos have a perennial shelf life. And what's weird about my Jordan Daniel would videos is like, they have this like constant slope of viewership over time. It's not like he's talking at a deeper level that applies to more than a seat of books instead of YouTube. Yeah. Yeah. Cause authors, my Tom Holland videos are the same. Not the ones that Tom Holland is on because books work at a different speed than videos. Yeah. Yeah. How about my conversations with you guys? What's there? Blowing up. I'm making bank off you, Luke bank. High peak quick plateau because they're very, uh, this little corner of the internet is all over them, but then they move on to the next thing. But no one else cares. Okay. Um, I should go. And do you have, I don't think anyone else has privileges to you. I should get to work anyway. Okay. And Paul's got a puppy. But what is America? I, I, I still want to talk to Richard Rollin about what is America, but I don't, he would be a great, he would be a great person to talk to about it. Um, it's an ongoing question. I don't have it's, um, the way I would probably summarize it. I was talking about this earlier in here. It's the, it's the vanguard of the evolution of consciousness in the person. And I mean, and it's, and it's where we're figuring out that balance of what we were just talking about. Who am I? What do I want? What is my name? It's part of, it's part of being an American. Only Americans think that we're at the vanguard of the center of the evolution of consciousness, but we do think that sorry Canada, you get to contribute sometimes to the center of the center of the world. Sometimes Canada, it's the West. It's not even like, it's, it's the, it's not American exceptionalism and like, I mean, you know, like I'm not, I'm not a fan of the military. You don't need to be a fan of the military industrial complex to be an American exceptionalist. I think that the essence of American exceptionalism is this idea that like America has some unique, relationship with the instantiation of progress. And so even the people who think that, oh man, the, I'm so enlightened that I realized the evils of the military industrial complex. I'm going to end the military industrial complex by instantiating the good moral progress in America that gets rid of the military industrial complex. Yeah, we might have to, we might have to fully embrace that Christianity. Somebody said earlier, like I guess Dave Bentley Hart said it like something like Christianity has never made it to America. Yeah. We might have to embrace the fullness of that whole seed going into the earth and dying to embrace the fullness of what we are. There's so much interesting about America's story. It's so Exodus like in a lot of ways. I mean, the symbolism of crossing an ocean from the old world to the new world, right? That's the, you know, it's like Exodus. It's like baptism. It's like going through the Red Sea, you know, the fact that we even use old world and new world is like a very New Testament interesting sort of language. You know, there's so much interesting about America's story and self identity that sometimes I think we forget and we forget to give ourselves credit for. I mean, we are the new Israel, right? Obviously, duh. Not like in a British Israelism sense. That was a weird way of answering that question. Or a Mormon sense. But I would love to talk to Richard Rolland about this stuff. And Peugeot is not the right person to have the conversation of what is America about. Because Canadians, I'm sorry, Canadians, I think Sherry's out there listening. I'm sorry, Canadians. You just have a little chip on your shoulder when it comes to this topic that is a little bit hard to is the only nation with no national identity because it's not a people. And there's in this way, the project of America necessarily mirrors the church. I think that there's something very right about that, that because America is somehow ethnic lists and it's and it borrowed that idea of being ethnic lists from Christianity and that that's another deep, interesting part of this whole thing. So and there's we got it. We got to figure out some way to maintain it. I mean, it's all unity and multiplicity without turning it into a nothing less liberalism monolith. You might say E pluribus unum or something like that out of many one. America has always been aware of this fact of itself, that it's like trying to do unity in some sort of weird kind of way. But anyway, I think that America is super fascinating. I've been reading the Little House on the Prairie books with my kids, the Laura Ingalls Wilder books, which are way better than I thought that they were. Yeah, South Dakota, like South Dakota never seemed more interesting and dramatic than it does in these books. I mostly thought South Dakota was just boring, but apparently it can be fascinating. Have you ever been in a white outlook where it is so windy and snowy that you can't see anything? Yeah. Do you not listen to my stories of my childhood that I tell you? No. All right. Tell me about being in a white out. You need a new channel, Luke's stories of childhood. So it's I mean, yeah, it's definitely a phenomenon. So the thing that's different, I mean, people talk about Minnesota and it being cold and it is particularly when you get in northern Minnesota. But the difference with Minnesota and South Dakota or North Dakota, for that matter, is that you get in the middle of winter when it's negative 50, you get 50 mile an hour winds and there's no trees. And so that's what happens. No, it's just being like it's like a sand blaster. Right. You have super cold snow, which is like sand. I mean, it's not big, fluffy wet stuff. And then you get a 50 mile an hour wind that just blows. So like the story I'll tell you is there was one time I was going to school with my brother and this would happen regularly. And I lived seven miles outside a town of my town of 800 people. So you are from Little. You are from Little House on the Prairie. This is you. Yeah. Like I always tell people I grew up where where they Kevin Costner's outpost was and dances with wolves like that was fit filmed 15 minutes from my house from like that's like what it looked like on my front door. You couldn't see a house from my house. And so we were driving to town and we had a 1979 98 Oldsmobile, which had a 402 in it was awesome. And you wonder what America is. This is America driving around South Dakota in an Oldsmobile with an engine that is way bigger than there's any right to be. You know. And this was and this was like in the 90s. It was a 79. My parents bought it. I grew up really poor. My parents bought it as the family car when it had 200,000 miles. Every one of the kids drove it. I drove it up until I bought my first car. I don't know. It probably had over 400,000 miles on it. And we abused it too. So it was awesome. But so we were driving to town in the middle of winter one day. And what happens in these in that kind of weather is you get these giant like snow drifts that can get like 30 foot high. Like they'll cover a barn. We used to like tunnel into them and build like snow caves and stuff. But we would be going to town and so the snow would blow over the road and you'd get all these drifts, just periodic drifts, and you try to get up enough momentum in between the drifts on the gravel so that you could hit the drift and blow through it and try to make it to school. You know, and one day though, it was really, it was a particularly bad day. I don't know. We always used to joke because our superintendent smoked. They like, they wouldn't, he'd cancel school only if he couldn't light a cigarette with a blowtorch. And we were going to school one day and my brother, I couldn't drive yet. And my brother was driving, even though you can drive when you're 14 in South Dakota. And we got stuck somehow, you know, it was a rear wheel drive and the drift was too big and we got stuck. And so then he takes off to the nearest house, neighbor house, which is probably a couple miles away, just running out along. And you'd have to, you have to learn, you had to follow fence lines because you can get lost in a whiteout. Like if it's blowing you out there and you have no idea your orientation, you can't see anything. And then you just wander out into the prairie and freeze into that. Yep. Yeah. And so he was running the fence line, you know, probably with not nearly enough glows. Cause it gets real cold too. And, uh, somehow made it, but he must've called back to my parents' house. Cause then my dad eventually comes with a tractor and he's just like scooping out the car and dragging it home, you know, through the snow drifts. But yeah, it was a regular occurrence. That's what dads are. That's what dads do. My dad was hard. Like he used to have a, we had a open cab tractor and he used to have to go roll out bales and feed and calve during all that all winter long. I mean, it's just, it's hard country even now. You know, it's the West. So it's my story of whiteouts. There we fi- well, at least we figured out what America is. I mean, it can snow in Chicago and it can blizzard and snow a couple feet in a day, but I've never been in a whiteout. Like when I'm reading this book, I've, I'm like, I've never experienced that. So. Yeah, it's a, it's quite a phenomenon. I mean, there's a lot of, it's a weird, it's a weird place. You know, I definitely, I was always weird there, as I've said many times, my dad used to say, who's sorry, you boy. Cause I was a weirdo growing up there, if you can imagine. And, but then going back, like I went back to my 20th high school reunion and it was just, it was weird. I hadn't been back in 15 years. It's like, oh man. Go shovel the walk. I want to talk about Owen Barfield. I wasn't doing that then. Well, you were doing it. Whatever you were doing, whatever was pre-Owen Barfield. Yeah, I was doing something. Uh, so yeah, I mean, you fly into Rapid City, which Rapid City is a small town. Like, I don't know, it has 80,000 people or something on the like big city in the Black Hills or Mount Rushmore is Sturgis by Crowley. And then I got in a car and I drove to my hometown, which is like 90 miles east of there, north of Badlands. And it's just, it's such a, it's such a weird phenomenon. It's like a ghost town. It's like, there's no one there because there barely is. I mean, it's just a tiny little town and there's nothing around it. Like if you drove north of my hometown, like there's nothing until you get to North Dakota. Like there's nothing up there. There's not even towns or anything, hardly. It's the kind of place where like having frequent you can run out of gas because like if there's not frequent gas stations everywhere, there's just nothing. And, um, and then culturally, it's just a lot weirder, you know, like, and there's a lot of like old school kind of masculine bravado, you know, it's just very Wyoming, Western South Dakota, Montana, small town, middle America, you know, and I come back like, you know, from big city Minneapolis, like wearing my custom made fanny pack with like a pink shirt on probably. And they're all just like, Oh, here he is. Big city, big city, man. Getting a head shaking. Yeah. And, uh, well, it wasn't even that, you know, and then they're just like, there's stuff. I'll tell you more offline stuff there. I mean, there were some pretty hard things that happened to there, but, um, anyhow, it was interesting. It's fun to see people. It was a weird experience. It took me a long time to process it. Yeah. I mean, I have a high school reunion every morning when I go to drop off my girls at, uh, kindergarten, uh, you know, about all the same people about a third of the parents are, um, you know, old classmates or siblings or classmates or something like that. Yeah. Well, I mean, and that's how it is like there. A lot of my class still lives there or lives close by, you know, basically, or at most they like move to the really big city to Sioux falls or something or rapid. But outside of that, I think probably like me and my best friend, best man are like the only people that moved further or one, you know, some of the few. Um, so it's funny. That's what I've always felt in between two worlds because I'm wired the way that I'm wired. I like going bar field. I like intellectual conversations. I've gone to school, but I'm very, my upbringing and history and family is all very, very less than blue collar, you know, almost no call. Now you're talking to randos on the internet. See what, see what that leads to. I know the super, super Paul, I called you in the last live stream. I called you the super hot it girl. Cause I was talking about the origins of brandos united and how we have to all start talking to ourselves. Cause the hot girl was too busy to talk to us. Well, that's why the puppy is a, is sent from God so that y'all don't become too dependent on me. That's why I'll never be the leader. Jacob wants me to be. Oh no. Has Jacob really? So I haven't talked to Jacob in a long time, but I haven't seen him around. He's just, he's left us behind, right? He couldn't co-opt us for his political stopping world war three. His attention is slightly off, but it's not gone. He's still Jacob being Jacob does his, you know, Hebrew Bible study and we'll be back in the center of his focus of attention soon enough. Exactly. He can't quit us. He can't. You'd be, you'd be surprised how many people circle around and come back. You see it in the comment section all the time. Um, we're a hard habit to break. It's true. I think, cause it is, it is hard. It's hard to find community like this. Like if I want to, if I want to have conversations and tell people what I really think, cause I have that, I have that, um, phenomenon happen or that experience where I'll start a conversation with somebody I can tell pretty quick where I'm just like, you don't really want to know what I think about this. You don't want me to give you my honest opinions. I think we're like family. We don't want to know either, but we still listen. I think part of what the difficulty with my last church was, was not even just Trinity things, but like I'm, it, it's hard for me to communicate theologically at the level that I want to with people outside the little corner of the internet. And it, and I think I just sounded really weird and that, and can combine that with the Trinity thing. And like, I, you know, it was just hard for me to say like what I wanted to say without sounding, you know, just like a complete fish out of water. And so that just like raises a bunch of low openness, red flags in, you know, the sorts of people who tend to be on the elder board of churches and that sort of thing. So I don't think it was just Trinity stuff. I think it was also all of this weird sort of whatever you want to call it. Confessionalism, institutions. That was a good video. I, you guys, that was a great video. I loved that video. And I want to try to figure out how to weave that video into my denominational stuff, because what you guys talked about, my denomination has to really think about and ponder because it's not just YouTube. No, it's all over the place. And, you know, that's part of why I I'm excited about trying estuary on Sunday morning, followed by worship is I sort of think that's the proper process. I think that's where the curious, you know, you start with. So I mentioned briefly in the video I did on on the Holy Post, this piece where someone basically does a quick review of the de-churching video and says, you know, all this, all this thinky talky stuff, it's all about belonging. And belonging is first. Believing and behaving follow belonging. But how, how the church, how the church deals with those three is super hard. Here we go, Paul. This is part one of that Jordan Daniel Wood talk. Oh, okay. Because he talks about this stuff too in a way that's technical and more read and better than I can. I mean, you've heard all the stuff I have to say many times, but and, you know, I just, I mean, Sam's difficulties just haunt me and. And it's. And you know what I saw, I'm, I wind up with all these, you know, very conservative people in the Christian informed church who sort of want to really hammer. The confessional subscription thing, but the irony is that many of them aren't cradle CRC people, which is super interesting. Eastern right evangelicals, the well, right evangelicals. Well, it is that I mean, we've already talked about this, but that's the way that you can transcend being an ethnic church. It a way I'm not saying the way a way that you can transcend being an ethnic churches to be very propositionally focused. And that's what attracts people to it is like, I think those people got it right. That resonates with me. I'm going to go over with them. Um, and that does work to some degree. Uh, and then, and then, but you're kicking up against the goads of your residual Dutchness and your wooden shoes and, uh, and that sort of thing. Uh, maybe that's why, because I have, you know, this, I won't name them because they very much want to be off the internet people, but you know, they, they come to living stones and you know, he kind of took me to task. He says, you really got to work a lot harder on this confessionality thing in terms of, you know, because they don't fit into any box, but they're at living stones every week and they're, you know, they're, they're working the belonging aspect and confessionally, you know, they're not close, but living stones, living stones in many ways doesn't care. I mean, it's like when the one deacon was like, can't we make Rick a deacon? I said, he's gotta be baptized first. I mean, I'm really flexible, but I'm not going to have a deacon in the church who isn't baptized. So Rick, if you're listening, let's, let's, I, let's get you baptized, man. We can do this. We can do we're, we're not Orthodox. We're Protestants. I'll, I'll get it done fast. And I mean, well, another thing about the CRC is you guys have really long confessions. It's not like a 10 bullet point list. You got these like things from Dort and other weird Dutch, Belgian names that I can't remember and pronounce at the top, off the top of my head, Vito de Brea, that, that are like pages and pages and pages and chapters, long worth of confessions. And like, when's the last time that was sort of like gone through, you know, it would be because destroy the church. You're right. And, and a lot of it, I'm sure, was, you know, a bunch of well-meaning Dutch people in the 17th century best attempt at being eternally relevant, but it's hard to be eternally relevant. And I'm sure a lot of it doesn't make contextual sense anymore. Probably some stuff about relationship to Catholicism or all sorts of, or, you know, church state questions are all sorts of things. The detestable Anabaptists, even though you're surrounded by Anabaptists and that doesn't mean what it used to mean. And like all of that sort of thing is, and I've said this, I say this in the comment section about once a week, but I think that the real thing is hell. I think that the real test and the real confessional question, and Luke loves this question, of course, will be the question of, of hell and is actually the church a way of, you know, saving you and you're altering your eternal destiny? Or is it a social construction project for the present age? Oh my. Well, this is my three causes that I listed again in the Holy Post video. You've got liberationist social justice people, you've got conservative social justice people, and you have evangelical salvationism. And these are sort of the three causes right now that are both broadly in the culture and in the church. And these are the tensions because many people have multiple, some even all three. I probably have all three, but it all depends on the order that you stack them with respect to the question, what is church? I was thinking about doing a video on that today, especially with respect to Russell Brand. But I haven't done a Russell Brand video yet. What do you, Luke, what do you think of all the Russell Brand business? Because I know in general, you kind of like Russell Brand, but you don't like Russell Brand. Yeah, I do. I think as far as the allegations. Or all of any of it. Pick your slice of pie. I like it when Luke's wife goes away for work. I, so I like what he's trying to do with his project politically and globally and being free and speaking wherever you want to say it, follow the money. I think it's great. I mean, a lot of that stuff that I think he's talking about is spot on. You know, I think it's really interesting. I guess RFK talked about this, but like this is on YouTube. Who cares? But Blackstone, State Street and all those like going to be owning 60% of the single family homes in America in six years. Like that's probably an important thing for people to know. When it crashes, they'll sell out. Yeah, maybe. I don't know. I don't know how that will all play out, but it's just that stuff's interesting. The allegations, I mean, it seems no doubt. The dude did. I think he's a good guy, largely even back when he was being a bad boy. Like that guy was still in there. He was just, he was an addict. He was in a lot of pain. I mean, he's talked about those things. He was just a sex addict. You can't have that sort of throughput without having done some pretty allegation worthy. Yeah, for sure. So like at some point in there with drugs and that much sex, I'm sure he did some questionable at best things, you know, like what's the detail of all of it? You know, I don't know. It definitely seems like he's trying to be silenced in some regard. That's the thing that seems the weirdest to me is like just the sudden coordinated use of these things, like because they were true the whole time. And obviously, and we still have no, I don't know, sense of forgiveness or redemption in our current court of public opinion. But what seems really creepy to me is that it was so blatantly obvious that this is some sort of hit job of someone trying to get rid of him, that either the person calling the hit and the apparatus that's able to do the hitting is getting sloppy at showing itself or it's so confident in itself that it doesn't care about being revealed. And that either of those two things are a little scary. And like that it can ask the UK government, who's currently mostly controlled by conservatives, to just like, hey, send an email to rumble and ask him to ask them to take them down. Like, like, how does that even happen? Like, is George Soros just like pick up the phone and like, you know, like call some room of people and tell them to do this? Like, it's so but but something like that, you know, whether or not it's George Soros, I have no idea. But something like that is happening. I think they're trying to if if all that stuff is true and whatever's going on, they're trying to. Yeah, I don't think they even care at this point if they get found out because it's probably inevitable. And if there's going to be a collapse, which there will I mean, it's babble, you can't you can't centralize stuff to a certain degree without a collapsing. I mean, that's just what happens. And so if it is going to collapse and it's going to be some sort of global economic collapse, they're probably just, you know, eking out as much as they can. You got to silent dissenters, you know, and also you shouldn't rape women. So that's my that's my hot take. We put that in the video because it was unclear for a minute. And OK, so let's say should no rapist should be allowed to have a YouTube channel. Right. Right. And by mobsters, how about murderers? OK, how about the Taliban? OK. And it should no one even accused of rape, even credibly accused, but not yet convicted should be allowed to have a YouTube channel. Is there a statute of limitations? Is there a blackout period? Is there a path back to having a YouTube channel? You know, like the the the the tent, the connection between OK, Russell Brand did awful things in the mid to late 2000s. Therefore, Rumble needs to take him down now like that. That's not an obvious thing at all. You know, so like and the BBC didn't feel any pressure when he was doing it. Right. And the fact that we kind of just let that pass like, oh, well, maybe if it may be if enough of these accusations were credible, he should be demonetized. Like that is not an obvious connection in any case. And what's with the demonetization thing? Why didn't YouTube just take him down? Right. You know, so Alex Jones gets taken down. We're just going to demonetize you. So listen, if that's the blunt tool of mammon, that's what you got. Take away the money. Kind of talk to get Grizz to join. Grizz got to be careful because Grizz doesn't want to get demonetized because, you know, at 1100 subs and 200 views per video, boy, he's raking in the ad sense like you wouldn't believe. Yeah, it's got to be just dollars. So many individual dollars per video. Right. That's right. I know this feels five dollars per thousand views. That's a serious question from Grizz, but I don't know. I don't know. He says buy me a coffee. That's really what it is. Making a Starbucks a week for Grizz. There's so much. There's so many commercials on Grizz. There's so much branding on Grizz. I now just I just zip now to like two thirds through to finally get the sermon like a good Protestant. And then there you go. I skipped the scene. You don't need all that mind control. The collection. You know, that's what I do with Grizz's channel. What is one in the world is the connection between the 2012 Olympic ceremony and Russell Brand. Where even were the 2012 Olympics? Was that in London? It's a pop quiz. Yes. 2012 was in London. Come on, Sam. Can't you see? It's obvious. Was Russell Brand in the 2012 Olympic ceremony? Did he have some role in the 2012 London Olympics? Does having a YouTube channel equal having a voice? Don't you remember that ceremony in London? That the the you know, the the the although you've there's something that watched enough grim grizz. There was something about the Industrial Revolution and then the bean played that chariots of fire song and there was the Queen parachuting down. But that's all I got. There you go. You're on the right track. I don't know what that has to do with the current Russell Brand situation. For those who have eyes to see. I think the only solution to that level of corruption is nonparticipation. It means a hidden life. But we're currently broadcasting on YouTube. Does that count as participation or not? Well, that's probably what he means by pushing the narrative. I don't know. You brought it up. I don't. This is why I'm an anarchist. I don't like to participate in politics. I was the original anarchist. I was talking about anarchism before Nate was. Oh, OK, I have to go. All right. I have to talk to Thomas in 15 minutes. Thomas. I don't know. He's he's going to be in the he's going to be in the German Festival Breakwater Festival. And I did a conversation with him already on the channel. He's he's he's had to cancel twice because he's he's doing chemo. And boy, I really feel for him. And I don't know how the conversations I'm going to try and do this conversation. I'm hoping my son wakes up and keep an eye on the dog, because this is this is what the conversation is going to be. This is what the conversation is going to be like. So I mean, and I don't I won't do a randos conversation like this because it's there's too many holy moments in a randos conversation where people are opening their soul. And so and I, you know, got to watch the dog. So. All right. Well, thank you both for jumping in. All right. It's always great to see you guys. I miss you guys. Same. All right. That's it, folks. We done. All right.