https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fM64gVTr_Ts

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to make a video on psychedelics and the spirit world. I, before I got into the Jordan Peterson stuff, I had zero encounter with most of this stuff. And very quickly, once I started making videos, people started approaching me with questions, sharing their stories, and as you can tell from my channel, listening to people, I'm always willing to listen to people's stories. I'm very open-minded about these things, and I myself have never done any psychedelic drugs, and I have no plans on ever doing any. But I do have some thoughts on it after listening to quite a few conversations. I don't know a lot about it. But one of the things that I pick up from, especially people who are raised in the materialist secular West, is that it becomes this kind of liminal space between this materialist world and then the question of, is there another world out there? And so, in a sense, through this, I think the word trip is a very telling choice for a word. Through this trip, they're encountering other beings, other voices, and then there's always this liminal space. This question is, is this, are these other, am I talking to my subconscious? Are these other spirit guides? Are there other spirit beings? So on and so forth. Rebel Wisdom has been doing a variety of videos on this, both in terms of, let's say, a fair amount of Hindu, Buddhist, spirituality, meditation, but also just outright psychedelics. This conversation I listened to, and I listened to pretty much everything Rebel Wisdom puts out, this conversation I really found fascinating and interesting because he was picking up on something that I felt for a long time, not just in terms of the psychedelic conversation, but also in terms of the spirit conversation. So, and when I talk spirit, I mean spirits. I mean other entities, forces, personalities, beings, other than human beings that traditional religions and many other cultures have asserted are real and powerful and, in fact, impinge on human, the human domain, let's say. And I thought this, I thought this segment of the conversation was really fascinating and telling. And again, part of this is because I've often noted not just, I've often noted in conversation with people who are more on the New Age side of the spiritual conversation. I often have this sense of that they mine the riches from Native American spiritualities, different spiritualities all around the world. We might call them primitive spiritualities with shamans and so on and so forth. But I always get the sense in listening to them that they would imagine that the spirit worlds is sort of a Disneyland, that there are no evil spirits. There are only benevolent spirits and somehow they would just go off into these spaces of which they know absolutely nothing and just encounter rainbows and unicorns and ponies to ride. And I listen to that and I think, well, if you do a fair amount of reading of history and cultures from these other places, you'll learn that those weren't the assumptions of those ancient peoples whose material you are mining to establish your New Age Disneyland. That in fact, this is a very many people in the ancient world were convinced that the spirit domain as the material physical domain they lived in was a very dangerous place. Now, again, you might say, well, they're projecting their fears from the physical domain onto the spirit domain. Okay, that's an argument. But how are you going to check it? Part of the difficulty that materialism has is that their axiomatic assertion that we are the only conscious agents in existence makes even the supposition of other realms off limits. In other words, it's a blind side. So then I listened to this conversation and let's listen to a piece of it because I thought it was really quite good. I had never heard of Jules Evans before and it was very interesting. So just going to play a little clip. How difficult to fit is this experience for the medical model? This is something that a lot of people in the psychedelic world, I think, are very concerned about. There's a kind of push pull because for the first time they're getting the mainstream acceptance of scientific studies and medical usage. But also this brings in a very different conceptual framework. It brings in a materialist framework. It brings in the world of like double blind trials. It brings in corporate influence. There's something and I have this sort of sense that there's something about the psychedelic experience that is a very difficult fit for this paradigm. And I think David's observation is dead on right because, again, it's hard to put the stuff into words. But I think David is right and he's talking about how, and Jordan Peterson's a part of this, talking about, well, the ability to give up smoking, the ability to reduce anxiety, these drugs being used in a clinical sense. Now, a lot of the domain between, if you read, there's a pretty fierce argument going on right now in terms of whether or not the medical establishment should be dependent on 12 step programs, for example. Because 12 step programs are offering a non physiological remedy to alcoholism, let's say. I just read a stream, I forget where it was, questioning about what exactly is the frame of reference that we should look at addiction with? Is it a disease? Is it a disorder? Is it, well, you might look at it if you go into certain Pentecostal churches, they might look at it as an example of spiritual oppression or possession. So, you know, here's, you know, what I want to get into is that you have data, let's call it data, you have an experience and then there's interpretation. And those two things are always connected. You cannot have an experience without interpretation. And those things are always connected and they go together. And when we put this together, this actually was a very deep part of the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris talk. When Peterson again and again tries to get Sam Harris to realize that we're not just monarchical observers in a space of objects. There's no view from nowhere. And immediately once you enter into this view from nowhere, you've contaminated it and disrupted it and your interpretation floods it because you cannot perceive anything without the active, without the active process of interpretation. And that always changes and short and shapes and morphs the experience. And this is what David is saying. Well, now suddenly in the materialist medical frame, which isn't necessarily materialist, but that's the that's the frame that dominates. Well, is that going to change this whole thing? And well, here's the answer. Right. We want re-enchantment, but we want it in a very rational, predictable and measured way. And I thought that line was exactly right. We want re-enchantment and we want re-enchantment to resolve our meaning issue. But we want it. We want it domesticated. We want it on a leash. We want it in a pill. We want it controlled. And right away you have this contradiction that, you know, it's the iMUD contradiction. So iMUD in this old episode of Star Trek on his own planet establishes, you know, builds these basically Stepford wives and the Star Trek, you know, Captain Kirk and Spock, and they all come in and iMUD wants off. Well, why do you want off? You have the power to create the world that you thought you wanted. Oh, but now you don't want it anymore. Well, what is doing the wanting? What is doing the choosing? What in fact are you? You don't really know. And neither do we. And so now suddenly, no, but we, yeah, it's a great line that he just gave. Let's do it again. What we write, we want re-enchantment, but we want it in a very rational, predictable and measured way. And I think that's what people are trying to do with psychedelic science and with contemplative science. Look, we're getting transcendence. Look, we're losing control, but we know exactly what we're doing. And here's a brain scan and so on. And that can work two ways. You can either end up with a form of spirituality, which actually totally disenchanted because it's become so rational and instrumentalized. And actually, you're not going anywhere. You know. And notice the language going anywhere. OK, this is a this is a transportation. This is a moving from one space to another. In the same control freak capitalist culture. The other way is that is. Interesting that you dropped capitalist in there. It's very interesting. The science gets spooky. Actually, the real challenge happens. And you end up Michael Pollan talks about shamans in white coats. The scientists become kind of guru figures. All just weird stuff kind of comes through and challenges the model that you're bringing. Well, this is like entities. This happened with the guy who did the DMT research. Strassman basically gave it up because he went into the DMT research as a materialist scientist and was so freaked out by not just the things that people were saying, but the commonalities between what people were saying that it really challenged. It really disturbed him. It really challenged his worldview. And he also felt, I'm not sure though I should be doing this. Right. So I mean, Strassman, he wasn't exactly materialist. He was a Buddhist. He thought when people would take psychedelics, they would have an experience of pure light consciousness. And that's the kind of idea that goes all the way back to Aldous Huxley, who came to psychedelics, having very much, you know, research mysticism. He was very into Zen and Vedanta and so on. And he thought the highest truth was kind of pure light consciousness. See now, so here we have the question. And these questions just keep going. So your psychedelic experience, does the drug simply, okay, materialist frame, does the drug simply re-alter the chemistry in your brain so that the other things in the file cabinets in your brain are not just the same? The things in your brain are now pulled open and different parts of your brain are talking to each other. But the frame is the buffered self, that everything is within your head. And so Huxley's experience of psychedelics was, you know, moving around the stuff in his head. And this same conversation has to do with dreams. Are dreams just the moving around things into our head or the moving around things even into the inter-subjective space? Or in dreams, as they say you would find in the Bible and in ancient peoples and in peoples of many cultures, the Haitians that I worked with, do other, in dreams, are we open to voices, other voices in the spirit world, let's say? But other entities, other knowledge. And so this then gets into the materialist frame because obviously with the iron box of materialism, we have a buffered self and it's all between your ears. And that psychedelics would bring us to that highest truth. But what Strassman found instead was people didn't have this kind of clear light experience. They had entity encounters. Lizards, elves, all kinds of things, aliens, and some of whom weren't necessarily benevolent. I think there was one person, one of the participants, you know, meets this alien and the participant is really scared and she goes, all is love, all is love. And the entity says something like, even here, or something like that. They weren't necessarily loving. Often they're just kind of detached and want to operate on you, whatever. And, you know, to me this again is similar to my experience with spiritual but not religious people over on the New Age spectrum and they're just anxious for these spiritual experiences. And I'm thinking, how do you know that it's Disneyland on the other end, on the other side of the door? How do you know that there's not something real there that has an agenda for you, that wants to colonize you? You thought you were going to colonize it and take from it the spoils of a virgin land. What if you are the virgin land and something else is looking to colonize you? So it's interesting. When psychedelic researchers think about these kinds of things that you might meet on a trip, they will often try to bring a Buddhist perspective, like Aldous Huxley. These are just emanations of your mind. So like just as the Tibetan book of the dead says, after you die you might meet scary monsters. Recognize them as just emanations of the clear light of your consciousness. That will transform it. So likewise at the Johns Hopkins laboratory, you get given trip guides. This is the laboratory that's been very key to the psychedelic renaissance. And these guides say anything scary that you meet, these are just emanations of your own consciousness. Recognize it, go towards it, accept it and surrender to it and become one with it. Now what's interesting about this, and he's going to go on, these are assertions. These are basically assertions based on the materialist framework. They're not based on evidence. I was just re-listening to a note in the network video on Sam Harris and South Park. And you know when Sam Harris is talking about, you know, religion is stuff based on bad evidence. Well these are assertions based on no evidence. In fact, the evidence seems to say the other things. The direct experience is one of, hmm, I'm encountering a being that does not have my best interests at heart. Well don't worry about that. We know there are no other beings. How do we know there are no other beings? This is not a thing that you can prove or disprove. These are statements of faith. And so you're just going to tell people, don't worry about it. Okay, but maybe they should. But what if that's not the case? That's just one theological perspective. Another theological perspective, like say a kind of shamanic perspective or traditional Christian perspective, might be that these aren't just emanations of your conscience. These aren't just emanations of your conscience. These are actual separate independent entities which could be malevolent, could be harmful to you. And so you shouldn't go towards them, accept them, and surrender them. And it's the job of the shaman to defend you from them. Now what's interesting here too is that, and there's a context here, and there are assertions, and worldviews make assertions about realities. And again, the interpretation and the experience are always going hand in hand. And so what I really enjoyed from this guy was his honesty of saying, hey, wait a minute, these are theological presuppositions that people are bringing to the experience. And again, if I know a number of you have read Miracles, and I reread Miracles at least once or twice a year just because it's that deep a book. But C.S. Lewis begins with a ghost story and says, you know, the only person I know that's ever seen a ghost doesn't believe in ghosts. Well, what does that mean? It means, well, it's experience and your interpretive filter. And these things, these things work together. So, I don't know, these are interesting. I guess the point of this is, is that you can't just, you know, this isn't just science. This is also theology and metaphysics. And it's also just totally beyond our pay grade. Who the hell knows, right? I don't know if... No one in medical school has been taught this stuff. Well, even when David reframes it there, I just kind of chuckle because how would medical school know? Now, I've been, I didn't bring the book in, I've been taking a look at George Marsden's book on the university. And part of what Marsden was comparing was Abraham, this is getting really nerdy in terms of reformed theology, B.B. Warfield and Abraham Kuyper. And Abraham Kuyper basically said, well, there's, there's, there's science that the regenerate Christian scientist does versus the unregenerate Christian science. That's kind of the reformed antithesis. B.B. Warfield was a little bit horrified by that. Said, no, there's one science. And that, that itself is an interesting conversation. But, but it gets to the, it gets to the point that these, these theological presuppositions deeply matter. And I didn't decide on an end point yet. So let me, let me go a little bit further. Towards, you know, the nature of the spirit world. And this is why, you know, Ernst Junger, the writer, said to Albert Hoffman, I, you know, you're, you might be messing with stuff just that you shouldn't mess with. Albert Hoffman being the guy who invented LSD. You might potentially be opening portals that you shouldn't. In the global Ayahuasca survey, one fifth of respondents said they'd felt under energetic attack during or after an Ayahuasca survey. That's 20 percent. That's a huge amount. So you look at indigenous cultures and the, you know, the emphasis they put on the need for protection, you know, the need for spiritual prophylactics when you're, when you're in, you know, opening yourself up. I don't know. Should we know about that? Should we think about that? And I said this to Roland Griffiths, you know, the lead scientist. I said, what's your position on entities? Do you believe in bad spirits? Do you think we need protection from bad spirits? And he was like, well, I would just probably see them as, I would not see that as a belief. I would not encourage that belief, he said. But I say it's interesting whether I suppose, let's say in the future we'll have lots of different psychedelic centers that we can go to. That's already happening, right? And each of those psychedelic centers will basically have a different model of the universe. So you're not just going to pick your drug. You're not going to just going to pick your center. You're going to pick your universe. Do you go to a universe that's totally atheist, where everything is just aspects of your imagination? Do you go to a universe where there are good and bad spirits and that center will help kind of protect you from the bad spirits? Do you go to a universe which is Buddhist, where all things are just emanations of pure consciousness? So, you know, in the old days we just had to pick our therapist. But in 20 years we'll be picking our universe. Picking our metaphysics. Yeah, exactly. So this is, and that's interesting. And it's, I think, I suspect it'll go the way of, you know, William James thought. You know, he was a pluralist that perhaps reality isn't one. He came up with the word multiverse. We're going to, you know, we're going to have these multiple universes that we can visit through different substances. But when he, when he, when, when Jules Evans makes that transition, he's actually moved the conversation over a little bit. And, and he once again has it as sort of asserted the materialist posture of humanity at the top of the pyramid being the chooser and the decider. But to go back to the conversation a few seconds, the question was, well, do you need protection? Well, protection of what sort? And protection from what? And, and then to just slip back into us being the chooser or decider presumes that, in a sense, the walls are up from these forces and we ourselves are, are buffered, are buffered selves. Oops. How difficult to fit is this? And so to me, you know, it's really helpful to, to understand worldviews and what they are. You see, we can't appropriate, appropriate or integrate experiences without interpretation. If you have, if you have an experience that you can't assimilate, it's just out there. And in fact, a lot of psychologists that work on trauma recognize that in many ways, traumatic experiences are those types of experiences and they sort of get stuck in the brain. And then they do this, I think it's EMDR where you're looking at a light bar and you're, you know, just by moving your eyes in a certain way and following the lights, you're helping your brain to reprocess. Now, now again, this is very much getting into the, into neosacramentalism because the question is, well, how do these layers connect? And now we're, now we're in the realm of, of, of magic, of, of alchemy. How, how does, how does the spirit world connect with the physical world? And, and what if in fact we are not alone? I, I watched a Joe Rogan a couple of days ago, Cox, was it Brian Cox? And they started talking about extraterrestrials. And, you know, it's interesting where we are willing to go into that space, but to suggest that there might actually be beings and entities around us and among us that are spiritual. Well, that's just crazy talk. Oh, okay. Well, is it, is it really crazy talk or is it our desire that we keep them at bay? And is it the fact that such beings perhaps are smart enough, not, you know, smarter than they are? And then to just simply jump through our hoops and show up under our microscopes and show up in front of our cameras when we choose them to be. I mean, we, we're not, we're not going to be able to do that. I mean, we're smart enough to play those games with each other. You would imagine that beings at least as smart as we are would be able to kind of have a sense of what's going on in our lives. Now, again, worldviews have their different worldviews and it's interesting. Well, you can pick your worldview. But do you really pick your worldview? That's the question. Many of the kind of people that we're talking about today are people who are not really smart enough to be able to do that. And so we're not going to be able to do that. Well, I don't just start believing in Jesus because our beliefs are not subject to our volition, subject to our wills and rightfully so. Because if our beliefs were merely subject to our volition, then we would be able to do that. Well, I don't just start believing in Jesus because our beliefs are not subject to our volition, subject to our wills and rightfully so. Because if our beliefs were merely subject to our wills, well, we already know people who practice willful blindness. And that, in a sense, is one step towards your beliefs being subject to our wills. The reason we stay alive is because our beliefs are not subject to our wills. And the competition between will and belief is always there for our own survival. We have absorbed these interpretive frameworks, worldviews, and this necessarily pushes us to interpret new experiences. In other words, you're going to, if you think about, let's say that the Don Hoffman interface metaphor for our relationship with whatever it is that's out there, okay, our interface is our interpretive structure. Again, this is Jordan Peterson in his conversation with Sam Harris. This is this a priori structure that, again, watch the wheeze, that we have developed, meaning humanity extended through time, humanically broadly in civilization. These are the interpretive structures that we bring to experience. And in fact, it's so hilarious to me, not just hilarious, but a little bit terrifying, these parents who are saying, well, I'm going to let my child choose their gender. And it's like, really, you're, you don't think that even that decision is imposing and beginning to form your child into a worldview. You cannot help but form your child into a worldview. And in fact, you started that before, we know that unborn children listen through the walls of their mother's stomach and already start to pick up the verbal, Chinese babies are more capable of speaking Chinese than babies that have not been subject to the sounds of their mother and father and people around their mother talking. We know this. And so the imagination that this child is this this formless void and I'm the goal of a parent is to somehow preserve this child. What are you going to put them in a bubble? You start thinking this through and you say, this makes no sense. In fact, the act of choosing to do this to your child, in fact, is an imposition and already forming that child. We grow up in worldviews and our children absorb it. It's not even done consciously. They're just watching us. And that's why when people ask me about parenting, I say, if you want to impact your child, be the person you want your child to become. Because this is what's happening anyway. So the degree to the degree that you have control over yourself. Well, that's really what your child will pick up. But again, it won't pick up perfectly. I have five children. All five of my children are different. And so there's there's there's the nature nurture stuff. I mean, this is tremendously complicated, but worldviews are absorbed and they're not subject to our wills. And then they, in fact, do bind and blind. Now, the three major worldview options that are that these are big picture things that are really on the table right now. The dominant ones seem to be the materialist, which which most of us are familiar with in the secular world. You have the buffered self that we imagine. Well, if you if you take a psychedelic and somehow this is connecting places in your mind, even that representation is a part of the materialist framework. Because, for example, a Haitian who lies down and dreams like this one woman did about me and says that says I dreamed about you last night and you're surrounded by fruit and flowers. Well, what did that mean? Well, you're going to have many children. OK, well, she wasn't these according to her. These weren't ideas in her head. Now, a Westerner like myself, who's highly impacted by secularism will listen to that and say, oh, but I've got a great deal of skepticism because I've been so impacted by secularism. But an African would hear that in a different way and and different Asian peoples would hear that in different ways. I mean, this is the nature of culture and the diversity of human experience. So you've got the materialist, let's call them the Hindu Buddhist framework and then the Christian framework. And again, there are many more. I get that. But I'm just going to talk about these three because I don't have time to talk about everything. Plus, our consciousness can't manage more than two or three things at a time anyway. So the materialist has the buffered self. It's all in your head. And humanity is the top monkey where we'll kind of well, I'll choose which world I want. Really? Is you see, we just finished talking to the Sam Harris's type that say, well, choice is an illusion. And all the brain books that say choice is an illusion. And we jump right over here and say, well, I'll choose. And it's like, well, what who's who's you? What is you? Aren't you just simply the sum of all of these experience? Is there a little chooser inside of you that's choosing? How does this work? Then there's the Hindu Buddhist where and there are metaphysical assertions governing and and you'll Julian Evans. I thought articulated that well that well, suddenly when when you're in this one worldview and you start to get some data that is in dissonance with your with your worldview. Well, now suddenly you have choices to make. You can maybe try to assimilate it. You can try to colonize it. You can turn it away and push it away. These are all the usual things that we do when we're struck with dissonance. And then the third is the Christian. And and there is a story with characters now. A regular frustration of mine and I already voiced this, the ancients who practice this stuff and were immersed in it in ways far deeper than our secularized selves. Nearly university assert that there are evils and dangers out there. We know that there certainly are even among other people in your species. In other words, you're going on a trip. You get just going to drop your your loved one off in a strange neighborhood that they are as innocent of as a newborn child as a babe in the woods. That is in effect what people are doing again, depending on your worldview. So again, for for materialists, they start these things and they say, well, we'll put them in a room. Well, what do you mean? So they're going to they're going to have this experience in a safe room. Well, what does the safe room look like? Well, it's got, you know, it's got walls around it. Well, safe from what? Well, they're going on a trip. Well, where are they going to? What doors are being open again? All of these are all of these are real questions. Why do we imagine that what lies on the other side of the door is always benevolence? Now, again, you don't have to do a lot of reading. A lot of these peoples are not that hard to find via reading history. Really cool book I read a number of years ago, Blood and Thunder by Hampton Sides about Kit Carson and the conquest of the American West. Fascinating book, writes about the Navajo. It was odd in a way that the Navajo posed such a threat for collectively, they did not have the reputation of being particularly fierce or effective warriors. They seldom fought in large numbers and they lacked the highly developed warrior societies typical among the Plains tribes. The Navajos avoid killing wherever, wherever possible. There's a there's a worldview that's governing because theirs was a culture that a deep seeded fear and revulsion of death. Now, what's interesting in terms of editing here, theirs was a religion would read different from theirs was a culture. We're again, by virtue of our culture, trained to be less dismissive of cultures than we are of religions. They wanted nothing to do with corpses or funerals or anything connected with morality. When a person died inside a Navajo dwelling, the round windowless dome roofed Hogan made of mud and timber, the body had to be removed from the structure by bashing a hole in the north wall and pulling the corpse through it. Then the Hogan had to be destroyed. Think about that, everyone who dies at home, there goes the home. The taint could never be washed out. The presence of death led to witchcraft. It lured resentful ghosts and evil spirits. It upset the fragile order of things. The Navajo did not have a concept of a devil in any sort of Judeo-Christian sense. There was no single evil spirit permeating the world and counterpoised against good. But the ghosts of the dead were devilish enough. They were vexing and malicious and unimaginably frightening and they were everywhere. They could even invade a person's dreams. Okay, now again, as a materialist, you look at this, this is just superstition. There's nothing to it. All right, well, that's your worldview talking. But the funny thing about, again, back to interpretation and experience, what if someone were to tell me that there are creatures that bounce along on two legs and they have a long tail and they're marsupials. They keep their babies in a pouch and there's a strange land somewhere that's full of these creatures and they bounce around and when they fight, they box and they kick. And someone might say, well, that's this mythical key creature called a kangaroo. Now in a couple of months, I'm going to be heading to Australia and I might see a kangaroo and I've never seen one. Well, I believed people when they've told me about kangaroos. I've seen pictures and videos of them and I didn't imagine they were a hoax. People that I grew up and that I sensed to be trustworthy told me that kangaroos existed. So I believe in kangaroos, even though I've never seen one. These are the basic structures of things that we have. If you've never seen something, why would you believe it? Well, then someone has to tell you about it. Well, how do we know the Navajo were wrong? These people weren't crazy. These people weren't stupid. These people had experiences. What do you do with those experiences? Well, you know, Freud moved in and said, well, these are the projections of their fears. I don't find most of those answers satisfactory in terms of the numbers of people that experienced it. Now someone might say, yeah, but you know, you're a pastor. You're around dead people and you have these and you have experiences with dead people. Why don't you have the same experience? I don't know. I've got ideas about it, but I don't know. That's just the way it is. I don't know. I don't know. And you're better off saying I don't know than saying something that you really don't know. The Navajo believed in a class of witches called Skinwalkers who were said to put on wolf pelts and dig up graves. The Skinwalkers would be prowling around at night on all fours. They had pallid white faces and red glowing eyes. Looks like Adam maybe had them on Think Club. And chanted holy prayers backwards to invoke evil deities. They desecrated graves and stole funerary trinkets and jewelry. They removed the dead person's flesh and ground it up to make lethal poison called corpse powder, which the Skinwalkers blew in people's faces, giving them the ghost sickness. Even a fingernail pairing or a strand of hair from a dead person could be used by a Skinwalker to perform diabolical things. What are we to make of this? Is it true? Is it not true? Why did people believe this? Were they stupid? Were they unenlightened? Were they uneducated? Were they wrong? Were they right? One way to see blind spots in your own culture is to try to see yourself through the eyes of another culture. Now again, I've been rewatching this Jordan Peterson, this Tim Keller video, and he has a very interesting passage in this. That's germane to this conversation. The church locally must be as informed as possible by the global church. The global church must be as informed as possible by the global church. Now this is what he was saying. He's saying, I know the sound isn't great on this video, that the church locally must be as informed as possible by the global church. And you might think, well, what's going on there? Well, is this some kind of social justice warrior mantra that, oh, globalism? And he's going to talk about that in a little bit. But basically what this says is, as Jonathan Haidt says, that the purpose of diversity is to expand your filters and to be able to listen to other people. And what's nice about something like a church and the church is that what Christianity offers is a very broad, very multicultural, both in terms of contemporary cultures and historic cultures, a platform with common terminology by which you can actually have productive conversations. That's really what these broad religions offer you. Because you want diversity of experience, but you also want commonality of language so that you can have productive conversations. And this is powerful. I think it's the missionary, of course. It's right in the 80s. He's talking about Leslie Newbigin. This is really radical, but unfortunately it's still radical. A condition for a missionary encounter with our culture would entail the necessity for help in seeing our own culture through Christian minds shaped by other cultures. Paul says we need all the saints to comprehend the greatness of Christ, Ephesians 3, 14 and following. We need their witness to correct ours and our witness to correct theirs, but our need at this moment is the greater one. Now, he's saying the only... Leslie Newbigin had been a missionary in India and he had spent much of the 20th century doing mission work in India, after which he came back to Britain and England and started working there and realized he was coming back to a radically different country. And then he just started doing what missionaries do now, a missionary in retirement, and started writing about and talking about and ministering to what he saw. He learned a ton in India from the people of India, and now he's going to England and he's going to work through that. The only way you can escape cultural captivity is to really listen to people whose minds have been shaped by the gospel in other cultures. They can see your culture far better than you can, and therefore we need to be listening to them. Now, here's...let me just quickly...conservative evangelicals are not good at listening to the global church in many ways, because they see everything through the national interests of America. They also methodologically are way, way, way too proud that the way we do things in America is the way everybody's got to do it everywhere else. So when something really gets big here, we just franchise it. We have the African franchise and the Australian franchise and the Chinese franchise. We just franchise it. Mainline people are a little different, but I'm afraid that because mainline folks very often consider the global church to be in social and sexual morality unenlightened, there's a tendency to say, well, they'll catch up someday. And of course, they're used to this from Western people. It's called imperialism. They've been kidding for 200 years, saying, oh, so we're going to catch up someday as the light is you. So in different ways, both the mainline church and the conservative evangelical church do not know how to listen to them. Lamin-Sane, in his great book, whose religion is Christianity, makes the case that Christianity is far more culturally flexible than modernity, or than any other religion too. And he's a foreign Muslim. Far more culturally flexible and therefore allows people to, though they're transformed, I'll show you here in a second, transformed by Christianity, of course. And yet they're transformed in their culture. And then their culture is able to give us new insights into the gospel and we need to hear their insights. So he tells a story. He actually talks about this as in whose religion is Christianity. He says, you know, in 1900, you all know these things. Nine million people were Christians. Nine percent of the African population today is 380 million. Actually, that's when the book was written, so I'm sure it's more. 50 percent. Christianity is growing seven to ten times faster than the population. And he says, what is fueling this extraordinary explosion? And this is what he says. He says, if you're an African, your Africanness means you believe in the spirit world. You see spirits everywhere. You believe in the spirit world. That's what makes you an African. But there's a problem, he says, and that is the fear. What do you do with the evil spirits? The fear and the superstition. So he says, let's say you go off to Oxford or Harvard or something like that. On the one hand, they're going to say, oh, we absolutely love your culture. We're really, we're really open to everybody's culture. We really are. We want you to eat your African food and dress your African dress. But by the way, there are no spirits. There's no demons. There's no nothing. There's nothing. Nothing at all. It's all gone. Everything has a scientific explanation, but we really love your culture. So in other words, so Muhammad Sani says, you know, on the one hand, you know, modernity says, oh, we love all cultures. On the other hand, we're going to make you just like us. We're going to make you just like us. We're going to make you an educated, enlightened questioner. But he says, what happens is you go to the Bible and the Bible says, yeah, guess what? There are demons, but there is a savior who has defeated them on the cross. And this is what he says at the end of this statement. He says, African people sense in their hearts that Jesus did not mock their respect for the sacred, and were their clamor for an invincible savior. So they beat their sacred drums for him until the stars skipped and danced in the skies. And after that dance, the stars weren't blue anymore. Christianity helps Africans become renewed Africans, not revenge Europeans. And so we are not, unless we listen to Christian African Asian Latin Americans, renewed Christian African Latin American Asians, we will not become renewed Westerns, period. Lastly, number seven. I just want to add, get a little bit of this next point in because what he says is really critical. We must never lose our grip on the difference between gospel grace and just religion. It's one place where Leslie Newigan says, we have to show the modern world that we've learned our lesson. That's interesting. That we understand the difference between bearing witness to the truth and pretending to possess the truth. We understand the difference between bearing witness to the truth and asserting that we possess the truth. And I think that is such a key point in all of this, because people are looking for evidence that you have the truth. But listening to you assert that you have it, that's what everybody does. So how do you choose your own worldview? Well, you sort of can and sort of can't. And that's just it, because again, you've been formed from before you were born. The very determined realize that it is sort of a second order governing. You know, we've talked a little bit about second order thinking. Well, this is sort of a second order governing. You don't do it by doing it directly. And you'll find this in religions, because religions know this. That you don't become religious by, well, I'm doing Christianity. Well, what does that mean? Well, that means you do other things and you become a Christian as you do them. Because the elephant changes slowly as the wise rider figures out that elephants are shaped by paths more than the knocking of a stick on that hard elephant hide. You have to discipline yourself to immerse yourself within the community, the tradition and the practices that will have it grow in you. In other words, your worldview is more like a plant. It's less like a thing that you make. It grows in you because it's always taking in these experiences and assimilating them in certain ways. That's how your worldview grows. And in fact, I would say that your yourself in you is more like that. You don't say, OK, myself is going to be like this. We know from our bad habits that ourselves are remarkably resistant to a lot of our conscious minds agendas for them. So in fact, you have to grow into them. Well, how do you grow into them? Well, how do how are people changed? People are changed by the people they spend time with, by the communities that they immerse themselves in, by the by the media and the material they immerse themselves in, by the thoughts that they surround themselves by and so on and so on and so on. In other words, the way you reshape yourself is by choosing the context in which you live. And that context will then the path will then be absorbed by the elephant, not just the whacking and nagging of the rider on top. The smart Jonathan Haidt stuff. The smart rider trains the elephant by virtue of the path. That's how worldviews get shaped in us. But how are we to pick another book recommendation for you? A severe mercy, powerful book, beautiful book, emotionally difficult book. Don't read this book if you're struggling in your marriage, because especially if you're a woman, because Sheldon Van Aachen writes this book about this incredible marriage that he had with his wife. And I don't want to give away spoilers, but it just that the kind of love story that I think many moviemakers would hardly dare to portray because it almost seems too good to be true. But just like every good story about a happy time, the happy time doesn't last. And why would he call it a severe mercy? But in this story, there are there are letters from C.S. Lewis, because this was a friend of C.S. Lewis and C.S. Lewis was an avid letter writer. And he wrote letters back and forth. And actually, one of the treasures we get from Sheldon Van Aachen's book is a rundown from Lewis of why he became a Christian and not a Hindu, which is which is very interesting, because you would think from Lewis, well, why would Lewis become a Hindu? But remember, Lewis is very fascinated by mythology and and very much after leaving atheism wanted an enchanted world. Well, you know, look who his friends were, Tolkien. Tolkien basically wrote for us an enchanted world. And one of my last videos, someone said, not enough Tolkien references. This is a this is a part of a letter from C.S. Lewis to Sheldon Van Aachen describing why he chose Christianity. And I think we see in some in a place here also the sense of why I call this neo sacramentalism is is what is coming again after our secular, our our de-enchanting, our disenchanting the world. So I'll read this part of C.S. Lewis's letter to Sheldon Van Aachen. I don't agree with your picture of the history of religion. Christ, Buddha, Muhammad and others elaborating an original simplicity. OK, so this is this is one of the things that Charles Taylor writes a bit about in in a secular age. There's there's all these in a saying and story structures and one of the story structures is, you know, we want to get back to an original simplicity. And you find this story underneath every time you see an organic label on a food product or or we're going to have a paleo diet or or people weren't people there are the line. People weren't designed to inhabit office buildings. They were designed for the the Serengeti or something like that. So so Lewis is pushing back on Sheldon Van Aachen here. I don't agree with your picture of the history of religion. Christ, Buddha, Muhammad and others elaborating an original simplicity. I believe Buddhism to be a simplification of Hinduism and Islam to be a simplification of Christianity. Clear, lucid, transparent, simple religion, Dao plus shadowy, ethically ethical God in a background. In other words, I mean, even Jordan Peterson's chaos order. I mean, that's such a powerful framework that that scales on so many ways and so beautifully elaborate. So so there's a you know, there's a there's a simple religion. But but the problem with a simple religion is you have to scale it out in order for it to be applicable for your life. Dao plus a shadowy, ethical God in the background is a late development, usually arising among highly educated people in great cities. What you really start with is ritual myth and mystery and death and return of Balder or Osiris. The dances, initiation sacrifices, the divine kings. So in other words, again, Lewis is talking about mythos over against that are philosophers. Aristotle or Confucius, hardly religious at all. The only two systems in which the mysteries and the philosophies. That's what Lewis is trying to do. He's trying to say, I need the mysteries for the elephant, let's say, and I need the philosophies for the mind. And Lewis says, as I scan all of that, the only two systems that for Lewis really found gave him satisfaction were Hinduism and Christianity. There you get both metaphysics and cult continuous with the primeval cult. In other words, it scales. It's it scales so that the person with a low IQ can gain wisdom and flourish in life even without the philosophies. But it also scales all the way up to the philosophies. And what Lewis is going to say is the odds are that the true religion will scale seamlessly between the simple cult all the way to the intellectual philosophy. That is my first step. That is why my first step was to be sure that one or the other of these had the answer. For the reality can't be one that appeals either only to savages or to highbrows. This undercuts intellectual elitism. This undercuts esotericism. Real things aren't like that. And this is Lewis's point. Real things aren't like that. For example, matter is the first most obvious thing you meet. Milk, chocolate, apples, and almost and also the object of quantum physics. In other words, real stuff is in fact completely scalable. I can look at. No, let's have my cell phone stand again. I can look at my cell phone scan stand and my dog or cat can interact with this. But at another level, I can consider this to be a cultural artifact. Well, I can ponder its shape. I can ponder the systems that went into devising it. It scales all the way up and real things are like that. And so Lewis says that for him helped him decide what would likely be most true. Because it would have to scale just like real things. It would have to both be so simple a child could apprehend it and so deep you could never exhaust it. There's no question. There is no question of just a primitive of archaic primitive religions. There's no question of just a crowd of disconnected religions. The choices between A, the materialist world picture, what I can't believe and again read miracles for that. He gave up the materialist world picture. B, the real archaic primitive religions which are not moral enough. C, the claimed fulfillment of these in Hinduism. D, the claimed fulfillment of these in Christianity. In other words, what he was saying is in a sense like Peterson, he saw all of the mythology out there. And well, this is kind of like the ontological argument. It's kind of like C.S. Lewis's argument from desire. All of these primitive religions must be connected to something. And I think this is part of the reason Peterson is having a powerful effect on people. Because he's bringing out all of this and he's making sense of it and saying this stuff is psychologically coherent. But all of these things must be connected to something. And then Lewis had to answer the question, do they finally find their fulfillment in Hinduism? Or do they finally find their fulfillment in Christianity? Which system actually promises and fulfills or at least has the capacity to fulfill the primitive religions? So again, you've got the primitive religions and the philosophies. You've got the scale of matter, the simplistic real thing all the way to the reality that every real thing is not only simple, but more complex than my mind can fathom. But the weakness in Hinduism is that it doesn't really join the two strands. Unredeemably, savage religion goes on in the village. The hermit philosophies in the forest and neither really interfaces with the other. It is only Christianity which compels a high brow like me to partake in a ritual blood feast. See for Lewis, this is where his rider and his elephant are one. The brilliant Oxford Don participates in a ritual love feast and need not be embarrassed because he's not betraying the other side of himself. Only in Christianity, which compels a high brow like me to participate in a ritual feast and also compels a central African convert to attempt an enlightened universal code of ethics. So you have the feast and the morality. You have the wholeness of things in themselves as we find in apples, pomegranates and tangerines. And then he asked him, have you tried Chesterton's Everlasting Man, the best popular apologetic I know? Lewis was a big fan of Chesterton. So, well psychedelics. Part of the reason I don't feel the need to explore psychedelics is that actually in some ways I think psychedelics are a chemical shortcut to something that religions themselves offer just usually in a much more patient and demanding way. As a Christian, I have my own and most Christians do my own pathways to ecstasy. Christians have pathways to ecstasy. Well, there's books, there's music, there's the church, there's fellowship. There's all of these things and you say, well, I've been to church and it's hardly ecstatic. Well, but again, what you do in religion is you grow up into it. So let's say if you're going to pursue Buddhism, well, you're going to meditate. Well, you're going to have to meditate for years to achieve certain levels of that, to achieve certain experiences. I get that. Part of the reason certain kinds of churches in Christianity have grown very quickly is because via music they have been able to produce in people an ecstatic experience in worship. In many ways, look at the Orthodox and their churches and their dome with Christ on top and the art and the icons. These are all to incite experiences within us. Part of the reason that Protestants turned their head from it was a question of enthusiasm and that's a whole other conversation. My memory is knocking on my conscious saying, was it rebel wisdom that was talking about that or was it another video that you saw? That's always the problem that my consciousness committee watches and remembers more than I can pull out into my conscious brain and spit out here on YouTube. But if I find it again, I'll say, oh, yeah, you should make a little video and talk about that, so on and so forth. So I don't feel the need to explore psychedelics because in a sense as a Christian, I'm practiced in ecstasies in far less chemical ways. I don't know if that makes sense to you, but there are books I can turn to, there are stories I can turn to, there are songs I can turn to. I have practiced ways of calming myself. I have practiced ways of controlling myself. I have practiced ways of experiencing ecstasy and union with the divine in worship. That's what comes in time in pursuing the practice of a religion. And again, the elephant isn't trained by simply wanting it to be so. The elephant is trained by changing the path. So there's, I hope this is helpful in some way. Every now and then I finish a video and I think, that was a good video. Most of the time I finish a video and say, no, that wasn't such a good video. Maybe I should just erase it. But another part of me says, I've just invested an hour or so into this video. Erasing it would seem to be a waste of time. I'll throw it up there on YouTube and if anybody finds it helpful, God be praised. So there it is, a video on psychedelics.