https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FjeVOfa2YcU

 Hi, this is Paul. I just finished my sermon series on the Sermon on the Mount, and those of you who are following the rough drafts or the sermon series over on the Church Channel would probably note all of the references to Game B, all of these kind of things. Usually when I'm working on my sermons, all the same stuff is flowing through the same head. Obviously a lot of people have questions about Estuary versus Living Stones Online. They're gonna be different, of course, because I'm hoping to have Living Stones Online really much more in shape by September. That's sort of what I'm pushing towards, getting live streaming going and through the app and everything there's an app coming. Estuary is gonna be longer in development, whatever one's up turning to be, but it's all going through my same head. Rebel Wisdom is having this big series on sense-making, and a number of videos ago I talked about, what do they mean by sense-making? I'm trying to make sense of their sense-making, but I'm not the smartest man in the world. Things take a little bit of time sometimes to sink in, but I'm understanding it. So this week's rough draft dealt with the difference between the beginning of the Sermon on the Mount, which are the Beatitudes, and the end of the Sermon on the Mount, where Jesus gets fairly apocalyptic. Now some of you might not be familiar with the apocalyptic genre. It's not unique to the Bible. You can find other texts that are apocalyptic, especially in the Hebrew vein, and so describing a genre is always a little bit difficult. You have to describe the patterns. You can see the development of the apocalyptic in the Hebrew prophets. The book of Daniel that many Jewish communities consider part of the writings, Christians consider it part of the prophets. In the book of Joel you have the Day of the Lord, and the Day of the Lord, if you've been following my rough drafts you'll know I talked about the Day of the Lord fairly often. It's a vitally important theme, and I think if you want to understand the theological context of timekeeping by the New Testament, you have to understand how the conclusions that Christians came about Jesus relate to the Day of the Lord. You'll find the Day of the Lord in the book of Joel where it's a locust invasion or it's an invasion of an alien army. You'll find the Day of the Lord, often in the Old Testament, it'll be rendered as that day in that day. And the Day of the Lord is this, it isn't, it isn't, it isn't. It certainly comes on, yeah forget to get dressed in the morning, to finish getting dressed in the morning. I always think about the Day of the Lord as a pre-echo. So the Day of the Lord is the last day in this age, but it echoes throughout. It's Judgment Day, it's the consummation, all those Christian terms. The day of your death is the Day of the Lord. The day when the doctor tells you have cancer, has cancer is the Day of the Lord. Good Friday is the Day of the Lord. Easter Sunday is the Day of the Lord. The Day of the Lord comes and comes and comes and basically it's the day when existence, it's when existentially everything comes to a defined moment, okay. And so that can happen with a job opening, a wedding day. It can be, it can be good or bad, they'll be totalizing moments. There's Kronos in Greek which is running time and there's Kairos in Greek which is moments and it's connected with that. And so the Hebrew, the Hebrew scriptures have these kinds of events in them, but you know the Bible wasn't written, someone wrote Genesis and then Exodus and all of that. The Bible is a library and the layout of the books is not chronological. And so there's, there's an apocalyptic sensitivity and in, and in Matthew, Mark and Luke you have the little apocalypse which is, which is, which is quite a bit more apocalyptic. That's when Jesus talks about the destruction of the temple and all of these things. But as I'm pointed to in the sermon this week, the end of the, the end of the Sermon on the Mount has that sense of apocalyptic. There's an eschatological perspective. What do I mean by that big theological world? Eschatology are last things and last can both mean ultimate in terms of ultimate, but also can mean kind of conclusive and it can kind of mean, the word end has that similar nature to it. It's the end of all things is, is understood in a couple of different ways. It can mean the chronological end of all things, but it can also mean the point towards which all things are moving, alright? And eschatology has that dual sense in it as well. And you just plain see this in Jesus' disruptive nature. If you read the canonical Gospels closely, people don't quite know what to do with Jesus on a very regular basis and, and I think part of the reason the canonical Gospels are so different from a lot of the far later Gospels that weren't admitted into the canon later on is that over time we, the further you get from Jesus, the more we tend to clean him up and tidy him up and make him fit all of our categories. And, and by nature, real true things are beyond our categories when in fact they are indeed our categories. Real true things are beyond our categories. We can't exhaust them and, and this is part of the aspect of science that we both enjoy and avoid. This is, this is both what makes Jesus such an engaging figure, but, but also, and also a figure that winds up being appropriated by pretty much every faction and every time in, in Jesus, in the Christian world. There's this startling and sometimes discouraging habit of Christians to take whatever aspect of Christianity they're trying to promote at the time and say, well, Jesus was the champion of that. Part of what, part of, to me of what speaks of the authenticity of the Gospels is that they, they, the Gospels themselves don't seem to fit. Every time we sort of make a category and create a little box, there's always a portion of them that's outside. And again, that's, that's a function of real things, but it's also part of the reason that, as, as Tom Holland noted, after, after 2000 years, these things continue to read fresh and these four seemingly random authors, they're, the identity of which continues to be debated and contested historically and theologically, all seem to be able to do it at the same time and the thing they all have in common is Jesus. And so there's something apocalyptic about Jesus that's, that's genuinely disturbing to us. Now, the Book of Revelation is a book in the Bible that people really don't know what to do with. The book is easier to understand if you know the rest of the Bible because of the many things that can be said of the Book of Revelation. One of the things that is quite clear is that the author is, is taking pieces from Genesis, from Exodus, from Ezekiel, from Daniel, and, and integrating Jesus into it. In many ways, it's the, it's the integration of this, of this apocalyptic son-of-man theme into the context of the Roman Empire. And it's, it's just a, it's a dramatic, scalding book. I mean, the first, the, the opening sequence of the book is just dramatic with this, this figure who's, who's, you know, whose face shines like the sun and eyes are like blazing fire and holds the seven stars, which is, you know, basically astrology and, and the seven candle stands and, you know, just, just full of this kind of symbolism. And then, of course, chapters two and three, the letters to the churches, and, you know, all, all of them, you know, all of them are dramatic. Most of them are con, are condemning. But this is, you read the Book of Revelation, you get a real quick course in apocalyptic literature. Now, there's been a lot of comment about the rise of apocalyptic literature, and, and I would assert that basically apocalyptic literature, apocalyptic thinking arises when the normal order is disruptive. So in many ways, rebel wisdom sense-making ideas are analogous to the expression of apocalyptic when, when people's, when people's normal sense- making functions fall apart. The plagues in Egypt are apocalyptic. This is, this is in many ways, and we're going to get into the difference between the Hebrew god and the, the Greek and Egyptian gods. This is, this is the Hebrew god basically pulling the rug out from the meta-divine realm of all the Egyptian gods that are supposed to be functioning to provide Egypt with the kind of stability and security and prosperity that Egypt had grown accustomed to. The normal order is disrupted in the corruption and destruction of Solomon's temple. There are vivid visions of that in the Book of Ezekiel, and of course descriptions of that in, in others of the historical prophets in the Old Testament, and, and this spawns this, well, what, what do we do now? What do we think now? We thought God was this localized entity, but here he shows up to Ezekiel over near Babylon, and he claims to be the god of all the earth. According to the script, when, when the god of the Hebrews is beaten in war, then the god of Egypt, the god of the Hebrews is, is conquered and in some ways subsumed. If you watch Jordan Peterson's treatment of, of polytheism, and Peterson's lays some of that out. Peterson isn't a theologian nor an Old Testament scholar, but it was common that, that gods would get subsumed by the victor god, but here the Hebrew god isn't dissolved, assimilated, subsumed, absorbed by this polytheistic process. And then when you have, now the Persian Empire, the Persian domination of, of the I mean, the book of Isaiah calls Cyrus a servant of the Lord, so, you know, talk about a, a welcome wagon. Cyrus, of course, and Darius, I mean, the temple gets rebuilt. The Persians had a very different understanding of the way to treat their vassal nations than the Babylonians or the Assyrians, but then the Greeks and the Romans come, and the Greeks and the Romans are full of themselves. And of course, the, the best way to live is the Greek way, and so there are Greeks and barbarians, and in a sense, to be Greek means to conquer the barbarians by winning them over of this better way to live, and the Romans, in many ways, picked up on the project and, and did it more pragmatically, and so you have really Hellenism versus Hebraism during the Greek and Roman occupations, and, and of course, it's during the Roman occupation before the destruction of the second that this is the context for, context for Jesus' work. Now, much of the context for much of the rest of the New Testament is the rest of the Roman Empire, so you have Saul, who becomes Paul, and, and his attempt to, to assimilate this, the revelation of Jesus Christ into the life of these synagogues, and then these, the God-fearers who come up again and again in the book of Acts, and, and that gets manifest in the churches, and of course, the churches will grow and grow, and eventually, Christianity will triumph over the Empire. Now, I want to do a little thinking, this is all rough draft thinking, about the relationship between the archetypal, the symbolic, and I'm gonna call the other the, the logic, as in logo, logoic, let's just call it logic, and, and sort of logic, logical. Once we get things down into tiny little discrete words, we tend to manipulate them and build systems, okay? Archetypal is broad, systemic, relational, communal patterns, and, and Jordan Peterson nicely, in Maps of Meaning class, was able to talk about these archetypes, and in his lessons, talk about the tyrannical father, and the devouring mother, and, and these patterns are large and broad, they're repetitive, they're systemic, but they're highly relational. Agents participate in them, wittingly or unwittingly, they're, they're communal, they're, they're between actors and agents, they're, but they're, they're patterns nevertheless, quite obviously, and perhaps a step, so, so, so archetypal is very, very large. Now symbolic is perhaps a little bit smaller, and probably Jonathan Peugeot would have something to teach me in all of this, but, but, but patterns are distilled into smaller recognizable, in some ways, manipulatable portions and fractals, and so we can much more consciously work out these pattern symbols, and use these symbols, and, and, and so that's, in a sense, a little smaller, little easier chunk for us to deal with, which is the symbolic, and, and to breaking down further, we get into the logical, okay? Let's call it the logical, or the logic, where, where it's further distilled, it's reproduced in language, it's in written language, it's, it's, it's down to math, you have law, you have morality. Now, now I would argue that apocalyptic emerges when the logic fails, and, and so we, what we start doing is we start moving back up this conscious realization chain into the symbolic, because we begin to realize that these, these systems are no longer working. We might struggle to figure out and articulate why they're no longer working, but we just know that there's not a technical solution to our problems. The, and, and you can tell this when it's common when you listen to, especially political type speech, that, well, everything will be solved by more money and better managers. Well, that, that's sort of the realm of the logic, all right? Money and managers. You get above the logic into the symbolic, and, well, now, now we're starting to ask much more fundamental questions about what is good, because the logic won't really tell you what is good. The logic is more like the scientific image. It, it might tell you how to do something, but it won't tell you what is good, and, and so that the symbolic layer then tends to have more resonance, but, but even, you know, the more things fall apart, the, the bigger things go up, and the bigger questions are in play, and the, the consensus, that the communities of consensus break down, and, and there's going to have to be work on all three of these levels to really begin to put together a new system, to put together a new narrative, to put together a new story, and, you know, Peterson talked about this, and this is sort of where the prophets and the poets and the artists and the filmmakers really come into being, and they don't, you know, I've been around creatives enough, and I'm creative enough to, to know that many of the creatives, they don't quite know what they're doing. They just kind of know the patterns of doing these things, and, and, and it's where sort of the group A-ness and the group B-ness that sort of comes together, and, and, and they, and they express, and they do, and they, and then sometimes, you know, it's like the old saying, well, if I, if I, if I could explain what the story is about, I wouldn't have to tell the story, that the story in that way, in a sense, tells you what it's about in a way that the logic can't really break down and describe. Now, Peugeot quite recently had a really good video on the stories we live in, where he read this, this piece that he had, that he had written for, for Word on Fire, and it really gets us into, and, and, and if you haven't watched that video, you should very much watch it or read the article from, from Word on Fire, because, you know, he gets into the, he gets into the point that, you know, these, what's happening with these superhero stories that we have? Well, in many ways, all of these superhero movies that we're doing, the comic books, and it's not incidental or coincidental that the superheroes are coming out of comic books. There's a, there's a certain degree of, there, there's a certain, there's a certain degree in which the, the graphic novel is freed from the logic level and into more of the symbolic level and into the archetypal level. So, so superheroes are in many ways our apocalyptic stories, and if you look at superhero movies, in many ways they're, they're recognizable from a book like the Book of Revelation. Now, one might argue that horror, the horror genre is as well, and maybe I should have another talk with my friend, Burn Powers, because he's, he's much more literate in a bunch of these things than I am, and his, his knowledge of, of, of music and, and art and literature is, and puppetry and texture, I mean, Burn knows about all those things, is far beyond mine. But, but the horror is, is, is sort of there too, but if you look at horror movies, basically what happens is that normal people sort of find the pagan religious trick in order to master the chaotic, uncontrollable, evil forces out there. That's different from a superhero movie. In a superhero movie, we attempt to, we in a sense, bond. We live vicariously through the superhero movie. In a horror movie, we live vicarious through the, the person whose life is in the balance, and much more like, like ancient paganism, we look to manipulate or appropriate or, or do something with forces larger than ourselves in order to quell the chaos or the evil and to restore the world to normal. So, so horror will often simply play with more conventional pagan religious agency in that. But, but superheroes, we in a sense, vicariously identify with and, and bond with the superheroes. And this is where people, you know, they'll dress up as Luke Skywalker or Princess Leia or Captain America or Iron Man. You, you don't find children, you don't find Halloween costumes from the protagonists, sometimes the antagonists, which is telling, but the protagonists from horror movies. You will find people dressing up as, as perhaps Jason from Friday the 13 movies or, or, you know, the, all the, they will, they will dress up as the creatures of chaos for Halloween. But, but they won't, but, but the, the protagonists are often forgotten. Now, now Super, Supernatural, the show that was on TV, they, they tended to blend some of this. But again, it's normal human beings in a context of powers in a meta divine realm that are more powerful than them and they have to go through and learn the spells and the incantations and find the, the sacred relics and the objects and the power and, and in a sense, in that way they're very pagan. Now, also in another way, and, and the genres blend here, but, but Super, Superheroes attempt to integrate technology into the magical. And so, and so Thor is, he's just a god. Well, and you know, part of with the, what, what modern comic book makers can't help but do is sort of bring technology into this. You know, what is the, what is the source of Thor's powers? And you'll hear little bits of that. And of course, in the, in the Star Wars prequels, we heard about the, the midi-chlorians for the Jedi. And, and this is going to get into an important question of whether gods are born or made, whether gods come from God or gods are products of our technology. So superheroes are an attempt to integrate technology with the magical. But now, again, if you haven't watched Christine Hayes's second lecture, I'll, I've referred to it many times. She deals with Kaufman's book, The Religion of Israel and Sari. I, you know, basically me and my videos, you can't get these books for any reasonable price anymore because people are reading them. But Hancock is, so, so superheroes are gods, lowercase g. What do I mean by that? They're full of power, usually lacking wisdom. A great example of this is the movie that came out in like, at, towards the ends of the, of the aughts, which was Hancock, where, where Will Smith is a god and Charlize Theron is a god. And, you know, they're having romantic relational problems and, you know, I'm probably going to have to watch that movie over again. I remember watching it the first time and it, it sort of, it sort of captured me. But, but that movie in many, very, in very many ways sort of bridges the genre, okay, where superheroes are gods. And there's a little scene, you can find it on YouTube where, with the, with the fight between Will Smith and Charlize Theron, where, where she has a little, where she basically comes out and says it, you know, angels, gods, you know, that's, that's what we are. But they're living in a meta-divine realm, okay. And this is very different from the Hebrew conception of God, that, that, that's why you don't have a birth of God in the Hebrew Bible. The creation stories are different in the Hebrew Bible. That, as Christine Hayes notes, these, these gods live in this meta-divine realm. But, God is both agent and arena altogether. Now, now that leads to other questions and challenges within the theological and philosophical system. But, you know, in terms of Will Smith being a god, he fits right in with the, with the ancient pagan realms. And, you know, this came up in Jordan Peterson's conversation with, with Sam Harris, because Sam Harris talks about his daughters liking, I remember who it was, Batgirl or Wonder Woman, or, or of course one of these female, one of these female gods. And, and Jordan Peterson could understand what was happening with Sam Harris's daughters better than Sam could. Because, and Jordan pretty much laid it out in the video. And maybe I'll have to pull up some of those videos and play them again. But I, I'm, I'm thinking of starting a clip channel. And I know I, I said I wasn't going to start a clip channel, but there are sometimes clips I want to use and refer to that I don't necessarily want to take the time to play in my videos, which is sort of how I got started. But, and then clips, you know, take my question and answer sessions on Fridays. Many of those questions and answers are sort of succinct and instead of having a two hour video, they can be a ten or a fifteen minute description. So I'm playing, I'm always playing with different ideas of different things to do. But anyway, Jordan Peterson could understand what was happening with Sam Harris's daughters better than Sam could. Now that sounds offensive, but then if we shifted over to the realm of psychology, you would say, well, he's a psychologist. We expect psychologists to understand what's happening in us to a degree better than even we ourselves can. But, but you add with that Jordan Peterson's understanding of, of mythology and how this plays on us. The kids are working out how to live in their world and the logic is, is still under development. So they're much more symbolic and archetypal. First, again, go back to the first Jordan Peterson biblical series, you know, we watch each other act out things and we, we copy them acting out. You watch children. I remember as a little child, my father's shoes seemed enormously large and I would slip my feet into my father's shoes and I would walk around the house and, and we would, we would act out what we saw our parents do again and again. We couldn't describe it. The, the logic level was not yet present, but the symbolic and the archetypal, those were already coming in. And by the time you get down to the logic, you're at a pretty advanced level, but you're also at a fairly fragile level. Okay. Because the logic won't tell you how to get through the best way to get through that cornfield or even if you should walk through that cornfield. And, and this is why modernity is breaking down and why in many ways, you know, Jonathan Peugeot and his brother's time has come because as Jonathan Peugeot has said many times, he said, you know, I, nobody would understand this if in a sense the spiritual context in which, and I use that word with a lot of intent, that the context is, is, is modernity is breaking down and that's part of the reason we see all of the chaos we are seeing. And I think that's part of the reason we are seeing the ascendance, not just of horror, but especially of superhero movies, because in some ways, this is the way that we as a culture, like little children, are trying to work these things through. And it's the, it's the, it's the writers of graphic novels who are tremendously popular, especially with millennials. Again, these things are not incidental or accidental. That these graphic novels, which, which are less logic, you can do things in a graphic novel. You can express symbolism. You can express archetypal and play with archetypes and symbols easier in a graphic novel than ease, than, than you can with CGI. Part of the problem of CGI is it's too logical. And, and so the, the probably the, you know, the hemisphere of our brain that is working through, you know, all of the rough drafts, not the kind, not the, the left brain that wants to sort of nail everything down. The other side just sees stuff. It says, nah, nah, nah, it's too, you hit that uncanny valley and no, I'd rather watch a graphics, not a graphic novel. And so in many ways, you can sort of watch the evolution of the zeitgeist by watching these characters. And so, you know, Superman comes in during the Depression. You know, Superman, Batman, some of these classic figures come in during that, that disruption of the Depression. And, but, but look at Superman. Truth, justice in the American way. There was a sort of confidence in the culture about its underpinnings, at least at that level. And Superman, just look at him and compare him now to Homelander in Amazon's The Boys. Now, I mentioned Homelander, I mentioned The Boys quite a while back in a video or two. This is not, do not let your children watch The Boys. If you are very sensitive to explicit material of all kinds, do not watch The Boys. The Boys is rough stuff and it's intended to be so. I think part of the poverty of our culture is that, whereas I think cultures, we're so illiterate, we need to be shocked with gore and sex and violence because we can't understand the head nods and we can't understand the looks. And, and the symbolic has broken down so much, it becomes explicit. But, but Superman is about a good guy who, you know, who restores the world to order. Jordan Peterson in one of his videos talked about, I think it was his son, Julian, begging him to go see a movie that Julian wasn't really ready for and Jordan agreed and so they went to the movie and the movie was scary for his son. And so Jordan tells his son, if I'm remembering this correctly, keep watching The Hero. Now you can do that in, you can do that in Superman, but when you look at The Boys and when you look at Homelander and when you look at Tony Soprano and when you look at Breaking Bad and, and when you look at Better Call Saul, who is the hero? There is no hero. And in that way, the tragedy continues. Well, there's a hero in The Boys and we'll get to her. And of course it has to be her. When you get to, when you get to The Boys, the Superman figure, and he's pretty much a carbon copy of Superman, is this character And of course there's lots of layers of politics on this, homeland defense, homeland security. I mean it's, yeah, you can follow the political threads because they're definitely there in a show like this. But in most of these shows, if they're well done, there'll be elements that run counter to political and politically correct narratives as well. And some of those are in The Boys and Homelander is in fact a villain, but he's not, and we'll get into the ways in which he is strong and the ways in which he is weak and vulnerable. Now, if you're not familiar with this or you don't have Amazon Prime and you really don't want to sit and watch, I don't remember, 10 or 12 episodes of some pretty rough stuff, there are a whole variety of pretty good YouTube videos out there that will be spoilerish. They'll give you some spoilers. They won't give you all the spoilers. Obviously if you plan on watching it, then just watch it. The second season is coming out, if it's not out now, it's coming out soon. I've seen it promoted by Amazon. But basically, yeah, you can watch if you watch two or three of these videos, you can pretty much get a lot of the ideas of the premise. It's unlike a lot of things that are out there, it's at least complex thematically and it's fairly well written, even though different groups might not appreciate the shots it takes at a variety of groups, especially evangelical Christians and some of them. It's a very... Yeah, I'm going to watch the second series. And so there's some common tropes in there. The superheroes in these cases are sort of captured by a corporation, an American corporation that they're really celebrities. And the show is about the corruption of celebrity and the corruption and corrupt corporate culture. And most of the videos talking about it will be capitalism. The word capitalism has become a whipping dog, but I don't see people willing to step out of the love of money too often. The corruption of power and lack of accountability, some videos will bring that up. About how systems even than superheroes. I thought some of those themes were pretty good. At bottom though, it is a deeply American production because in many ways, if you can sort of sift through the gore and the shock and all of the rather clever unmasking of the principalities and powers, well, deep down, there's sort of an American folk morality. The hero is the up and coming fresh face. She's now integrated into the seven and she's a really cute blonde hair, blue eyed, has some significant powers and was duped by her religious mother. She got her powers from God and, spoiler alert, these powers are manmade and there's a corporation that's been giving them powers. But the innocence of face to face relationships, the basic goodness of human beings. So morally, if you're to chart the morality or the presumed, assumed and then therefore implicitly promoted morality of the show, it is an American folk morality, which even at the, you watch the current culture war waging, so far at least, and wokeness has sort of taken a few little bites into it, but for the most part, that moral level is still showing some durability. That moral level is not too difficult to deconstruct and Christians have been doing it for a while because Christians have deeper resources with which to critique and address moral archetypes than a lot of people who only have the moral archetypes that they have inherited. So it's full of some common tropes, but the meaning crisis is deep here and in many ways this sort of echoes, if you watched from 2006 to 2010, so I mean Hancock, I think was 2008, Heroes was 2006 to 2010. So there's something at work and so these people with supernatural powers, now of course there's no logical ways of explaining the miracle substance that is given to people so that they now can fly and have x-ray vision and have laser vision and be bulletproof and know the future and travel through time and so all of these, it's fiction, it's, is it science fiction? It's apocalyptic, but the gods are not born that way and their powers are not given to them by god and watch how that language was used in the discussion about born that way and homosexuality and watch how someone like Andrew Sullivan is increasingly disturbed by the erosion of that type of language and you know this stuff gets complex, but many of the things we're talking about within the context of the meaning crisis are at play here. The gods themselves are product of scientific tinkering, the gods themselves are products of us, they're our children, they're there are children who inherit our technology but don't necessarily have the types of wisdom that this power requires in order for the power not to destroy us and again these are common themes in Captain America, it's a common theme in the Captain, even Godzilla, a monster movie, okay and you see in many ways the Godzilla becomes in some ways a superhero. Now Clay Rutledge in the piece that I just read last time, The Spiritual Beings, note that there's these alt supernatural, I'll call them sort of sub supernatural beliefs and astrology and aliens and you know Jonathan Peugeot always has to deal with the alien questions and there's a reason these things go here because in many ways we're dealing with these ideas and these themes and this very much is a product of the meaning crisis because unlike let's say a Greek tragedy where you know this is a demigod Hercules is the product of Zeus or you know there was a rape or a seduction and so here's Jason and all these other demigods who you know they're not exactly superheroes but they're all within a spectrum as it were but it's some higher volition, it could be the fates, it could you know there's all, literature plays with all of these themes but now suddenly the superheroes are product of a corporation with shareholders and a board of trustees and a hidden power beneath and suddenly conspiracy thinking comes up. Implicit in this though is that we are the gods and you will find that message out in the culture, in a secular culture pretty often and we are the gods and while our technology continues to afford us increasingly apocalyptic power what is revealed in this apocalypse is that we are not wise enough to yield such power and in many ways you listen to Brett Weinstein and Eric Weinstein they're both highly apocalyptic and their videos and their conversations are highly apocalyptic and what is revealed is that we don't have wisdom and this is where again their inability to really get much beneath the political or the technical undermines their capacity to actually deal with what we're dealing with and I go back again to Jordan Peterson at the, when he's talking, Jordan Peterson a quote that I've played before too where he notes that often when he deals with patients they can't have a breakthrough until they get to a theological level, it has to be level. It has to be existential at that point that is deeper than politics and and Sevilla King who's you know got her own channel too I've spoken with here I mean she said very similar things and and so as much as Brett hopes and and don't get me wrong I mean I vote and I have political ideas as well but and and Brett's understanding that the political party is broken the political parties are broken absolutely but the renewal of those parties will not be fundamentally technical it comes out of far deeper places within us and in many ways part of the liability of the worldview that the best of my knowledge Brett is attempting to work from it doesn't afford deeper penetration and contemplation of not just how do we acquire that which I implicitly from my parents my what I implicitly imagine from my parents again comes from from I haven't pulled this book out in a while soul searching you know our our moral sensitivities are not unformed but again spiritual is is is beyond these levels and so part of what makes part of what limits the work of of most of the other members of the IDW is that they continue to be religion shy and and part of what okay you know in the back of my mind Eric I think I see Eric more willing to delve into some of these but I think part of what we continue to deal with is is pervasive skepticism now skepticism is in many ways a pragmatic form of humility skepticism also perhaps has a degree of nihilism and cowardice because maybe you're seeing cracks form in the walls of your house and the floors are all starting to creak and some of them are getting unstable and you know the only way you're going to get to the bottom of what's going on in your house is to pick up a flashlight and go in the basement and take a look at the foundation take a look at the take a look at the flooring the floor joists take a look at the the beams that are supposed to be connecting the foundation to the rest of the house skepticism says the basement is too dark I can't see anything okay the house is going to fall we human beings rightly echo the psalmist such knowledge is too wonderful for me that's true but we have to go down there and people will go down themselves that's what's clay rutledge's part is if if they don't go down themselves they will make up stories but you have to go down into the dark basement and you're going to need wisdom and you're going to need some light you're not going to be able to illuminate the entire basement you're not going to be able to even understand the structures beneath your basement but avoiding these via skepticism well pragmatically we do it because we want to keep big groups together but when the house is falling down it's time to go down it's time to get theological it's time to actually engage at those levels and I think part of the reason people individually do so by engaging on the religious level is that they know that they the tiny little house of their life is falling apart so they have to get religious they have to go in the basement they themselves understand this secular modernistic public secular public sphere that is a little bit allergic and avoidant of the religious layer and and rightfully so given the history you can't live on that layer when your house starts to fall down so while our technology continues to afford us increasingly apocalyptic power that is revealed that we are not what is revealed is that we are not wise enough to wield such power we are easily corrupted and manipulatable it's true and and a lot of you know the good work in John Vervecki's meaning crisis series is the fact the parasitic processing all of the ways that we fool ourselves but into the basement we must go it was very interesting looking at wisecracks the philosophy of the boys and you can you can see how philosophy tries to be a substitute for going in the basement but it can't now Aristotle, Plato, philosophers tremendous tools incredibly important but you don't get around your presuppositions you don't get around this this foundational layer of of basic questions about the world in many ways we have to deal with things we cannot prove and what's interesting is that the even the name of the channel wisecrack it they almost don't dare talk philosophy while taking themselves seriously and what we imagine we'll keep our new innocent hero this is the woman here starlight I think her name was is on the straight and narrow is all the usual suspects in American in American culture romantic love why because romantic love once you feel it there's no questioning it's it's again this this it's a it's a psychological Cartesian self-referential certainty that that we have sort of a scrap extrapolated into other areas I'm oppressed therefore I am I'm in love therefore I am I'm angry therefore I am and I'm right and you're wrong I mean we have all of this this emotional stuff and so you'd better not talk to a psychologist very long and you'd better not look at human psychology and so then we have this sort of self-biased deception where everyone else's anger is all formed but my anger comes from my secret sacred self and is somehow in a Cartesian way undeniable my oppression is undeniable my romantic love is undeniable until of course well this is where time is a solvent for all of these because everyone who's had an almost everyone who's had a divorce has come to hate the person that they stood in front of their family and friends and pledged their undying love for how's that for your your your psychological certainty and again you talk that way you're feeding skepticism and and so well well well how can I actually live in a world with all this skepticism well you're gonna have to make some commitments so so starlight or star bright I don't remember has you know has all these small town values and these are deep deep parts of American you know the American psyche and often what we're doing is we're going back two or three generations you know pre-urbanization in these small face-to-face communities where you're held accountable one to another and and there's all these well in the city you're just a number and no one holds you accountable but down down at the farm where does Superman grow up what is it Iowa where does Captain Kirk come from Iowa you know Batman's a little bit more but Batman again comes from wealth and power and there's a little different tropes going on through the Batman story but they're face-to-face relationships and good upbringing but then she discovers that no mom was in on the conspiracy but dad dad left because of the conspiracy and and she was told lies when she was young but now she's she's a young woman and she's thinking for herself and she's not going to listen to the evil corporation that wants to seduce and manipulate her she's not going to listen to the the guy who me tooed her and you know because she believed in the seven and the corporation and and and all of the story she's now seeing with her own eyes and and has maybe found a romantic partner who's who lost his lost love to the evils of the corporation and of course it's a it's a story they deal and they we they wind through all these things but if you pay attention she got just enough trauma in the background so she has knowledge of good and evil but but not so much trauma like hot like Homelander so now it makes him evil but what is the source of evil it's all theological questions is it is it capitalism capitalism is it urbanization is it is it too much power for the the normal restraints to hold us in and then we think if you can if through story control if you can raise your kid with with with just knowing enough of the evil in the world but not too much to cripple them if if you can if you can raise them just right because we're these formed creatures then then suddenly your children will instinctively know good from evil because they'll embody the the right and wrong of the small town of the face to face of the parents etc etc and then they will have their moral compass as their guide not Homelander versus Starbright but if through story control we can avoid these debilitating experiences that make people go bad then the good guys and gals can use power to make the world right again but power and and and this is where the there's so much built-in deception with so many people using some of this post-modernity power is evil give it to me and i'll use it for good power is power is it again i think andy kraut has a better take on a lot of these things and so now we're back to sense making in the apocalyptic because q and on now has a finland branch and and i saw my friend paul paul paul and lightning you know giving christians in q and on q and on here we go well it's a crisis of sense making we don't know what to believe is donald trump the maverick outsider fighting deep state fighting the deep state for the soul of america is that who donald trump is or is donald trump the evil authoritarian or capitalist con man looking to dupe america for power and money or is donald trump the incompetent bumbler who who accidentally wound up in office and he's unfit for the office now we have to get him out no matter who else is in how do we know how can we know and here's the difficulty that we think well i can't know because i don't live in washington dc do you know people who you think people know by virtue of their zip code well we can't know because i don't i don't see donald trump up close well i would say that the white house staff has a much higher resolution pick on donald trump but you wait until either within a year or within five years he's out of office and all of the books start coming out there'll be those that say he's this and those that say he's that just look at your own life you know some people think you're all that and some people can't stand you a person only their mother could love and and and so this this sense making well if you really think this through and think about the long ways in which these things have been undermined and the ways in which skepticism has has arisen well now suddenly i feel skeptical because everything's seems to be coming unglued well except that if you go to if you go to scott adam's page he'll say well for most americans there's no protests on your streets now if i live next door to the california state capital well then i would see a lot but folks don't bother protesting on florin road i think some of them probably think they get mugged or at least panhandle to death so and if you're living in some little town in iowa boom now we're back into the tropes no it's the small town face to face milk of human kindness this is the place yeah but how many horror films are set in some place out in the woods or out in the farm or you know watch signs or children of the corn or or something like this once we once we are suspicious that there's no there there in terms of a me beneath all of the the sum of my experiences is then i can never know any true thing at all there's a meaning crisis and you look at the power of the story of jesus you can understand why this story is so enduring the hebru god not not handcock not iron man not zeus the hebru god is the god above all gods well how does that work well if you control the meta divine realm you can turn off gravity if you're the programmer who programs the simulation within which the gods have superpowers just call up the zeus profile and let's take away flight let's take away lightning bolts boom zeus can't generate that paganism is built upon this meta divine realm that you simply don't have programming privileges for you have programming privileges for certain things and so then as you get amulets and cast spells and incantations then you can deal with the deal with the meta divine realm because you're following the patterns and you look at how it works but if as eric weinstein says if the meta divine realm has an opinion about you there's not a lot you can do that's the terror of calvinism right there's nothing i can do augustin tells the story as augustin tells the one young man go to a church and get yourself elect so jesus comes and you know we don't find him flying around oh i've got to i've got to go up in the air and fly out to to ethesus because there's a little girl getting crushed under a cart or a dog comes off what what what what mary fell in a hole which mary half of the girls are named mary and you know you don't find jesus zipping around in fact part of what annoys us about jesus is that why don't you just disable influenza in the simulation now suddenly we have character concerns about this god yet jesus stills the storm father comes because his daughter is sick says your daughter's well what you don't have to go there and move your hands over her and say some special things or even just lay hands and prey on her no you don't have to do any of that bang programming power that makes hancock look like a wussy and of course other comic books the matrix some of these that get more into this programming stuff even the good place upload i mean they're playing with these ideas but but there it is this master however is one who dies for his servants most masters we run across won't die for their servants and they're suddenly is it is it a mental trick they're suddenly is it just data they're suddenly we begin to trust and we begin to think well this is sort of how human beings grow in trust why do i trust my parents because before i had a any agency at all i was a losing proposition for them and they fed me and they clothed me and they sacrificed for me and yeah they weren't perfect but for the most part they steered me right they demonstrated again and again that they cared for me that gave them authority read philippians 2 why does jesus have authority because although he did not consider his equality as the god level programmer to be exploited he humbled himself and went down to the bottom of the stack and made himself nothing and died the worst death possible and therefore he's exalted to the highest place that's the story it's a terribly difficult story to beat homelander wastes people for fun and convenience and he goes to he goes to save an airplane and oops he messed up and the people on the plane know he messed up he could still save all the people but he doesn't why because of his reputation go back and my sermons on the center of the sermon on the mount what does jesus what does jesus talk to us again and again about it's about this reputation management you better watch that yeah but my reputation yeah your reputation is more powerful than your arms your reputation goes through time we value our reputation because people are powerful homelander wastes people for fun and to and to save his reputation he kills all those people so as not to endanger his corporate profits and the relational aspect that he has in the eyes of others that doesn't fully dispel the kinds of questions we have where is god when you are enslaved by superpower egypt he shows up and what does he do it's like god-like programming privileges oh darkness let's just turn off the light for half the country sea to blood frogs everywhere flies everywhere god can manage this no problem all of these things the egyptians thought were gods and so whether you're seeing it from a pagan perspective or whether you're seeing it from a hebrew perspective this god is bigger than those gods where is god when the gods of babalon destroy the temple of the god that you trusted in well he shows up in babalon and it's like you're not supposed to do that i thought we i thought i thought we understood well and he says things like well i sent babalon to punish you i'm not sure how that story feels when god's people are subjugated and corrupted in the promised land where is god john the baptist says he's coming the day of the lord is coming and when he gets here oh boy all you all you compromisers all you people who are doing wrong when the day of the lord comes and when god shows up you're going to be in big trouble and then jesus shows up john's a little confused i thought we were going to have more some of that egypt plague stuff i thought we were going to have some of that maybe homelander stuff where you know whoosh ground opens and the roman army falls in a pit or old testament stuff they start fighting each other and jesus comes along and jesus answer is well the lame walk the blind see but blessed are you who do don't stumble on account of the son of man you're the son of man so so if you've got that kind of power why don't you just delete influenza doesn't seem like a big deal christianity was built right into the story from the beginning of this question um now losing as the solomon's temple did against the the babelonians losing resolves corruption my grace is made perfect in your weakness the holy spirit tells the apostle paul it's a eucatastrophe uh tolkien coins that word and and builds it into the lord of the rings but but there's also willing will come winning will come in the end the book of revelation and so those themes are worked on right in christianity and and and so now it's rooted in the hebrew scriptures but these are these are the themes that are built into christianity and again gives the story endurance now the difficulty that you have if rationality is your standard and this is part of the reason that um that new atheism is done is because cognitive science is killing new atheism it's it's not a secret why if you listen to someone like listen to someone like john vervecky or jordan peterson they look at this rationality argument and they say it just doesn't you just can't get there we're not capable of that that's not how our brains work it's not how we relate to the world your your rationality hope is a false hope rationality is a powerful thing and basically in some ways what john vervecky does in his series is redefine rationality because he doesn't want to lose the word it's not necessarily a bad thing we're redefining words all the time look at my conversation with brett sockled and conspiracy thinking we we like to label things as conspiracy in order to sort of eliminate it sort of this um rhetorical trick we can sort of eliminate something from the from the from the uh from the overton window if we label it a conspiracy but but the truth is all of our thinking runs through narratives and this is why this is why we're having this sense-making crisis because the logic isn't saving us and so it's at the narrative level with the symbolic and the archetypal that things are breaking down and why communities are fracturing along these different lines and we have these levels of self-deception we're bs-ing ourselves the parasitic processing can we know the truth not all of it well why not i only live 80 years and if i had to prove everything i needed to prove well truth is i grow old and die long before i'd be able to prove anything substantial and the fact is i already started life with people who weren't proving anything and i grew up not being able to prove anything because the allegorical and the symbolic and the narrative processing all came online way before all this all this frontal lobe stuff and i just read this was reading this wonderful book that talks about this is the lobe that starts to shrink i've got i've got dementia to look forward to it's gonna come well my father didn't have that to look forward to he died first good thing for him this is how we are this is what we are and this is undeniable what sort of creatures are we this rationality project is absurd believing things without evidence that's faith well you're born into a context you didn't choose this monarchical vision clean room that rationality requires is unavailable to you as a historically formed creature you're not capable of it privileged mystical knowledge may be convincing but is always private knowledge you you you might believe that your secret sacred self or the experience that you had over in a monastery or in a in a meditation session or on a on a on a psychedelic well that's convinced you people are convinced by all kinds of things just being convinced is just being convinced it's what it is doesn't mean you're right you have to live with conviction and you have to live having been convinced of things but it's just it is what it is you're too small for this imagined certainty and john verveckis conversation with jonathan peugeot i thought that was a lovely little story that john vervecki told of of of his son saying this level of this level of certainty i'm not comfortable with and john's like that's what you get you're a human being we're small we're limited it's how we are you need narrative you can't live without it if in fact you live without narrative you'll look something like a schizophrenic walking around the street i see plenty of them i see schizophrenia up close they really struggle with narrative you're always evaluating narratives with data which you should be doing but it's always limited to the scope of data that you're presented with and the narratives that they're being fed into this is how we are we are small it's what your theological anthropology should say and i think part of the reason jordan peterson became such a convincing preacher was he had a better anthropology than what was currently available to the audience he was speaking to doesn't answer the question how will you live this lesser soup from from from the boys gets demoted he's the ocean guy and he gets sent to ohio maybe he's got a little bit of a great lake to play with so he decides you know he's not feeling terribly authentic so he decides he's going to kidnap a dolphin because from a from you know he's going to play free willy and the thing is a catastrophe and the dolphin dies you know he goes into a supermarket and the lobsters are talking to him saying oh what do lobsters say i don't know please let me out no they're just saying get these bonds off so i can eat my neighbor you can't get around authority and sources you trust the people you trust because they were good to you within your limited amount of knowledge the childlike vision of godless of godness that you looked at your parents with dispelled when you got more information now hopefully they were good enough so that it's not radically dispelled because then you have more work to do psychologically you don't have enough time and you don't have enough time to do it and you don't have enough time to do psychologically you don't have enough time in your little life to rationally research everything you can't even finally plumb the depths of yourself why did jordan peterson series took off well he got there a little bit earlier before derek thompson 2005 ha ha religion is so dumb if everyone stops believing in god then we can finally be rational but give me more of them superhero movies 2018 maybe secularization unleashes a bunch of ersatz religions that are also bad you think 2020 everybody back to church now i don't know if he's saying this or he's saying that other tweet that he was quoting was saying it but yeah the process is there so things get apocalyptic in this world and they get an apocalyptic fast but here's the thing the day of the lord doesn't just come we're having a really big one now we're having a global one now with a global pandemic and and and those who have sort of reached the height of of of the modern projects those those heights are those buildings are trembling and some of them are too rigid and they'll fall others are a little bit more flexible and they'll last a little longer but will an asteroid strike things get apocalyptic sometimes they get apocalyptic in your life and this is why many many people become religious because they got to go in the basement they don't have a choice flashlight or no flashlight they got to go down there and they got to prop up that beam or the whole house is coming down or maybe the house came down and they have to build it all new from the bottom up this is what we do this is what human beings do apocalypse happens rebel wisdom is talking about sense making in a in sort of western civilization but as a pastor i see people regularly go through this process of sense making themselves they get to a point jordan peterson articulated it well maybe you discover that your spouse was having an affair for the last 30 years of your marriage and or maybe they had a gambling addiction we're able to cover it up or maybe this lie or maybe that lie and whoosh your whole life comes undone sense making how do you know what you can believe well when it happens globally when it happens as a culture whole lots of people get upset and then actually people start doing pretty predictable things you know buying guns hoarding gold hoarding food hoarding toilet paper this is what people do read history the world is full of it and a lot of it's and some of it's pretty well recorded so things get apocalyptic you're in over your head the past is a historical a well of historical information you need and i think this is part of the reason jordan peterson starts talking about the bible because he says you know what he doesn't necessarily he's skeptical about a narrative in which there's someone in the sky talking and someone on the ground writing but he says this has helped civilizations endure maybe we should read it maybe we should talk about it maybe we should think about it people of goodwill yeah i'm a calvinist so i've got an augustinian anthropology but people express goodwill all the time we're inconsistent like that it's how we are and you also want a community to live and die with and really a community to believe with because in terms of building a sense meaning structure it's not good enough to have one yourself you need to build it with others you need to try out ideas with others and those people need to be people of goodwill and and they they shouldn't they shouldn't just they shouldn't just cut ties if there's a moral problem or if there's a theological problem or if there's an answer that is out of place with the rest of the community we need communities like that and and this is where you know churches every church should have an estuary that it's flowing into of people who the church is offering people of goodwill who won't just cut ties if there's a betrayal or a heretical word or a moral misstep we're dying for that and well isn't this what we see in jesus now the other thing where there's purity well that you need to have that dynamic too and so well thing is you need to have a broad spectrum of spaces where those can be just like your bedroom is not your kitchen is not your living room is not your front yard there's a public meeting room and then there's a private home we have spaces for all these things but the reason this took off is that we're in a broad path we're in a broad place of sense-making now and we don't know how deep it will go and we don't know how long it will last and we're pretty nervous and anxious about it but that's what we're doing so that's the sense-making we're doing it's in the midst of a meaning crisis yep that's enough for this video um more videos another day