https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GJ9njeaS-iE

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do a little commentary on the Peugeot Peterson Pinker conversation. Now Jordan Peterson did a conversation with Steven Pinker. I made a video talking about Pinker's, what Pinker says about the relationship between Christianity and the Enlightenment and the Bible. I think Pinker doesn't have a leg to stand on in most of his assumptions there. But Jonathan Peugeot made a video, which I also thought was excellent on the conversation on Pinker's, all these P's, Peugeot Peterson Pinker, on Pinker's imagined clear-eyed non-dogmatic view of the world, which seems to have very little understanding about human nature. You almost listen to Pinker and think, have you actually worked with human beings who are full of good intentions and can pull off none of them? And that's not us as individuals. When we do that as groups, we do that, we're even worse at it. Jonathan talked about human beings have need for sleep. We have cycles that we engage in where Jordan Peterson says, phrase it in this way, we're not masters of our own house. We're mysteries to ourselves. This perspective of what a human being is as sort of this rational robot really is something that died a cultural death at the beginning of the 20th century and probably shouldn't still be kicking around because it just really doesn't have much basis in evidence or truth. What's really rather disturbing is that so much of this has been tried. Well, we're going to improve human beings by eugenics. Well, why not? I mean, we should sterilize the stupid people and the undesirables and breathe the desirables. This is all rather brave new worldish. The desire to subjugate all nature, other persons to a vision of the good that allows no rivals, even if they can't realistically explain to us how they derive the good. This gets really strange when you start talking about democracy, which he wants to talk about. Reason, purpose, employs, power and means to achieve certain ends and Pinker, I don't know the relationship between Pinker and Sam Harris, but they seem again and again to declare that good and self and ends are somehow self-evident. What's amazing about people is this hardly bears any relationship to reality at all. If there's anything true of people, they're all over the map in terms of what is good in this moment, what is right in that moment, what are the ends that we wish to achieve. This is especially true about democracy. All you have to do is go back to Plato's Republic and look what Plato felt about democracy. He thought it was foolish to give all of this to human beings. Human beings are sucker for their own desires and easily and quickly diluted. We fool ourselves all kinds of ways. We're in denial about all kinds of things. If you state that telos are ends are self-evident, you fail to see the most obvious point about people in that we differ. The imagination is that somehow we can all quickly agree not only on the ends that we desire, but the way to get us there. This is an implicit totalitarianism of enormous proportions. But then you espouse democracy, which in a sense is a way of crowd sourcing for the sake of political stability, the ends that a majority sees and in that way hopefully having a degree of order and continuity, but you're not in any way going to achieve whatever you might imagine to be the right. What you will achieve more often than not is what the majority wishes for themselves, however they constitute themselves as a majority. That's enormously variable. Do they do so on the basis of religion? Do they do so on the basis of ethnicity? Do they do so on the basis of the ideas in their minds that they have at the moment? When I hear these kinds of things, I often think have they read absolutely no human history? Because if you look at human history in the 1930s, everybody thought that well, killing Jews was a good idea. That was the best thing for the world. If you look at the Russians and the early Soviet Union, the best thing for the world was to reorganize that farm, those farms. So Belarus and Ukraine basically starve again and again in the moment we have these ideas of what we must do so that progress can move forward. But it's always a limited group that imagines and ends and imagines a means to get to that and it's the mess that we have. In human history, one way of looking at it is basically the telling of that story. And so when I listen to these kinds of things, I think my goodness, have you not read any history? To espouse democracy as somehow a way to achieve some great good as opposed to a way to achieve some mediated satisfaction of a political majority seems just foolish. Now I've been rereading C.S. Lewis's Miracles after my conversation with John Verbeke and I described to him a little bit of Lewis's theme here. Oh, my wife finished her class early. Oh, wow. That's, I have to pause this video. Hang on. Now I don't know the details of Pinker's thought, but I suppose it's a sort of naturalism. And I'm going to get into this video what basically is, well, this is at least C.S. Lewis's treatment of naturalism and he calls supernaturalist or supernaturalism. I wouldn't want to use that word, but that's what Lewis is saying. But in many ways, Pinker's imagination, not only of human beings as Jonathan Peugeot rightly critiques, but also of how the world works and basically seems to follow something like Lewis puts together here. Now I very, I should do a Words That Fudge on nature because I think I'm making more and more progress in terms of understanding so often what we mean by nature and how the definition of this word nature has changed throughout time. But I'll start by reading a little bit of this paragraph. This is Lewis's definition. Before the naturalist and the supernaturalist can begin to discuss their differences of opinions, they must surely have an agreed definition of both nature and supernature. But unfortunately, this is almost impossible to get such a definition. Just because the naturalist thinks that nothing but nature exists, the word nature means to him merely everything or the whole show or whatever there is. And if that is what we mean by nature, then of course nothing else exists. The real question between him and the supernaturalist has evaded us. Some philosophers have defined nature as what we perceive with our five senses, but this is also unsatisfactory for we do not perceive our own emotions in that way, and yet they are presumably natural events. In order to avoid this deadlock and to discover what the naturalist and the supernaturalist are really differing about, we must approach our problem in a more roundabout way. I begin by considering the following sentences. Are those his natural teeth or a set? A dog in his natural state is covered with fleas. I love to get away from tilled land and metal roads and be alone with nature. Do be natural. Why are you so affected? It may have been wrong to kiss her, but it was very natural. A common thread of meaning and all of these usages can easily be discovered. The natural teeth are those which grow in the mouth. We do not have to design them or make them or fit them. The dog's natural state is the one he will be in if no one takes soap and water and prevents it. The countryside where nature reigns supreme is one where soil, weather, and vegetation produce their results unhelped and unimpeded by man. Natural behavior is the behavior which people would exhibit if they were not at pains to alter it. A natural kiss is the kiss which will be given if moral or prudential considerations do not intervene. In all the examples, nature means what happens of itself or of its own accord, what you do not need to labor for, what you will get if you take no measures to stop it. The Greek word for nature, physis, is connected with the Greek verb for to grow, Latin natura, with the Greek verb to be born. The natural is what springs up or comes forth or arrives or goes on of its own accord, the given what there is already, the spontaneous, the unintended, the unsolicited. What the naturalist believes is that the ultimate fact, capital F, the thing you can't get, you can't go behind is a vast process in space and time which is going on of its own accord. Inside that total system, every particular event, such as you're sitting reading this book or listening to it, happens because some other event has happened. In the long run, because the total event is happening, each particular thing, such as this page, is what it is because other things are what they are, and so evidentially because the whole system is what it is. All goes on on its own accord except in the sense that it exists at some particular place and time, that general existence on its own or behavior of its own accord which belongs to nature, the great total interlocked event as a whole. Thus no thorough going naturalist believes in free will, for free will would mean that human beings have the power of independent action, the power of doing something other, more or other than what was involved in the total series of events. And any such separate power of originating events is what the naturalist denies. Spontaneity, originality, actions on its own is a privilege reserved for the whole show which we call nature. And you can see many times people, this is the basic definition I hear used by people. Things are going on outside of human intervention. So when we eat natural foods or organic foods, we are not using artificial fertilizer which for the most part have been created by the fixation of nitrogen. We use processes that could be found apart from human intervention even though obviously to get the loaf of bread or the produce to the store there's plenty of human intervention going on. We call that natural. It goes of its own accord. Now I was just thinking when I was leaving to visit the sick that in a sense what Aristotle does, I'm going to have to look into this more. What Aristotle really tried to do was unite the system when he imagined that let's say things fall because the clump of earth loves the earth. And he wants to unite the rest of the earth and wishes to be united with it. And again I could be totally wrong with this and I'll hear about it in the comments section. In a sense it's eros everywhere. Everything wanting the other and so that's why things fall. That's why you get the Aristotelian imagination of the four elements. So elements act in this way. That's the older system. But in a sense you can understand why the interest and desire for such a system because what it avoids is this fact of language and I would assert fact of human interaction and experience that asserts there are in fact there is not in fact one whole show which naturalists seem to continue to want to profess even if they can't live it out. To be fair Christians profess things they can't live out too. But that everything is finally the whole show. That's C.S. Lewis's point here. So there are two kinds of things in the universe basically. There's group A things that go on their own. So I've got my cell phone stand and if I let it go it goes on its own to the ground and we have this process and it keeps hitting my wedding ring and so it makes a cling. There can be accidents there can be things that I don't plan on. Now obviously this case is a little artificial because myself as a human mind I am doing this but its fall is what goes on its own. So there are things in group A things which go on their own and there are things in group B things that watch and choose employ reason and colonize things in group A. So we're imagining two groups and we're going to have to think about what is the relationship between these two groups because I would assert that basically we act as if and our language is built as if this is the fact. Our politics run as if this is the fact. Nearly every form of human communication and relationship assumes this to be the fact. There are two groups and we have to think about this to be the fact. There are two groups of things in the universe. There's group A things that go on their own. There's group B things that watch, employ, choose, region and colonize things in group A. Now a while ago I played a video for you and I'm not going to replay it because again the software is still messed up and I'm short of time anyway so I'll just put a link below but it's about random numbers and the maker of the video basically points out that human beings are really bad at generating random numbers. Now this is a very interesting situation for our group A and our group B because randomness would seem to be in a sense the in the domain of group B whereas things that go on their own well they go on predictably and I'm going to get too complex and complicated in a little while. You know who you are. You left a number of notes in the comments section which I appreciated which forced me to go and do a little bit of learning and I'm going to address them. So group A and group B. Random numbers are very interesting because they're sort of in the domain of group B but they're this seeming exclusion. Now Lewis actually does treat that in his book Miracles and he says these are probably sub-natural but they demonstrate not only the lived skepticism of naturalism things simply being the whole show but also the scientific skepticism that there are whole groups of things that are in fact random to us. Human beings don't do random. If we ask you to pick numbers between 0 and 10 most of you will pick 7. Then we get into the range of probability. We can sort of plot probabilities and even if we're looking at strong numbers like the one in the volume 90 and measuring that as he does in this video we're looking for randomness but it's important to understand what we mean by randomness. We mean that no human being an element of group B rational watcher or agent can predict in an instant where this electron is going to fly. We can't predict if you truly have a random number generator you can't predict what's going to happen. It's important again that we not lose sight of the subject in this. That the subject is deeply involved in this entire conversation from the beginning and how could we not be? We're the ones having the conversation. We're the ones trying to find a reason. We're the ones trying to employ and colonize all the elements of group A in order to satisfy things within us that we don't really understand. But this leaves us with a question. What kind of world really is this? Then we can plot a distribution of some of these things but at any given moment we can't predict it so we call that random. So now remember there's group A and group B. Things that go on their own. Now most of us would assert that well it seems like these electrons are going on their own but yet they're random. We're not quite sure what to do with that so again I haven't jumped over the line to the panpsychist point of view but you can see the motivation for it because just like Aristotle sort of wanted to bring the universe back together by imagining that my cell phone stand wants to be reconnected with the world. Well things coming out of that radioactive isotope seem alive in a strange way because we have difficulty predicting them and that's sort of group B mode. But notice the way I defined group B. Group B watches and chooses and employs reason in order to colonize things in group A. And in fact the guy who made the video colonized that little piece of radioactivity for the sake of making that video. Well what is reason? Well you know after my conversation with John Verbeek and I've looked at Whitehead in a few things and I think I'll continue to look a bit at Whitehead. Made a very interesting lecture in the 1920s which you can find on the internet. There's the address down below and you can, I'll leave a link to it. He talks about purpose, purpose and reason because what he's noticing is basic issues with the Darwinian worldview that was very much well underway by the 1920s that have difficulties with obviously with purpose and reason. But the point to which I wish to draw attention is the mass of evidence lying outside the physiological method which is simply ignored in the prevalent scientific doctrine. The conduct of human affairs is entirely dominated by our recognition of foresight determining purpose and purpose issuing in every conduct. Almost every sentence we utter and every judgment we form presuppose our unfailing experience of this element of life. This evidence is so overwhelming, the belief so unquestioning, the evidence of language so decisive that it is difficult to know where to begin in demonstrating it. For example we speak of the policy of a statesman or a business corporation. Cut out the notion of final causation. That's what he gets into in this. And the word policy has lost its meaning. So final causation very much part of group B. What is the thing for in the final analysis? As I write this lecture I intend to deliver it in Princeton University. Cut out the notion of final causation and this intention is without meaning. Consider the voyage of the battleship Utah around the South American continent. This is I imagine something perhaps a part of Teddy Roosevelt's great white fleet's journey. Consider the first ship itself. We are asked to believe that the concourse of atoms, of iron, of nitrogen and of other sorts of chemical elements into the form of the ship, its armor, of its guns, of its engines, of its armament, of its stores of food, that this concourse is purely the outcome of the same physical laws by which the ocean waves aimlessly beat the coasts of Maine. There could be no more aim in one episode than in the other. The activity of the shipbuilder is merely analogous to the rolling of the shingle on the beach. We are of course reminded that the neglect of this evidence arises from the fact that it lies outside the scope of the methodology of science. This is where Whitehead goes. He notes that I think this is similar to what Vervecky was noting. Don't confuse methodology here. So in science we use a methodology of assuming everything is in group A with the far larger lived assumption that we are actually living in a world full of beings. That method consists in tracing the persistence of the physical and chemical principles throughout the physiological operations. The brilliant success of this method is admitted, but you cannot limit a problem by reason of method of attack. The problem is to understand the operations of an animal body. There is clear evidence that certain operations of certain animal bodies depend upon the foresight of an end of a purpose to attain it. There is no solution to the problem to ignore this evidence because other operations have been explained in terms of physical and chemical laws. The existence of a problem is not even acknowledged. This is his critique of Darwinianism. The existence of a problem is not even acknowledged. It is vehemently denied. Many a scientist has patently designed experiments for the purpose of substantiating his belief that animal operations are motivated by no purposes. He has perhaps spent his spare time in writing articles to prove that human beings are as other animals so that purpose is a category irrelevant for the explanation of their bodily activities. His own purpose of proving that they are purposeless constitutes an interesting subject for study. Again, there are two kinds of things in the universe. There is Group A and Group B. But now we have to sort of ask, are A and B totally discontinuous sets of things? Or are A and B actually one kind of thing on a spectrum? This is where you get into the question of naturalism because naturalism basically says there is no Group B. Now at our meetups we've had the dreaded free will argument for a number of sessions because one member of our group has at every meeting wanted to argue free will and found, as you can find in our meetup groups, willing takers for just about any kind of argument even for argument sakes. So Group A says things that go on their own. Group B, things which choose, use reason, colonize in Group A. Now again, reason, if you read Whitehead, reason is being able to employ, strategize, move for an outcome. Now again, I'm not totally divorced from Steven Pinker's world because Steven Pinker would act as if he's part of Group B certainly. But the question for Pinker would be, do you acknowledge that Group B exists? Because Group B, you imagine that human beings are so thoroughly rational in this regard and that the purposes and ends which human beings seek are all extremely self-evident so that people would not differ on them. Not only self-evident in terms of destination but also, we would imagine, getting self-evident in terms of manner by which you can pursue that destination which, again, if you read Whitehead, is part of reason. Now you have Sam Harris' determinism which this particular member of our meetup kept wanting to argue basically argues that there is no Group B. What that does, as I briefly mentioned in my John Vervecki video, is that that in a sense consigns us to delusional ALS victims. ALS is Lou Gehrig's disease where bit by bit you're locked, you're locked in the inside of your body and even though inside, to the best of our knowledge, you're still in there and we all know what that sentence means even though we're not exactly sure what that sentence means. Now we're in the Mind Matter issue which I want to very much make a video about. But we imagine that we're acting but we're locked inside making this entire argument extremely pointless which is why a whole bunch of people in the meetup got very frustrated and when one group was going off to talk about free will, a whole bunch of people were like, I don't want to have that argument again because it's pointless. Because if we're delusional ALS victims then, well, that argument just gets boring after a while and if we're actually just simply trapped in the delusion that we have free will, well, we might as well be having a delusion that we enjoy. Now Peterson again consistently says that we act as if we are Group B and you are a vital part of it and in fact if you don't do that you quickly find yourself deep within the meaning crisis. This is almost a definition of what the meaning crisis is about. There is no other choice at all about this if you want to have meaning and play at the game of life. So okay Stephen, you want to very much be in Group B and you want to very much colonize the rest of the world, you've still got the problem of the self-evident good. In fact, naturalism has a huge problem, which C.S. Lewis points out, not only of coming to consensus surround the good, even if we could adequately approximate what consensus is, besides tribalism and factioning, which is mostly how we do it now, C.S. Lewis notes that those men who believe in the whole show stand up and act like they are a part of Group B when something happens that threatens the good as they imagine. Besides reasoning about matters of fact, men also make moral judgment. We say, I ought to do this, I ought not to do that, this is good, that is evil. Two views have been held about moral judgment. Some people think that when we make them, we are not using our reason. This would imagine that we have some faculty by which we have a sense of morality. Our conscience might be the experience of that faculty that somehow we know good and bad. That's not Lewis's tape. But are employing some different power. Other people think that we make them by our own reason. Lewis keeps capitalizing reason with an R, talking about reason as such. Lewis is a pretty ardent Platonist, and so in a sense the form of reason. I myself hold this second view. This is, I believe, the primary moral principles on which all others depend are rationally perceived. We just see, Alvin Plantinga might say this is basic to us, we just see, and by saying that I don't mean that it's self-evident to us, but that it doesn't require some evidentialist satisfaction. This gets into Alvin Plantinga's ideas of what we justify belief in, that whole thing. We see that there is no reason why my neighbor's happiness should be sacrificed to my own. As we just see that things are equal to the same thing, are equal to one another. If we cannot prove either axiom, that is not because they are irrational, but because they are self-evident and all proofs depend on them. Their intrinsic reasonableness shines by its own light. It is because all morality is based on such self-evident principles that we say to a man when we would recall him to right conduct, be reasonable. But this is by the way, for our present purposes, it does not matter which of these two views you adopt. The important point is to notice that moral judgments raise the same sort of difficulty for naturalism as any other thoughts. We always assume in discussions about morality as in all other discussions that the other man's views are worthless if they cannot be fully accounted by some non-moral, some rational, some non-rational cause. When two men differ about good and evil, we soon hear the principle they brought to play. We believe in the sanctity of property because he is a millionaire. This is what C.S. Lewis calls bulverisms. He believes in pacifism because he is a coward. He approves of corporal punishment because he is a sadist. Such taunts may often be untrue, but the mere fact that they are made by one side and hotly rebutted by the other shows clearly what principle is being used. Neither side doubts that if they were true, they would be decisive. In other words, if we simply appeal to elements within the human being, I have a lot of money and so I'm biased about property. I'm a sadist so I'm biased about corporal punishment. We look at that reasonable nature within a group B thing and say, ah, see, it's accountable within him. You have the difficulty, however, of infinite regress because, well, what made him a millionaire? Well, these things. What made him a millionaire? And that's when you get the dynamic of the whole show. And what Lewis shows here is that a bulverism, which is what he calls that. You can look at C.S. Lewis doodles for a fun little explanation of where C.S. Lewis came up with this name. But if you're always playing in this way, none of us are ever satisfied. We always sort of want some concrete view of right and wrong. And even though we all want this, it often eludes us. Neither side doubts that if they are true, they would be decisive. No one in real life pays attention to any moral judgment, which can be shown to spring from non-moral and non-rational causes. The Freudian and the Marxist attack traditional morality precisely on this ground and with wide success. All men accept the principle. And again, you can read more about C.S. Lewis and morality in his book, The Abolition of Man. But of course, what discredits particular moral judgments must equally discredit moral judgment as a whole. If the fact that men have such ideas as ought and ought not at all can be fully explained by irrational and non-rational causes, then those ideas are an illusion. The naturalist is ready to explain how the illusion arose. Chemical conditions produce life. Life under influence of natural selection produced consciousness. Conscious organisms which behave in one way live longer than those which have in another, living longer. They then, more likely to have offspring, inheritance, and sometimes teaching as well, pass on their mode of behavior to the young. Thus in every species a pattern of behavior is built up. In the human species, continuous conscious teaching plays a larger role in building it up and the tribe further strengthens it by killing individuals who don't conform. They also invent gods who are said to punish departures from it. Thus in time, there comes to exist a strong human impulse to conform. You can basically hear Dilla Huntie trot out this argument with Jordan Peterson. It hasn't changed much in a very long time. But since this impulse is often at variance with other impulses, a mental conflict arises and the man expresses it by saying, I want to do A, but I ought to do B. And again, if you re-listen to Jordan Peterson talk to Matt Dilla Huntie, this is exactly where they engage and Peterson keeps trying to see, keeps trying to show Dilla Huntie that you've got assumptions in here. And these are purely assumptions. And if your moral system is based on irrational assumptions, this is something we find deeply unsatisfying. This account may or may not explain why men do in fact make moral judgments. It does not explain how they can be right in making them. Because of course, the way we generally use it is, well, I'm speaking of myself, I'm not reading, the way we generally use it is right in service of goal X or right in service of outcome Y. Something for, this is for the preservation of the species. This is for the greater good, but what you find again and again in nearly every argument, human beings kind of do a little A-B testing, shouldn't use A-B testing because I'm using A-B in this video for something else, you are using X-Y testing in terms of relative goods. Well, it's better that I not starve to death than starve to death. Well, it's better that I make up with my neighbor than kill my neighbor. And we say, okay, I've got ideas of better and worse, therefore I know the good. Well, what happens though is that the world gets increasingly complex and you have all of these sort of situations in which, well, good becomes a pragmatic tool by which I pursue some other thing. Now, we're using reason as a means by which we try to bring events from A to B that we try, oops, I'm using A and B again, that we try to colonize elements in group A in order to achieve certain arranged outcome C and it's a member of group B that pursues it. All right? And Lewis says, but that doesn't really give you any sense of right, for example, if the German people decide that we can cohere better as a nation by blaming the Jews for everything, well then, that's good. Well, obviously not if you're a Jew and most people today would look at that and say, no, that's not good. And you might say, okay, why isn't it good? Well, because you shouldn't treat people differently on the basis of their race or ethnicity. And we would say, that sounds good. How do we know it's good? Maybe it's a bad game and maybe in the end the ethnic nationalists win over credo nationalists. See, that's the video I made that I still can't produce. So, you know, right away you get into these questions of, well, all of these judgments are within timeframes. And this is where we get to the problem of random. Well, is that good? You'd have to say good for what? Is it good in order to achieve what end? Can we talk about something being good in itself? Back to the reading. This account may or may not explain why men do in fact make moral judgments. It does not explain how they could be right in making them. It excludes indeed the very possibility of being right. For when I say I ought, they certainly ought to, they certainly think that they are saying something and something true about the nature of a proposed action and not merely about their feelings. And again, when they say I ought, what they in fact have in mind is a telos, a destination, an end. But is that end good? Well, and at what point in history can any person within group B be able to make that judgment? And then colonize and employ elements in group A or even in fact other elements in group B in order to achieve it? If, but if naturalism is true, I ought is the same sort of statement as I itch or I'm going to be sick. In real life when a man says I ought, we may reply yes, you're right. That is what you ought to do or else no, I think you're mistaken. But in a world of naturalists, if naturalists really remember their philosophy out of school, the only sensible reply is oh, are you? Are you, do you itch? Oh, I'm sorry, you itch. All moral judgments would be statements about the speaker's feelings or I would add preferences. Mistaken by him for statements about something else, the real moral quality of action. You can see Lewis's Platonism shining through here. Such a doctrine, I have admitted, is not flatly self-contradictory. The naturalist can, if he chooses, brazen it out. He can say yes, I quite agree that there is no such thing as right and wrong. I admit that no moral judgments can be true or correct and consequently that no one system of morality can be better or worse than any other. All ideas of good and evil are hallucinations. Shadows cast on the world by the impulses by which we have been conditioned to feel. So in other words, I saw a bad thing happen to me, therefore I feel it's wrong. I was spanked as a child and I didn't enjoy it, therefore I feel spanking is wrong. But I don't say it that way. I say spanking is wrong and we ought to pass a law against it. But then it must be stuck too. But then they must stick to it. And unfortunately, though inconsistently, most real naturalists do not. And Pinker is certainly part of this group. A moment after they have admitted that good and evil are illusions, you will find them exhorting us to work for posterity, to educate, to revolutionize, to liquidate, to live and die for the good of the human race. This is what's so amazing about Pinker and Harris in that they stand up on their soapbox and they preach to us, but when I listen to their system, I have no reason to say, why should I agree with you? I don't see it. A naturalist like Mr. H.G. Wells spent a long life doing so with passionate eloquence and zeal. But surely this is very odd. Just as all books about spiral nebulae, atoms and cavemen would really have led you to suppose that the naturalist claims to be able to know something, so all books in which naturalists tell us what we ought to do should really make you believe that they thought some ideas of good, of their own, for example, to be somehow preferable to others. For they write with imagination like men proclaiming what is good in itself and denouncing what is evil in itself. Not like, not at all like men recording that they personally like mild beer or some people prefer bitter. Yet if the oughts of Mr. Wells and, say, Franco are both equally the impulses which nature have conditioned each of us to have, and both tell us nothing about any objective right or wrong, whence is all the furor? Do they remember, while they are writing thus, that when they tell us that we ought to make a better world, and the word ought and better must, of their own showing, refer to an irrationally conditioned impulse which cannot be true or false any more than a vomit or a yawn? In other words, you have group A and group B, and what naturalism essentially says is there's no such thing as group B, but we can't help but act as elements of group B, and so elements of group B will keep trying to convince other elements of group B to line up and work in coordination so that everything in group A can be arranged to work in and of itself to achieve the imagined utopia, without really being able to in any way dispel the kind of disagreements that bar us, and so they're good human beings, and so they try to use influence, they write books, they go on YouTube, they try to convince us, but again, right from the start, they act as elements of group B denying that such things are true. Now, I won't mention his name, but he can out himself in the comments of this video, and he wished, he says, you keep confusing what is complicated and what is complex, and I thought, well, that's interesting, so did a little internet search and found some quick definitions, and apparently this comes out of business talk, all right? So, this comes out of schools of business, of managing organizations. Simple means that there is a well-defined relationship between an event and the resulting action from that. Dropping a pen, or in my case a cell phone holder, and seeing that it will fall is a simple relationship, or if one wants more accuracy, there are other factors such as wind velocity, taking it out of the simple domain. These are all things of group A, obviously. So, putting this in space may be a more complicated relationship, hence relationships may be simple, but not in all contexts, so context matters. Simple is a factor of the relationship. Chaos is a result, not an event. It is, in its definition, complete disorder and confusion. Now, that's a very interesting definition, because confusion deeply implies an element of group B, an observer, a person, because persons are confused. If I drop a box of matches, the matches all over the floor, we would say they are confused, but we do so as watchers. The matches are just all over the floor. Snow caused chaos in the region. In other words, our order has been disrupted. It can result from behavior so unpredictable, again we have predictability here, as to appear random, owing to great sensitivity to small changes in conditions. So, we get random into that chaos thing. And again, in many ways, one of the ways you can understand this is all of these terms seem to be functions of conscious viewing. These are judgments based on what we're seeing, but now we're going to have to ask the question, what about group A and group B? Complicated systems are when there are several well-defined relationships between cause and effect. If all these relationships are known, then we can predict the outcome of the atoms. Launching a rocket is an example of complicated. Or I would say, an internal combustion engine in a car that you drive or ride in is complicated. Engineers have designed this thing. It is enormously complicated, but it can achieve the predictable outcome. Generally speaking, with intolerances, engines that come off the factory line with the proper fuel will have the certain amount of horsepower. And these cars that come off the assembly line will be predictable. They are complicated, but they are predictable. But again, notice the observer is very much in the story. What we do with the observer is we extrapolate out and develop something that I talked about quite a bit in my earlier visions, this monarchical vision, where we imagine this will always be this case. But remember, that always has built into it the context. In other words, that Toyota that you buy off the sales room floor, you never buy it off the sales room floor. Well, maybe you do a few of them get on there. Most of them off the parking lot. That Toyota that you buy off the parking lot, or let's use a Tesla, the Tesla that you purchase from Elon Musk will run in predictable ways on the earth, but if he launches it up into space, your mileage will vary. Complexity means that the exact relationship between things are neither known or possibly knowable. So if you look at other examples of this, complexity does not mean general predictions can't be made, but that exact predictions cannot. For example, weather is complex, but there are patterns to whether we can learn. Now, if you look at my conversation with John Vervecky, I noted that there is a posture by which we approach these things. Pascal has the spirit of geometry. I will approach the falling cell phone stand with the spirit of geometry, and this will be a nice physics question for high school or college physics students to make predictions about this. And in space travel, in fact, it's amazing the predictions that they can make and the predictions that were made for Apollo 11 to get to the moon and come back. It's really phenomenal. Those are complicated. Complexity involves, now here's the question, is weather really complicated or complex? And this gets into the question of group A and group B. If we can see a system full of group A things, well, that can be complicated. Complexity seems to arrive when you have systems of group A and group B. Now these group B things or persons can't seem to be penetrated by the spirit of geometry. That's what you're getting into, into this complexity. So we model things, but they seem to be along the lines of random. So are they sort of like the electrons coming off of the strontium-90? Now we would say, well, are they, this is where you get into consciousness and choosing. Are they choosers? Now unless you're a panpsychic, you would say that, well, these aren't, those little electrons aren't really choosers. Well, if you're, I suppose, a panpsychic, I should probably have a conversation with JP. If you're a psychic that, or if you're a panpsychic, then you would say they are little choosers. And in that sense, if you go that route, then again, you have a continuous cosmos. The sense of Aristotle, well, my cell phone stand loves the earth and so it drops down to it. And fire loves the heavens from which fire comes from, because you look up in the sky and you see that big fiery gas. And so it loves the heavens and so it goes up to it. Then you have one universe. So the whole show, according to C.S. Lewis, is, it's group A all the way down. In other words, there's no complexity. There's just complicated that we haven't figured out yet. That makes you a naturalist. But that also dispenses finally of group B. In other words, the death of God is the death of us. Maybe right now we can't handle complexity, but someday we will. And this is essentially naturalist eschatology. That if we knew more, someday we'll know more. That's in a sense something like, someday Jesus will come. Okay, but you can't prove it, can you? Now if group B exists, elements of group B have group A dynamics in them. That's why we have psychology. That's why we can sort of predict. Well, what kind of group, what kind of elements are those? And the real question is, do they go all the way down? We can't for some reason be reduced to group A things, as I talked about in the argument with John Vervecki. We shouldn't treat each other that way. And in fact, Sam Harris and Steve Pinker would agree with us. We shouldn't treat people as if they're group A. Yet, according to Sam Harris and I suspect Steven Pinker, we are really elements of group A. But that then leaves you with the problem of the I-me. Well, what's doing the observing? And is this observation and this choosing and this colonizing and reason itself, is it actually real? Because the irony of this sort of thinking is that reason itself then sort of becomes an illusion as does purpose, as at least as Whitehead laid it out. Now, again, I thought about doing longer outtakes of this, but the software isn't working and I don't have that much time today. It's interesting if you listen to a couple of really good things that are out there right now. One of them is the fourth. I really enjoyed the first episode of Eric Weinstein's portal. And I also enjoyed the fourth episode where it talks about preference falsification. Now, this gets really interesting because, again, we can't seem to escape treating other people as part of group B, even though we very much want to make them into part of group A and exclude ourselves from that. I alone am a member of group B and the rest of the world is group A. That's sort of a weird solipsism and that I think is really spoken about in Genesis chapter 3. People express false preferences for social and safety reasons and this mucks up markets. And that's where you get these cascading effects like, well, before the election nobody said they were voting for Trump, but Trump won. Well, how do you explain that? It's a wonderful podcast, but it very much assumes group B, lots of group B people in there, having preference falsification. If you say there is no such thing as group B, then that's just another example of group A, but again, we're delusional ALS victims just watching this show working out our own determined script. Another terrific video, The War on Sense-Making by David Smackenberger. Yeah, you thought VanderKlay was hard to say or hard to spell. Truth and truthfulness. Again, I thought this whole video was really terrific. We are depending upon group B signalers and so we have problems in sense-making to make sense, but if you listen to more of it, you'll notice that we are all these little group B-ers trying to figure out the world as if it's group A, so that we can make a map. Well, what is the map used for? The map is used for group B persons in order to navigate the world and employ Whiteheadian reason upon the world in order to achieve outcomes that we enjoy. Group B-ers use maps plus reason to achieve outcomes. That process isn't always truthful and this is what he talks about that. Well, we are watching each other, watch each other, and so some of this false signaling, this preference falsification is in fact something that we are doing to each other and it's mucking up and what he argues is that, well, we should stop doing that, stop polluting the world with untruth, and that's a fine admonition, but there are reasons that we're doing it. We're doing it because we're parts of group B and we are trying to game the system. We are trying to reduce everyone else to group A in order to colonize it to get what we desire. And I've been looking at a little bit more René Génard because then you get into the question of desire and well, you pour the desire thing into this video and you get some really, really interesting stuff because, well, what I desire is what I see other people desire, but don't forget there's preference falsification going on. I am desiring what I see high status people desiring and so I'm calling this other thing good. And if you keep going this way, it's very tempting to move along the lines of Sam Harris and Steven Pinkert say, ah, it's all just A, but again, once you make that move, you in a sense slit your own throat epistemologically because you can't be a chooser then either. So there's a reason we act the way they do. Now what this video, the Warren Sends Making notes that in fact human beings now with our very powerful tools such as corporations, giant things, powers and principalities that are in a sense giant factor B things full of group A things that we can sort of watch, but yet play within backed by AI are now massive wanters and choosers. And so again in some ways I was thinking about this today, I was thinking, you know, good old Aristotle had a point. You know, nobody's going to say that my cell phone wants to fall and that's what I'm going to do. Because it wants to be reunited with the earth from which this metal came from. It loves the earth. Well the nice thing about that language game is at least it's one game. And right now we have this two mode game of things in group A and things in group B. And now naturalists again in a sense want to reunite the world and say, oh no, it's all group A. But they can't live it. They can't begin to live it. And so the kinds of the kinds of Pollyanna's imagination that Steven Pinker, well we're going to have democracy. Why would you have democracy? Read Plato. You know, you wouldn't have democracy if everyone votes for something wrong. Well, the whole system just breaks down again and again. And that's the end of the slideshow. So I don't know, did this make any sense? Did you find the group A, group B naturalism thing helpful? Hopefully this software bug will get worked out and I won't have to use the Zoom program to make videos which isn't quite as handy. But I wanted to get a video out today. It's about an hour or so. I've done my due diligence. There you go, Julian and the Welders. I've given you an hour's worth of listening. Oh, and I want to give another plug for the Discord channel. And I'm thinking about doing a video that will sort of walk through what the Discord channel is. Discord is a program that is used for gamer chatting. And what it is essentially is a, it's going to be a series of chat rooms where there can be some global chat. So there's bridges of meaning metaphor that we're using. So right now the Golden Gate Bridge is sort of the mothership. Now there's a link down below and I might have to refresh those links because it's growing. But basically this arose out of the desire of our meetup to help people be able to discuss these kinds of ideas. Jordan Peterson stuff, John Vervecky stuff, Meaning Crisis stuff, Jonathan Peugeot stuff, stuff that I do on my videos, stuff that Rando's United that's now sort of become a sub channel. Karen Wong and her meaning channel is producing videos. Quality Existence, Savilla King, she's producing videos. We've got all these videos being produced right now. And as many of you know, not all of you have people to talk with about this. And YouTube comments do well, but there's a liveness to the Discord server that a lot of people have found very enjoyable. So not only is there sort of sequential chat on the Discord server which tends to be live, we're also doing some breakout voice only groups. And some of those conversations are being recorded and we'll figure out how to get those links out to you. Now all of this is in order to multiply the number of conversations. And we're not doing this in any way to displace local meetups, where in fact we have some plans about how to help people who are in different areas geographically to find each other. And again the Discord channel will be handy with that. Are you in Chicago? I'm in Chicago. I created a Google map called Buccos in Space where you can drop a little pin in some place near your home if you want to be discreet. So that people can sort of find each other to have these conversations. So we want to have conversations going online and then we want to help groups have meaningful conversations in their locality as well. And this isn't just me. In many ways for me this is what I do as a pastor. I like organizing groups and helping people get together and talk. And I believe good things come out of that. Now I also as a minister believe that actually this is very much in alignment with my ministry. But if you're an atheist and nobody's going to convince you but you love the hangouts and the meetup groups, go for it. You'll not be excluded. You're in fact more than welcome as are Christians of many sorts including heretics. So that's what we're doing with the Discord server. If you haven't tried it out click on the link. You have to sort of install a program and get on and there's a little bit of a learning curve in terms of finding out where the conversations are. How to join the audio conversations as they're going. But that's sort of been the fascination of a number of people surrounding this channel over the last couple of weeks. And we're very excited to watch the thing grow. I was just listening to a Rebel Wisdom. I don't remember J, so and so. It was about the IDW. And David Fuller mentioned that he hadn't felt the same kind of excitement since the Jordan Peterson thing. And I could understand that. I've talked to a lot of people that Peterson hasn't produced any new material. The Peterson stuff has sort of gotten dull. And they're looking for new content. You know you've got to order chaos. You're looking for unmapped territory instead of just the map territory. Well a number of us have had really a nice thrill from the Discord server. And it's been really fun beginning to deepen the relationships that kind of came through the conversations that I'm doing. And then came through the now the other conversations on the Randall's United channel and some of the other conversations that are going on right now. So lots of good stuff going on. And the Discord server has sort of become a hub where you can find new videos, where you can find new friends. And I'm also working on the retreat idea. And I'm going to have to do some work with my church to figure out exactly how I'm going to do that. How am I going to have the extra time away from Living Stones in order to do these retreats. And so I'll be in some negotiation with my church. We might do some. It's not exactly fair for Living Stones. I have to continue to employ me while I do these things away from Living Stones. So we'll be working on some fundraising for probably a special fund that affords my being away from Living Stones and can help support the hiring of guest preachers and some of those kinds of things. So working out all those sort of gritty little details. So leave a comment. Subscribe. I'm supposed to say all those things.