https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TzFYRSf2KWQ

 Hi, this is Paul. I got a lot of interesting comments, some pushback from my Blue Church War and the Heavens Birthing Spirits into the Estuary video that I released Thursday of Thursday, June 17. And again, I'm very appreciative to the comments. I try and read as many as I can. I don't necessarily answer a lot in the comment thread in terms of a lot of text. I know sometimes people get a little frustrated if I just put a little heart in, but that lets me know that I responded to it and I can find it again. But I had never really heard much of anything about Michael Malice. Some of you were really happy that I addressed him the way I did. Others of you thought maybe I was uninformed and I'll certainly admit to being not very informed about him. I haven't listened to any other videos or interviews of him. So I'm very open to your pushback and to your thoughts. And in fact, today when we had our usual Bridges of Meaning question and answer, part of the reason I like doing that question and answer on the Discord is I would like to have it be less just Paul answering questions. Well, maybe if I didn't give such long answers, it'd be less of that. And more opportunity for conversation. So I thought Sam and Nate Heil and Jacob and others gave some really good comments in there. And you can listen to some of those comments in the recording of that. But this morning, even before the question and answer, I thought maybe I should spend a little bit more time with that video because there are a few other things that I noted that I really wanted to talk about. I want to begin with an earlier segment of the video where basically the move is to deplore elites who call others deplorables. In other words, I see you hating me and I'll hate you back or something of that nature. Now again, maybe I'm being unfair. And so if there's a video of, I'm sure he has tons of comment, if there's a Michael Malice video out there that you think I should take a look at, I can't promise I'll see all of them. I don't know how much interest I have in hunting him down. You can only pursue so many videos. But if there's a video that seems to really capture him, especially those of you, one of you said, you know, I'm a super fan. Well, if you're a super fan of him, drop in the comment section some of your very favorite moments of him so that I can give him a fair hearing. Because of course, my commentary is based on my very limited understanding of him based on this conversation that he had with Jordan Peterson. Now, I really enjoyed the beginning of this video with the talk about trolling and understanding how trolling is in some ways, jiu-jitsu, because you use the strength and practice of your opponent against themselves. And if they've got, you know, it's easy to do this online because so many of the conversations are so anonymous. You can basically expect if I dangle this in front of this person, this is what they will say, and this is what they will do, and this is how they will respond. And once I understand this mechanism, how they are in that way, in terms of who they are, sort of a non-player character, I can do this in such a way as to embarrass them, marginalize them, put them into a corner, make them look like a fool on public display, and therefore discredit and disclaim, you know, what's going on. And, you know, that's a game. It's not necessarily a bad game. It's part of how we have public conversations, but you have to ask, is it a loving game? Now, I'm not saying it can't be, but that's really the standard, especially if you're a Christian, because isn't part of the thrill of trolling the man, the person in charge, the person with power, and, you know, one of the themes I hear from this is that this is very much a sense of, there's an asymmetry, we talked about the blue state, they have the power, I don't have power, so I'm going to use this method to take power away from them. Now, again, as I think Peterson indicated a bit, there are some similarities in terms of this game as there is in the woke game, because they're both parasitic in the sense that they feel themselves the underdog, and the asymmetry in power justifies this action against them. So, you really haven't disrupted the game of winning and losing, and in this anarchism, there's also a radical egalitarianism. I mean, that mic drop moment about one hour in where basically, you know, it's all, you know, any of this cooperation is oppression. That's a radical anti-hierarchical egalitarian vision, which again, is in many ways similar to the woke. There's a lot in common, and Peterson points that out in this video. And it's still about winning and losing, but it's about winning by another means, partly because again, your opponent has more power, and so you find ways to use the power that you have to be victorious over your opponent. In many ways, you're weaponizing the morality of your opponent against himself or herself. And because so much of these discourses are so morally strident, I mean, there's a deep moralism at play in both of these movements, and so what you in a sense do is you weaponize your opponent's morality against them. So let's listen to some more of this video, and really, again, I thought it was quite interesting. This can be put in their lab. So they used to, what 4chan would go, would be known for is, you know, for example, you had a Mountain Dew, right? And they had named the next flavor of Mountain Dew. It's just a corporate mechanism. I talked about this in the book. It's a corporate mechanism to sell your sugary soft drink. What name should we call it? And quite rightly, there's definitely something disingenuous about the corporation in something like this. It is the corporation. Any attempt to weaponize the desires of your opponent and use them against them is in a certain way demonic. Think about it that way. And I use that word very carefully, and don't over push it. But if you read something like, for example, the screw tape letters, that's basically how the devils work. Take a desire, use it to dangle in front of them. And because the goal of a contest like this is obviously to sell more soft drinks, but it's also to get your email so that they can continue to spam up your inbox. And they basically got enough people together. And this is kind of like rent seeking, right? If you have an organized goal seeking minority as opposed to an indifferent majority, that organized goal seeking minority is going to be able to punch very much above its weight. And that's genius. That's one way to sort of turn the tables on a power differential, let's say, and have victory over your opponent. In terms of getting the achievements at once. How many people are caring about this not in DuPol? Very, very few other than the trolls. So they got the number one result to be Hitler did nothing wrong, right? Now they're not Nazis. They're not, they don't think the Holocaust is something that is didn't happen or is bad. They're putting now this Mountain Dew who's trying to use this fun to sell you this poisonous sugary garbage. Now the corporation is in position. Are they going to follow through with this poll or are they going to pull it? Whatever they choose. And now again, using Hitler did nothing wrong, and in a sense weaponizes the assumed moral position in society against the corporation. I mean, it's a brilliant scheme. If you haven't listened to, if you're not a subscriber to the rest of history, they just had a two part series on Hitler and, and I thought it was very well done I thought it was very well done and it was fascinating. But, but again, this is, this is just, this is just genius stuff of in many ways, people who are sort of in some dimensions on the underclass and they want to turn the tables. Jews, they have been forced into making a choice that they themselves would not have wanted because you have someone in a meeting trying to, hey, this is going to be fun for the kids. And they ended up pulling the poll because they're like, okay, the internet won. So the internet won. That is a very interesting little tell because what for him is the internet? What is the internet an icon of? You know, I talked about data narrative icon, the internet one. So I'm not going to say what, but who is the internet? And again, the vision was that the internet is a radical egalitarian space, but a determined few can have victory over the apathetic many. What does that mean the internet is to go from that and this kind of extreme distrust, if not contempt for corporate irreverence and corporate humor and corporate fun to have. Okay. And so you've got distrust contempt for corporate. And again, I mean, fair enough. But again, see the last video, this corporation is something and even the name, it's a corpus, it's a body, there's a mind, there's a will. It's not embodied in an individual. It's not embodied in a person. In fact, anyone who works for this corporation must in one way or submit themselves to it. Now, again, by virtue of this, any corporation is evil. I'd be curious what kind of organization Michael Malice has around him. Now he might say, well, but everyone around me, there's no coercion in people working for me. Are they volunteers? Now my relationship with Rick, there's no coercion or very, very little coercion that I can imagine. Maybe Rick will, to the degree that you believe Rick is real. Rick comes on Fridays and Sundays to help. And we do so joyfully. And I think an anarchist would say, well, that's exactly the kind of relationship we would have. And I agree because coercion is problematic, to use that problematic word. But this sort of, again, both what I'm hearing here, and if I'm wrong, leave a comment and leave me a link with a clip so that I can have a fair hearing. Both Malice and the woke have a degree of purificationism in them because there is some coercion in a corporation, but there's almost always coercion, even in fairly healthy structures. I talked about, I talked about secularism as sort of a bright cloud with human beings in this dispensation. Again, I'm a Calvinist. It's always cloudy. We're not pure. We can't be pure. It's not this, this world cannot host purity, not for very long. And in fact, various forms of purity, it's in that sense, easier to purify evil than good. You know, one of the things that Jordan Peterson says often, which I think is deeply true, it can almost always be worse. It's almost always easier to make things worse than better. And so, in a sense, this whole strategy is about making things worse. Now, in the name of making things better, and maybe it will, but that is in many ways what the type of coercion that is being used by corporations do. They say, we're going to make, you're going to sacrifice. And again, this gets into another deep theme of Petersons, which actually, if they talk again, I hope they bring up. Because the whole idea of sacrifice is, I am going to self-tyrannize to a degree in order to set up something better moving forward. Now, if that dynamic itself is evil, it's very difficult to imagine how there can be any good or any life in this world, because to one degree or another, parents, parents are coerced by their infants. They do so freely. And again, that freedom is really important. And Peterson is also right in terms of when he talks about it is the freely chosen sacrifice, which is the one that is efficacious. God loves a cheerful giver. So this is an enormously complex set of dynamics that I feel, for the most part, he's making a simplistic case. Well, fair enough, it's difficult to make a nuanced case. And if you make a simplistic case and you make it in a dramatic way, as he's obviously very clever to do, well, nuance is the victim. Basically, can I curse on this? You can do whatever you want. Okay, well, not everything. They're both right. To have someone who was basically a shit poster on Twitter running for president, who was just there in these debates, insulting these politicians to their face, often very below the belt terms, that was that ethos brought to life. Because no one could have imagined in decades that you would have a presidential contender who's looking at a sitting senator in the face, who's doing well in the polls, and telling that senator, I've never made fun of your looks. And there's plenty of material there, believe me, that much I can tell you. This is something that was completely unprecedented and new. And we've been taught for decades. Now, that's actually an extremely important point in a very compelling case that regardless of how Trump thought about himself, and maybe he does think about himself in these terms, and he very well might, he is in many ways an anarchist. And he was, at least ever since the 20th and 21st century, the first anarchist president. And he's not there to, he's there to destroy the system. And that, in fact, the moral panic that was awakened by him in the blue church, that was exactly what the panic was about. He's there to destroy the system. But now this coarsening of public discord, you have to ask, is it helpful? Now, so what if Rosie O'Donnell is fat, and Lindsey Graham seems to be a sycophant, and Joe Biden is getting up in years, and Rubio is little, and Ted Cruz, you know, on and on and on and on and on and on. You can always poke fun at people. And doing so, what we've seen might be a big part of you getting elected for president of the United States. And I think Malice rightly points out that a big part of Trump's election was many people just saying, I don't believe in the system, and this is how I can register my vote against the system, tear it down. We could see a very similar thing with Caitlyn Jenner's campaign in California. And on one hand, I understand that. On the other hand, I've got real questions as to, is this finally productive in a world where there's much, in fact, I would say too much, residing on the state? Now, maybe your plan is to make the state smaller by having a candidate like this come in and destroy things, and maybe fair enough. Maybe that's, I mean, states need to be perpetually trimmed. They really do. So do churches. Almost any corporation or institution needs to be perpetually trimmed, and corporations and institutions have a life cycle, and they tend to grow, and they tend to get bloated, and sometimes they need to die. But when you're talking the death of something as old as the state, the federal government of the United States, its death would be a very bloody affair, and where it goes, who knows? So if you read, I should pull up this book. I found Timothy Snyder's Black Earth to be a very compelling read. And what he asserts is part of what there's another book that he wrote that I read before, Bloodlands. They're both brutal books, because they're written about this period between the Soviet Union and Germany in the 30s and 40s. And he makes the case that, and I find it to be a good case, that what Nazism tried to do was destroy institutions, and that's fitting with Nazi ideology because it was very much a radical environmentalism. It was very green. Tom Holland points this out in his Dilling Pod interview that you can find after, you know, when Tom was talking about Dominion, that the Soviets would come and destroy the institutions, and they would destroy the institutions. And that the Soviets would come in, and they very much wanted to build institutions and increase the power of the state. And the Nazis very much wanted to destroy institutions, because the idea was that if you destroy institutions, the natural process of, the natural Darwinian process of the strong taking the weak would in fact improve the race. And so in these areas where it would continually change hands between the Soviets and the Nazis, you know, Poland especially, you know, the Soviets come in and they, you know, now we're going to build a, you know, we're going to build all this totalitarian, tyrannic, communist apparatus, and then the Germans come over and they're like, we're going to take everything apart. And if we take all the institutions apart, it's sort of like, well then suddenly naturalism will bloom and will destroy all of these institutions. And if we destroy all of these institutions, then a radical freedom will emerge. But in that radical freedom, the wolf eats the lamb. Now one might say, well, that's how nature works and fair enough. But would you like me to haul you out of your living room and plump you naked in the Serengeti without the producers are of naked and afraid? Is that what you really want? Because part of humanity's superpower is we do build institutions and these institutions are built so that sacrifice can be productive and not simply predatory. And part of the Nazi vision was if you release people to be exactly who they are, and part of the reason that they disliked the Jews were because they saw the Jews as basically constructing ideology and institutions upon humanity, which of course led up to, you know, in many ways, at least as a Christian, you would say the greatest Jew of all who was Jesus of Nazareth. Now the Nazis relationship with Christianity was very interesting and there are books about that as well. But you know, when Tom Holland says that Nazism is in some ways a radical environmentalism, yeah, because you want to get rid of all of these institutions and if that happens, then according to the Nazis, well, humanity will continue to evolve in a natural way and all of the disruption that we have been doing in between by establishing these institutions which interrupt the disruption go away. And so therefore, in very social Darwinian terms that were very popular at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century, which basically died a death because of the calamity of Nazi Germany, the social Darwinism, you know, will simply flourish and the truly great humanity will arise. And in order for this to happen, weak humanity needs to go. Now, I don't know what Michael Malice's vision of true humanity is, but it's not an agreement with Peterson. It's not an agreement with me. I think Peterson is an Augustinian and doesn't know it. And I'm going to touch on that at the end of this video when I play a portion where it seems Michael Malice seems very kind and generous about the individual. But I think he's naive in terms of what it takes for individuals to thrive. And he finds intersection with Peterson that institutions can become tyrannical, but Peterson disagrees with him by saying institutions are also necessary as are hierarchies. That, you know, politics should be about respect. These are tough choices. These are people lives. That's all very true. But there's this very new left from the late sixties perspective idea that these kind of powerful entities use respect and decorum and decency as a mechanism to stifle dissent and to basically make their victory a fait accompli. And if I heard someone, let's say that Benjamin Boyce put on his channel, making this as an argument for systemic racism, that is exactly what they would say. And that is exactly what they would say about the right. And so the commonality I hear coming out of his mouth with the other side is dramatic. And if you kind of mess that up and force them to show their hand that these are not kind, caring people who care about your grandma and your neighborhood, these are power hungry sociopaths who will smile at your face and do whatever they need to when the lights are off. That I think was something that's very useful in terms of exposing our politics for what they are. Compare what he just said to something like this. Welcome back to Black News Tonight. I'm still here with Dr. Aruna Kilinani as we talk exclusively about her content of her virtual talk, The Psychopathic Problem of the White Mind. Before we talk about the kind of consequences there of your speech, I want to talk a little bit more about some of the things that you said in the speech that I thought were interesting and compelling. You said, this is the cost of talking to white people, the cost of your own life as they suck you dry. There are no good apples out there. White people make my blood boil. When you say that this kind of rhetoric does not sound inconsistent with what I hear from Malice. There are no good apples out there. What kind of claim are you making? I'm talking about people have this idea that racism is something that if you're consciously racist or if you're a clan member. And then Malice basically says, well, this is how they really are. Are they conscious of it? Because I think there are other views of these people, some of whom I know. I don't think they think they're conscious of it. Oh no, but this is what's going on. This is what happens when you inhabit a corporation and it takes you over to make you this kind of person. Again, this is exactly what we're hearing from the other side. I'm sort of making the claim that racism is something that is unconscious and it is actually in everyone. And everyone uses these words systemic. They're like, you know, I know that racism is systemic. And yet individually, when you call them out, they'll be like, well, it's not me. You can't say that. And so there's a disconnect between use of the word systemic and saying that racism is everywhere. But the moment you pointed out individually, there's sort of people disown their own violence and racism. Would it be fair to say based on your expertise that white people are psychopathic? I think so. Yeah. I mean, I think that there's many lies that, and I didn't get to that part because what I've delivered was only part of a first series of talks. But the way the level of lying that white people do that has started since colonials and we're just used to it. I think you could hear this from Malice. So just every time you, sure, every time that you, you, you steal a country, you loot, you say you've discovered something. I mean, this is this level of lies actually part of history. We don't say that we killed all these people. We got rid of all the Native Americans. We say we discovered America. You don't talk about the level of death. You don't talk about the level of what actually occurred. You wipe the slate clean. You sanitize the violence and you actually got lost along the way. You're trying to go to India. And then you say you discovered something. And this level of discovery is everywhere. You've discovered vegetarianism. You know, you've discovered, you've discovered yoga. You've discovered everything is a discovery and it's all actually stolen. So what you're talking about at this point is a kind of macro level, systemic, structural kind of thing. But you're also trained to think about the psyche, which is about the individual at a certain level. To what extent can we say that individual white people are psychopathic or unhealthy or out of their minds? I'm using this language for those who are watching. I'm using this language based on what was in the speech and based on other work that's been published. This isn't necessarily my personal opinion. It's the analysis here. Do you think, to what extent can we say that individual white people are this thing versus saying that there's a culture of theft, a culture of colonialism? And is there a useful distinction to be made between the two? I think people, there is a useful distinction to be made. And on one level, yes, that's absolutely true. And it's different than actual individual psychopathy, the way that people conceive of it. On another level, when we are thinking about individual responsibility and how it is that people change, I think that using the words systemic and there's a culture operate defensively to not actually let yourself go into your own unconscious and go into those dark places of what you're actually doing. So I'm actually talking about it sort of as a defensive structure, like not acknowledging that on an individual level, I think can operate as a defense. And again, when I listen to something like this, I think it's basically Malice and her doing kind of the same thing, kind of making the same argument, which is also basically the kind of stuff that James Lindsay keeps pointing out. Look at the word critical here. What does the word critical mean? The word critical means in this context, looking at an extreme closeness, analyzing particularly the use of language, history, et cetera, in order to make problems related specifically to oppression more visible, so that people will want to enact a revolution to overturn the power dynamics that are alleged to be a part of it. And I think that's exactly what Malice is saying. When I hear him, I hear this stuff. So again, leave a comment with a clip that might clarify this for me. I'm happy to see it, but that's what I hear. So it struck me over the last decade or so that the alignment of comedic satire with right wing philosophy or political philosophy or views was something that was completely, also completely unprecedented. I thought, well, all of a sudden the right wing are the jesters, or at least among the right wing are these jesters. And I really didn't know what to make of that. I mean, you seem to regard it in your book, The New Right, you seem to regard it as a kind of right wing anarchic rebellion against, but it's strange what they're against because on the one hand, there's the corporate voice, let's say, that characterizes the media. And on the other hand, there's the left wing progressives. And you can't really put them in the same camp all that easily. Well, hopefully we will be putting them in the same camp. But they are in the same camp because one of my quotes is conservatism is progressivism driving the speed limit. So much of conservatism. Buckley got his start, William F. Buckley, who's the, I think the big villain of the book, got his start complaining how terrible things are and how mistreated he was at Yale. The New Right perspective isn't complaining about how things are at Yale. It's let's send tanks to Harvard Yard and raise it to the ground. So the. I don't think he means that literally. But I can't say I'm sure he doesn't. That's a dramatic thing to say. These are two different approaches. Now remember that video that I just played of that interview, this woman got attention because she basically said she wants to put a gun to the head of white people. This guy's talking about sending in tanks to Harvard Yard. Again, I listened to this. I'm just listening. That's what he said. Now I think it's helpful to bring Orwell into this because Peterson is a big fan of George Orwell and in many ways, a lot of these issues that were issues that were visiting had been visited in the 1920s and 30s. There's a great courses series on audible about George Orwell, which I really enjoyed. I listened to it not too long ago. And so Peterson's critique has basically been following Orwell in this and Peterson deals with Orwell in his classes. Orwell noted that many of these individuals love the power they generated by speaking in favor of the beleaguered masses. And that dynamic continues. And I think Malice is right about that. I have often seen that a lot of the money that the state uses to try to address social issues mostly benefits those who supply services to those people. I talked about the fact that one of the big lessons I took out of living and working in the third world is that it's tremendously difficult to help a human being. It's also difficult to help groups of human beings. It's tremendously difficult. And so I think many do so with well-meaning intentions, but what happens in fact is often ineffective and sometimes ruinous. Now Orwell was a believer in the small and there's wisdom in there. The difficulty with that is sometimes we also need the large and the small is sort of, when the small works, it's usually because there is a degree of self-tyranny rather than tyranny from above. But the self-tyranny, if it comes in a healthy way, usually happens because of a parental tyranny from above that comes in. And it often comes in religious ways. And this is something that I think the new atheist completely missed, was that there's tyranny all through these systems, but you need a bit of it, but you can't have too much of it. And I think this comes and it only works well when the actual orientation is love. I'm going to talk about that a little bit more. Orwell noted that the first thing that he said was that he was a believer in the small and the small is a little bit of a difference in the way that the small works. Orwell noted that many of these individuals love the power they generated by speaking in favor of the beleaguered masses, demagoguery, we have a word for it. And many tyrannical rulers have risen to power. Hitler did so based on the grievances against the Versailles Treaty. Stalin and they drove to power. And when a system doesn't work for people, sometimes, and sometimes they're right, they say I'd be better off without that system at all. And that's part of the reason why sometimes systems need to go away and things need to be dismantled. But when, where and how takes tremendous wisdom. Notice that there's a subtle Christian assumption at play beneath the beleaguer meant of the masses. I mean, that's nearly sheep without a shepherd that you can find from the Hebrew prophets. And the condemnation of the Hebrew leaders goes back to the Bible. You can find it in something like Jeremiah 23. Woe to the shepherds who are destroying and scattering the sheep of my pasture declares the Lord. Therefore, this is what the Lord, the God of Israel says to the shepherds who tend my sheep, to tend my people. Because you have scattered my flock and driven them away and have not bestowed care on them, I will bestow punishment on you for the evil you have done declares the Lord. I myself will gather the remnant of my flock out of all of the countries where they have, where I have driven them and bring them back to their pasture, where they will be fruitful and increase in number. I will place shepherds over them who will tend them and they will no longer be afraid or terrified, nor will any be missing declares the Lord. Days are coming declares the Lord when I will raise up for David a righteous branch, a king who will reign wisely and do what is just and right in the land. In his days Judah will be saved and Israel will live in safety. This is the name by which he will be called the Lord our righteous savior. So then the days are coming declares the Lord when people will no longer say as surely as the Lord lives who brought the Israelites out of Egypt, but they will say as surely as the Lord lives who brought the descendants of Israel out of the lands of the North and out of the countries where that where he has banished them. They will live in their own land and there are there are numbers of passages just like this in the Bible that you know the shepherds are the shepherds are not doing what they're supposed to and God himself is going to judge them and God will give them a king a shepherd but this isn't this isn't a banishment of shepherding. Now this is an extremely complex dynamic because there are sort of two traps to fall into. You can demonize the elites and the unjust shepherds of the sheep who are fleecing the flock and and living the the wealth of the elites at the expense of the masses or you can idolize the masses and notice that the book of Jeremiah and the book of Ezekiel and the other Hebrew prophets that talk about this don't idolize the masses because part of what we've seen is is this is this pattern in our culture. Now I wanted to bring in Theodore Dow Rimpel's book Life at the Bottom because with Dow Rimpel who was just on Peterson's channel you get this interesting mix because Dow Rimpel also complains about a culture that has developed at the bottom and I'll read some of the introduction of this. Let's see if we can get there. Here we go. A specter is haunting the western world the underclass. This underclass is not poor at least by the standards that have prevailed throughout the great majority of human history. It exists to varying degree in all western societies. Like every other social class it has benefited enormously from the vast general increase in wealth of the past hundred years. In certain respects indeed it enjoys amenities and comforts that would have made a Roman emperor an absolute monarch gasp. Nor is it politically oppressed. It fears neither to speak its mind nor the midnight knock at the door and and I think this is part of a weakness in malice's approach as well. Yet its existence is wretched nonetheless with a special wretchedness that is peculiar that is peculiarly its own. Part of what you might see both in the overreach of let's say the woke and at least what I hear in malice and again if I'm wrong please feel free to correct me below is sort of a catastrophizing of those who are legitimately suffered at the hands of others. And again if you read Jonathan Haidt, Peterson references Jonathan Haidt a number of times in that interview in Jonathan Haidt's latest book. You know this catastrophizing of the situation actually doesn't help anyone and in many ways what Dalrymple points out is that the underclass has in effect sort of weaponized many of the things that have been used against them and they themselves are suffering because of it and this book is basically a catalog of that. As a doctor who has worked for the past decade in a busy general hospital in a British slum and also in a nearby prison I have been in a privileged position to observe the life of the underclass. I have for example interviewed some 10,000 people who have made an attempt however feeble at suicide each of whom have told me of the lives of four or five other people around them. From this source alone I would have learned about the lives of 50,000 people lives dominated almost without exception by violence crime and degradation. Now it's difficult for me to believe that if you would somehow relieve all of these people of any coercive institutions even loving coercive institutions that suddenly everything would come up roses. It's about as fantastical a belief as a lot of the anti-racist stuff I hear coming from the wokest around. My sample is a selected one no doubt as all samples drawn from personal experience must be but it is not small. Moreover having previously worked as a doctor in some of the poorest countries in Africa as well as in very poor countries in the Pacific and Latin America I have little hesitation in saying that the mental, cultural, emotional and spiritual empowerment of the western underclass is the greatest of any large group of people I have ever encountered anywhere. As a doctor I am of course committed to treat each patient as an individual. It could hardly be otherwise when you talk to people about the most intimate details of their lives it could scarcely occur to you that they are other than fully conscious agents in essence no different from yourself and this I think gets into another weakness of malice's position imagining that somehow relieving the burden of any kind of I should find exactly the quote that he used I don't want to take the time to look it up right now I'm already running late should get home and any any institution whether it be formal like a corporation that has stockholders or implicit like let's say a marriage which you may you may get into the marriage voluntarily but if you're married for any length of time there will come a day that you imagine I'm not sure this was a good idea and the tyranny of that marriage weighs on you and impinges on you because you're going to have to say no to yourself in order to achieve something else which in that moment might not be something you really want and and it's those kinds of issues that Dalrymple mostly points out and points to in terms of the poverty in fact what he shows is that in some ways and this is where talking about this gets extremely difficult you need the right amount of coercion both external and internalized in order to actually flourish and again I really wish Peterson had but no you know I think he's doing well with his interviews but if Peterson let's say were to do a video critiquing malice what Peterson the work Peterson has done on sacrifice I think is central to this as is let's say the work that René Girard does in terms of how Christianity takes in this really vigorous self-critique and perpetuates it and and so in that way both the woke who are similar to malice and malice actually reinstantiate that Christian self-critique in this but but without sort of a fully rounded religious container that something like Christianity offers malice himself I fear can become some kind of an ideology nevertheless patterns of behavior emerge in the case of the underclass almost entirely self-destructive ones and and again in my experience with what Dalrymple is talking about it is the inability of family structures and individuals to say no to themselves that causes these self-destructive patterns day after day I hear of the same violence the same neglect and abuse of children the same broken relationships the same victimization by crime the same nihilism the same dumb despair is everyone a unique individual how do patterns such as this emerge well these are the spirits among us they are the principalities that are working their way through economic determinism of the vicious cycle of poverty variety and the social and economic cycle of poverty variety seems hardly to answer the question not only is the underclass not poor but untold millions of people who were very much poorer have emerged from poverty within living memory in South Korea for example if being poor really entails a vicious cycle man would still be living in the caves genetic or racial determinism is no better it will come as a surprise to American readers perhaps to learn that the majority of the British underclass is white actually the majority of the American underclass is white too it's not black there certainly is a black underclass and its population is certainly significant but a lot of the very well-meant attempts to rescue that underclass which usually comes from white folks of which I think a lot of this wokeism is a reiteration of still the majority of poor people in America are white genetics moreover can hardly explain such a phenomena as the rise of mass illegitimacy unprecedented in recent and recorded history since the late 1950s the role of the welfare state in the rise if that is quite the word for it of the underclass is likewise over stressed at most it might have been a necessary condition for that rise it made it possible but not inevitable welfare states have existed for substantial periods of time without the development of a modern underclass an added ingredient is is obviously necessary this ingredient is to be found in the realm of ideas human behavior cannot be explained without reference to the meaning and intentions people have given their acts and omissions and everyone has a welten schong I can't speak German a worldview whether he knows it or not it's a religion w I would say it is the ideas my patients have that fascinate and to be honest appall me for they are the source of their own misery their ideas have made themselves man and they do so freely it's a principality in many ways that they are bound to but they participate in it freely and again it's it's finding the verbal models to talk about these nuanced dynamics that's incredibly difficult we we sort of wait for the logos to appear so we can have the words to say the frequent locutions of passivity is a striking example an alcoholic explaining his misconduct while drunk will say the beer went mad must be an English expression a heroin addict explaining his resort to the needle will say heroines everywhere as if the beer drank the alcoholic and the heroin injected the addict in some ways that's true and I've got my own critique of dowry but because our systems don't tend to be able to afford the kind of the kind of communal spirits principalities and powers but demonic spirits we may say that possess us in a rather peculiar way religious language tends to have that faculty whereas modern therapeutic language really struggles other lo other locutions plainly serve as exculpatory function and represent a denial of agency and therefore of personal responsibility the murderer claims the knife went in or the gun went off the man who attacks his sexual consort claims that he went into one or lost it as it were he as if he were the victim of a kind of epilepsy of which it is the doctor's duty to cure of which it is the doctor's duty to cure him until the cure of course can continue to abuse his consort for such abuse has certain advantages for him safe in the knowledge that he not his consort is its true victim and so again I don't find malice helpful because I don't think he engages what a human being is and what we are in community it seems to run the risk of devolving because of a certain individualism that doesn't mean that doesn't recognize we are not merely individual organisms discreetly contained by our skin we are in fact a living communities and we think together we have to one degree or another extremely susceptible and may be benefited from a certain capacity as a hive mind now what we're doing here is practicing some sort of relevance realization as John Verveke would say and I think again well as a Christian my answer is love but love is not fundamentally a romanticism love is a difficult painful sacrifice for the welfare of another which by virtue of communities such as churches we try to do so for others and I'm not saying that only church people do this by any means in fact if you if you get into the question and answer that I had today a big part of what I'm wondering about is in fact the the limits of Protestant confessionalism by which we try to demarcate a lot of things and in some ways western the western world continues as a Christendom it's it's because of our history of confessional Protestantism we don't recognize it as such loving involves a thousand facile inconsistencies in service of relevance realization a good parent knows this you know grade school children especially when they get up into the middle school years are remarkably adept at sniffing out fairness and and they will very quickly point out that good parents treat their children differently sometimes in an abusive way but a good parent will do so in a helpful way and the child will say you said yes to yes to this person for this and that yes to my sibling for this and no to me that's unfair you should always give us the same answer and the wise parent will say you're not the same person as your sibling and I will give you what you need that's what love requires and I will say no to you that's what love requires and and dowrymple knows that you can't that it's this it's this facile shallow romanticized image of love and and by all means I in fact was having a private conversation yesterday with someone I hope to have on this channel in the future because he's got a lot of wisdom and he works with a tremendously with a community that is struggling tremendously and he's his occupation is to try to help them and and we both pull out our hair often at government institutions that that try to help and in the process do a tremendous amount of damage and and as Orwell noted and as Malice noted and as Peterson noted what what happens is even the the people who are well-meaning and maybe they're not well-meaning you know there's something called donor resentment in a lot of these bad relationships where the people who receive begin to resent the donor and the donor begins to resent the people under them and if and if you worked in a welfare office or if you work in a mental health facility or if you're a police officer because this happens to cops all the time it's tremendously difficult not to see patterns and build resentment and begin to dehumanize the people you you you work with and are there to serve and the only remedy of that is love but part of what we do is is in these institutions is we depersonalize it and this is part of the reason why you know if you listen to Nate and if you listen to some in the bridges of meaning community that talk about their Christian anarchism and I think what Sam said you can find it in the question and answer section where it's right it's the first question you know and I agree with Sam that I couldn't have said it better than he said it that this is sort of a hey I can play the video can't I sounds like a sort of radical egalitarianism but in a Christian context where there is a definite archa and a definite hierarchy and and in many ways a monarchy there's tension in there so Nate maybe you can comment a little bit on what you see as Christian anarchism okay I'll have to make this somewhat brief because I'm actually in the middle of a work email but essentially priorities right essentially it has to do with the the concept of of autarky like self-rulership right well only the to be honest with you from my perspective only the Christian is actually capable of being a real anarchist because only a Christian is capable of true autarky because the only path to true autarky is in union with Christ and that's like that's really the core of it um and it's really in terms of joe joey yes it's very much a practice it's it's just like it's it's it's the secular version of it that is closest to the Christian idea of it is kind of like mold bugs like living like a like like an expatriate in your home nation kind of idea it's like you belong to another kingdom so why should you care about this nonsense um it's not going to act it's actually going to keep you away from the path of true autarky that only comes through submission and and conform to the image of Christ I hope that makes sense that does make sense boy it sure sounds like an anabaptist position though so I haven't had a chance to see your conversation with Luke and with Julian but seeing Julian in that mix really made me think of anabaptism and of course Luke is gosh how to how to how to summarize Luke um I mean he's he's sort of this free and again and this is this is from and part of the beauty of trying to develop a community where we know each other is we know each other and and our our conversations have context and that's that's it's necessary the constraint is necessary for productivity and that I think that goes all the way up orthodoxy and element thank you so um I'm here just for the comments on blading it's a fair pushback I really like what you just said Nate natural law and I should get to Sam though I'll just stop recording until I find Sam and here's where Sam cut in one of the reformed zealots uh give a can I say something quickly Paul if you don't mind yeah go ahead I I think that when I'm listening to Christian anarchists talk what they're really just saying is is something more like Christian pacifism it's not like they don't believe in authority and hierarchy it's that they just don't believe that it should use force to stabilize itself and to get accomplish its means right and that it should be some sort of balance of um persuasion from the top and healthy humility and submission voluntary submission from the bottom but that there's still hierarchy and cooperation and there's still the monarchy of Jesus at the top um whereas anarchists like the one that Peterson talked to when he said that all cooperation was like tyranny or something like that or all unity was oppression basically you know hard stop that is just extremely anti-Christian um yeah so I I really think that maybe the Christian anarchists should pick a slightly different word although it does do a good job of getting attention but I don't think that's really what they mean I could and this again is why I think love has to be what guides it and this is where we use you know my god number one god number two group a group b all of these little things that I've developed over the last 20 years barring from Pascal the spirit of finesse and so with each individual you employ the spirit of finesse not the spirit of geometry um you know it's what's you get frustrated with policy now again you sort of need policy but it's always limited you know one person said you can easily predict the conduct of a group of people but it's a different thing to predict the conduct of an individual human being a policy works to a degree with groups but it always falls short with individuals and and so then you use the spirit of finesse not the spirit of geometry love love is your only god guide but love is not niceness so I you know after the question and answer today rick and I went out for tacos and we didn't have to wear a mask in a restaurant that was kind of nice again and he got me telling missionary stories because we're talking about this video and about malice and I'm he rick had said that he was just gonna watch something was just watching something on comparison of Haiti to the Dominican Republic and this picture went around the internet why is Haiti so bare and the Dominican Republic continues to have trees well the reason is because the Dominican Republic doesn't have a terrific government and by no means has a terrific judicial system anyone who lives there will probably recognize that the capacity of the police in the United States is far beyond what it is in the Dominican Republic and it is far more just Balaguer who was you know who was a strong man in the dr following Trujillo once told the police you know I know we don't have enough money to pay you and we know you have to make up your money picking up tips on the street the other word for tips or bribes well anyway the Dominican Republic in all of its difficulty in establishing a just society had laws about deforestation Haiti is where they deforested the country because all the wood was cut down for charcoal for burning and in the Dominican Republic they had laws and they had reforestation programs and they've been fairly effective now sometimes it can get a little tyrannical and in the Dominican Republic if you wanted to hurt somebody you'd make an accusation that they cut down a tree and then you'd go and sit in jail for two or three days and I would regularly see many of the Haitians that I worked with in the forest a little prison right down in the little town that I lived and one of my friends who was working in a he was a manager for a shrimp by a Dominican spent a few days there and you know it's kind of a Barney Fife operation there and you got to go home to sleep at night and just show up by jail at eight in the morning and spend your day in jail sort of like jury duty and not getting called there wasn't a particularly nice cell but actually even my friend didn't have to sit in the cell and whereas the Haitians all had to and so yeah you know I'm no skeptic about racism or any of these things but yet what happens in Haiti is that well they didn't keep people from making charcoal out of trees the Dominican Republic they had a program to subsidize propane so that propane could actually compete and that poor people could get a stove and it's you know nicer to cook over propane you can turn it on you can turn it off and the system worked fairly well but I mentioned to Rick that well all of these systems have limitations so once the government started subsidizing propane it's fairly easy to convert a car to run on propane instead of gasoline and so people started converting their cars to propane and using that subsidized propane but now suddenly you're messing with I mean it's just it's just always problematic but yeah that level of tyranny which would be pretty disappointing to most North Americans because it's more intrusive than a lot of the systems that we have actually has managed to maintain and to retard deforestation in the Dominican Republic and not Haiti so sometimes even a not great law working not very well is better than no law at all because what are the Haitians going to do they say well we as a people should have our consciousness raised and we're not going to use wood as charcoal for cooking anymore fat chance it's going to take a structure and there's going to be some coercion now can it be too coercive yes and and figuring out the balance of that and all the complexity is very very difficult but just saying all that's tyranny that's that's that's that's simply simplistic and and what's more troubling is the idealistic assumptions beneath about how human beings operate I just have very little confidence in it and again if I'm being unfair leave a comment leave a link to a video and I'll try to take a look at some of them so so now I want to be fair because I thought the conversation ended very well and I thought you know malice showed himself as someone who does care for people and I know politicians you know Sacramento is a is a political city there are members of my church who good number of members of my church worked for state offices my children have worked in the offices of assembly persons and state senators so and what I hear from many of the people that I know and trust is that often these are people trying to do good but they're working within a principality but again there's no easy answers to any of this but I think what shows up at the end of the video is really a loving thing and and malice seems to want well and love the individual and but I don't think his system as a system works because again as Peterson points out repeatedly well I'm a university professor shouldn't I be the enemy well not you well that's sort of how we do it isn't it and I think Nate said very well you know a personalism rather than an individualism which is actually what he said in when I was talking about Lord Supper our communion or Eucharist in the question and answer that's right because you're using something that really is a tool for the good let's say humor and you're perverting it so that you're masking something awful so that's analogous in some sense to this corporate malfeasance that you were discussing and so I guess in the sense I get when looking at the the irreverence of these young you know Peterson's looking good and healthier and healthier all the time it's good to see guys essentially on 4chan I think just bloody well make sure if Jordan ever calls and wants to talk I'll wear a coat or you stay on the right side even though my office today it's 108 outside my office is 90 degrees so hey it's you know 20 degrees below the outside temperature in here I shouldn't complain funny and there's always doubt in that and maybe there has to be but but but it's still the right moral imperative it's like go ahead with your humor man but like watch your tongue like watch your tongue it's also the idea of claptor where you had all these comedians going after Trump or whoever and the audience instead of laughing which is a visceral reaction would applaud and it's and again I think that's a that's a really helpful insight and so listening to that it's like yeah this this guy's smart he's giving me insight I can see value with listening to him but I'm not buying his program I haven't seen anything that would make me buy it it's like they're not they don't think you're funny they're agreeing with you it's it's kind of like people whose favorite kind of music is like religious music it's like you don't necessarily which a lot of which is very good a lot of Christian rock is very good don't get me wrong they're very talented people but do you like this song because you like the beat do you like how it makes you feel or do you like this song because you happen to agree with the person these are well with religious music you not only have the power of the music you leverage the power of religious formation that that moves you entirely different phenomena well there has to be an element of surprise and humor right yes oh yes and that and that also accounts for that spontaneous laughter which is an indication that the arrow hit its mark right that the target is being specified properly and precisely and it really is a form of art to do that and so well then I think I always had mixed feelings about the satirists on 4chan for exactly that reason it's like well are you really watching what you're saying carefully enough like hooray for your humor hooray for your courage all of that but this is like the Steven Pinkers in any population you're going to have a small percentage who rise above who are quality and that whatever it is at its best and the vast majority of people bring nothing to the table and then there's plenty of people who actually use that mechanism to make things much worse right well there's an elitism in there isn't there he's not wrong but again how good is his system well and that's interesting as well because it also like I always think well wouldn't it be great if there were only good restaurants and then I think well wait a second how many bad restaurants do there have to be in order for there to be one restaurant and that's that's just a brilliant insight there isn't zero yeah yeah definitely some because people have to practice and they have to make mistakes and they have to learn and well right and so you look at 4chan too and you can think well how much wretched humorless racist noise do you have to tolerate in order to generate something of true value and the answer to that is I think two one is we don't know that's the first answer and so beware of clamping down on it too precipitously but the second is maybe and and this point might also be made about institutions of constraint how many of them do you need in order for the good ones to rise to the top that's also something that each of the people who are involved in that kind of activity should should be attending to you know within the confines of their own soul so to speak I mean they're anonymous and it's evanescent but that doesn't mean that you bear no moral responsibility for what you're saying yes and I think cruelty for the sake of cruelty is really a sign of weakness it's the kid pulling the wings off of a bug or like you know putting tin cans on a cat's tail it's a way for people to just feel some modicum of power over another human being but that's a very parasitic way of looking at things and using this other person as a means to an end and this person might not be a great person but really what are you accomplishing you're just both miserable now that there's there needs to be in my view a joyousness to what you're trying to do and I certainly hope that but not just a joyousness it has to build something and I think fundamentally a lot of what I've heard from him is parasitic it's it's the critique of tyrannical systems but I don't know how much you can build it's my work and my uh uh output it that's a good place to stop thank you sir thank you very much I hope you enjoyed this so far so good oh that's an interesting answer such an honor thank you can I ask you what do you have to bounce right now or do you have time for one question I have time for a question uh in your absence I've been kind of taking a lot of young men under my wing and kind of mentoring them I saved one kid's life when he reached out to me he was suicidal and now he's just kind of they're under your wing as bad days which that's that's all you need that's a lot better yeah like yeah that bad days if you're not a threat to your life whatever what advice would you have to me or to your past self when this started happening for you uh because I'm very scared of saying the wrong thing and making things worse you there's no way you can pay too much attention okay like ignorant attention watch the person and you do that when you're in in conversation you know yeah paying attention more attention and you can't offer advice in some sense you have to listen okay yeah yeah yeah let them feel hurt if you pay attention like if you pay attention your your good habits will take over and and you'll walk down the right course okay humility and attention that's good humility and attention as I'm sure you've seen it's amazing how many young people just want someone to listen to them and they it's it's just have some that they respect and once that happens they feel so validated yeah well they really want to say some and that's because of a status imbalance see the specific c.s lewis has this lovely section in the weight of glory where he talks about the specific pleasure of the inferior and there's no space in radical egalitarianism for that and the c.s lewis writes about that again in the weight of glory which is an amazing sermon and it's true and and for human beings and again you you need you need to have a god to understand that specific pleasure so I like this this little this close to the conversation and maybe I'll maybe I'll snap this snap this picture because it's a I'm always needing good pictures and thumbnails and that's a nice one of both because I want to I don't want to have pictures of them that that don't look good anyway so yeah again I I want to be fair and you know I won't have time to read malice's book or do a deep dive into them and mostly finding this here but if there are videos on youtube because he's got plenty out there I'm sure and you know if you can just if you can leave the place in the conversation you know you know how to do that with the link when you hit share on youtube and I can I can do that right here to show you just to hit share and then it comes up and then start at here and hit copy you can put that in the put that in the comment or you can put it on twitter and at me and because I want to be fair but you know there's this line that you'll walk it's sort of opponent processing you know Jesus both says do not judge and discern the spirits and so we're always sort of walking that line of opponent processing so I want to be fair I want to get it right but I want to give a good critique because in the spirit of what again John Verveke calls dia logos we both want to leave the conversation with more than we came and it's not about my victory at your expense it's about both of us learning from each other so again thanks for watching and as Freddy said I'll see you on the flip side