https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oGu6JjZMXcY

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday Friday where I walk through the current status of my sermon. I usually write my sermon throughout the week. I spend a few hours here and there on it studying the biblical text, thinking about illustrations, thinking about introductions. Friday is kind of a middle draft and then I continue to ponder Saturday and Sunday morning. I get up early and clean the thing off and Sunday at 11 o'clock we start worship and I start preaching about 1130 and we've been going through the book of Second Kings, which is the number of years ago I started, I got tired of doing series and I decided to do the lectionary during certain seasons of the liturgical year and then in other seasons to go through the Bible and so a number of years ago I started in Genesis and I've been moving steadily through and I'm now in the middle of Second Kings. I'm gonna have to figure out what to do with Chronicles. I might skip it. My adult Sunday school class I go through books serially there too. We did Daniel and Ezekiel and now we are going to look at the John. We're currently in second John. We'll go to third John and then do first John and then do the Gospel of John. For those recordings you can find them on my church channel, and I'll put the link in the notes. I'd like to begin this one with a Bible quiz. Jesus said in the Sermon on the Mount, no one can serve two masters. What two masters? I should change that. See? I'm at it. What two masters did he name? There's a little Japanese music for you. Some of you knew it exactly right away. Some of you might be looking for Matthew 6 and here it is. Matthew 6 24 from the NIV. No one can serve two masters. Either you will hate the one and love the other or you will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money. But those of you who maybe know the King James version might know the King James Version. Those of you who maybe know the King James Version might remember that no one can serve God and Mammon. Now Mammon is an interesting word. It's actually a loan word that gets brought over from Hebrew to Aramaic to and then it's just basically transliterated in the Greek, the Aramaic, and that gets brought all the way to the King James Version. That's a really interesting thing when you have a loan word getting brought all the way to this level. Now the translation of Mammon to money isn't a bad one, but it's a bit of a reduction because Mammon is a little bit broader. Wealth, stuff, the things, the thing, the material things around us. Money is this fungible, streamlined, storified tool that's been used for thousands and thousands of years. Now if you read this in your Bible though, one of the things that you'll notice is that editors break up the Bible into paragraphs and often sections and they put section heads on and other nice little handy things like footnotes. Part of the problem of this is that there's a fair amount of interpretation that's going on in the process of editing and laying out a contemporary translation and I don't like where this break comes and I don't like it for pastoral reasons because if I read it all through, no one can serve two masters either you will hate the one and love the other or you'll be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money. Therefore, that's a word that's supposed to pull the sections together. I tell you do not worry about your life. What you will eat or about your body, what you will wear is life not more than food and the body more than clothes. Look at the birds of the air. They do not sow or reap or store away in barns and yet your heavenly father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable than they? Can any one of you by worrying at a single hour to your life? What's that have to do with money? Everything. What's that have to do with mammon? Everything. There's a reason the therefore is there because if you look at yourself or if you're a pastor and you listen to people, what do we tend to worry a lot about? Especially in this context in North America where perhaps we're not eating every day from what say the Haitians who I worked with in the Dominican Republic were doing, which was often eating every day from their garden. Even my grandfather during the Depression as a Christian reform minister in the prairies ate every day from his garden. Gardening was the way that you would eat. Money was what you needed for other things. And well, money. He's insidious editors. They've added something. But now here's the thing. You have these two things, God and money. What if you put them together? Is it like peanut butter in your chocolate? Well, this is a well-blazed trail. One of the most famous people to put them together is Dr. Creflo Dollar. Now, in 1963, he was born the same year as me. Mr. Michael Smith was born and he changed his name to Dr. Creflo Dollar. And he is a preacher and he preaches you're supposed to be wealthy, how to make money, live comfortably and be an inheritance to a future generation. The Holy Spirit, your financial advisor, God's plan for debt-free money management. Dr. Creflo Dollar is what we sometimes call a prosperity preacher. He basically says, God wants you to be rich. And that's what the Bible is about. And there's a lot of prosperity preachers and a lot of preachers that flirt with it. Now, this seems clear if you listen to preachers like me that that won't talk nicely. Well, we won't advise that people go the prosperity gospel route because actually the story of the Bible, God and money, on one hand, Jesus says they're two masters. It's one or the other. And on the other hand, you got Creflo Dollar saying it's all the same thing. Well, is the Bible clear? Is Jesus clear? Well, the Bible does teach that the Bible does the Bible teach that you that to have wealth is bad. And therefore, you want if you want God's favor, you must be poor. The love of money is the root of all evil you can find in the Bible or the root of all kinds of evil, rather. See, I misquoted it myself. The misquotation is so common. It's not really that clear. In the Old Testament, wealth was regarded as a sign of God's blessing on a person. That's very clear in the book of Job. It's it's sometimes noted in the Psalms and the Proverbs and probably most clear in the patriarchs where Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph. Wealth, good fortune are all signs of God's providential blessing. In fact, Joseph gets highlighted because everything he seems to touch goes well. Same for David and a number of other people where there are biographical sketches in the Old Testament. Others have noted throughout the history of the church, John Wellesley, most notably that if you are a serious Christian, the common appetites of the flesh, such as the seven deadly sins, specifically sins like avarice, lust and gluttony are more under control. And those things often lead to misery and poverty. The love of money is the root of all kinds of evil. If your loves are under control by your Christian discipleship, you will work hard. You will work hard because God loves industriousness. Now we get Weber's, we get Weber's Calvinist work ethic. And this may very well make you wealthy. And it's interesting note that even medieval monasteries in the West, Roman Catholic medieval monasteries with vows of poverty became centers of wealth. People were so generous to these and the monks lived so frugally and they were so productive on the land that they farmed that during the Protestant Reformation and the iconoclastic period. Many communities regarded these monasteries as corrupt, as hoarders of wealth. And so communities would break in and basically loot the monasteries. And so there's a complicated relationship between between godliness and wealth. We've been going through the Book of Kings and I'll once again recommend the Bible Project videos. They have great rundowns and summaries of different books in the Bible and some of the little pictures I'll be I'll be lifting from that video. The rise we've been talking about how in many ways Samuel and 1st and 2nd Samuel 1st and 2nd Kings show the rise and fall of the kingdom of Israel, which we might even say would be in Old Testament terms the kingdom of God or the kingdom of the Lord. You have this messianic king that arises to power and then in the Book of Samuel and then really in the Book of Kings, you have the corruption and fall of the kingdoms. Of course, David on his deathbed says to says to Solomon, stay faithful to God and then proceeds to tell him go and murder my enemies, which which Solomon does. But then there's God's wisdom for Solomon and God comes to him in the night and says, ask what you will and Solomon asked for wisdom. And unlike David, he doesn't have blood on his hands. So Solomon builds the temple and the temple is is a sort of recapitulation of the Garden of Eden. It's where heaven meets earth. It's where God's presence is. But Solomon and his great wealth and his many wives lead him astray into idolatry, into into greed. He enslaves his own people for his large public works projects. And then after Solomon dies, his son Rehoboam is just like his father. And it's over taxes that the kingdom is split. And the northern the northern tribes go with Jeroboam. And Jeroboam in the in the Book of Kings, Jeroboam son of Nabat, he's got a problem because the temple is in Jerusalem and money will flow and allegiance will flow and identity will flow south. So Jeroboam is no fool when it comes to religion. He establishes two golden calf idols at strategic locations where people from the northern kingdom can bring their offerings, you know, to try to keep all the money in the family and to keep all the religions allegiance there. Now these golden calves were likely, as in the story of Exodus, supposed to represent the Lord, obviously in violation to the First Commandment. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make an idol out of any graven image. The First and Second Commandment. Well, first maybe second definitely. And so this is the sin that you find recorded again and again and again in the Book of Kings. The sin of Jeroboam son of Nabat becomes a refrain that echoes throughout the Book of Kings. But there's ongoing private tensions in the Book of Kings as there is in Judges and First and Second Samuel and then Kings. Finally, when you have the temple established between the centralized, authorized worship in Jerusalem versus the high places and therefore these other places. Now the two kingdoms are split and the genealogies flow distinctly. The genealogies in the lower kingdom of Judah follow David and in the northern kingdom begins with Jeroboam who rips them away. The tribal elders go with him and he hands it down to his son. But his son, like all the other nations, remembering First Samuel 8, there are coups that unseat them. And one leads to another and then the House of Omri then the House of Omri then begets Ahab. And there are coups along the way, just like the other nations. And in First Kings 16, we first meet Ahab. And Ahab does indeed continue with the sin of Jeroboam, but he takes it further. He, like Solomon, marries foreign wives and these wives draw him into Baal worship. And he also rebuilds Jericho at the cost of his firstborn and at the cost of his youngest son. But Ahab here is shown as someone who is shrewd and ruthless and someone who is really determined to use religion, both the religion of the Lord and the religion of Baal's to work his kingdom and make it great. Now, one of the things that a lot of Bible readers don't see right away is what archaeologists and historians have noted that the House of Romney was really a high point for the Northern Kingdom. The Northern Kingdom was able to keep its subjugation of Ammon and some of the other and Ammon and then in fact be able to subjugate and occupy some towns from their northern neighbor Aram, as it's called in the NIV or some would call Syria. A lot of contemporary translations opt for Aram because then you don't have the confusion between the Syrians and the Assyrians who will come later, the great Assyrian Empire. But the Northern Kingdom reaches the height of its power and it has adopted the regional religion of Baal worship. So they could be religiously connected to the Sidonians where Jezebel comes from, to Tyre and Sidon and the Phoenicians and potentially even the Philistines and also Aram. Baal is a very important god in this region, in the polytheism of the region. And so Ahab builds an entire temple to Baal in Samaria and an Asherah pole and goes fully into the religions of the area. If you're listening from the Jordan Peterson community, you know some of the background of how polytheism lubricates religious pluralism in the region. And Ahab is deep, deep, deep into this. So he adopted the religious tradition and the partition, also we know from archaeology in the area, that the traditional protections for families and the poor that was built into the Deuteronomic law of inheritance and the year of Jubilee, this seemed to have gone away because plantations and farms seemed to get larger and larger, which meant that families, if they had bad fortune or lost their farm or bad management, would no longer get their inheritance back. And in the stories of Ahab, this then gets, in a sense, told by the story of Nabath where the king wants a vegetable garden and Nabath has a nice vineyard close to his palace. And so basically Ahab engineers the murder, the political assassination of Nabath and takes his field and Elijah, the prophet, isn't going to stand for it. And this is where Elijah comes onto the scene and he keeps calling Ahab and Jezebel to account. And then there's this dramatic showdown on Mount Carmel where the priests of Baal don't get any, don't get any fire from the Lord coming down from heaven. And again, if you're listening to my Jordan Peterson videos, you should listen to the story of the Old Testament symbolism of sacrifice where the Lord himself lights the fire on his altar and Elijah goes and slaughters, kills the priests of Baal. Okay. And this is seen as zealous for the Lord. But then after this, Jezebel says to Elijah, you murdered my priests. I'm going to have you dead. And Elijah loses his nerve and he runs away and hide. And the angel of the Lord finds him, tells him to get up and eat and go to the mountain of the Lord, Mount Horeb. And there he finds Elijah and he says, where are you? And Elijah says, I have been very zealous for the Lord my God. And I'm reading N.T. Wright's biography of the apostle Paul right now. And this is a very big deal in the Old Testament that is brought into the new. Just as Phineas slaughtered the men in Israel who were sleeping with the Moabite wisdom women, Elijah slaughters the priests of Baal. But then Jezebel threatens his life and he says, I've been very zealous for the Lord Almighty. The Israelites have rejected your covenant, torn down your altars and put your prophets to death with the sword. I am the only one left and now they are trying to kill me too. The Lord said to him, go back the way you came and go to the desert of Damascus. When you get there, anoint Hazael king over Aram, the northern neighbor, and also anoint Jehu son of Nimshat. King over Israeel, and anoint Elisha son of Shaphat from Abel, Meholla to succeed you as prophet. Jehu will put to death any who escape the sword of Hazael and Elisha will put to death any who escape the sword of Jehu. Yet I reserve seven thousand in Israel all whose knees have not bowed down to Baal and whose mouth have not kissed him. Now Elisha was a very big deal. But one of the things Elisha did not do are two of these three things on the list, which is very interesting. And even his anointing of Elisha, by the way the story is told, Elisha's determination, by his determination that he follows Elijah. And so the picture of Elijah's faithfulness is not that stellar. Shaka Lule, who has a very interesting book, Shaka Lule was a very interesting man, as a very interesting book, The Politics of God and The Politics of Man. He notes that most contemporary critical scholars read these texts and say, oh, these are the scribes and they're just kind of writing God into the history. And he Lule makes the point that if they were doing this, they got things dramatically wrong. They would have had Elisha have the idea of anointing Hazael, which we'll see here, and anointing Jehu, which we'll see later. And they would have cleaned all that up, but they didn't. That's not how the text is. So we've got Elijah hanging out there eight to ten years later before the events happen that the Lord told Elijah to do, which Elijah didn't do. Now Elisha went to Damascus. Didn't God tell Elijah to go to Damascus? I don't know that he went. Elisha went to Damascus and Ben-Hadad, king of Aram, was ill. Now Ben-Hadad was basically the son of their gods, the son of Baal, and that was not actually the given name of each person. It was the royal name. And what's interesting here too is that Elisha must have incredibly high status now. Now if you remember back a little bit earlier in the book, now this is way back in terms of the Living Stone sermon series, that, oops, kicked my table. That Elisha cures Haman of leprosy, and he was the top general for Ben-Hadad, the king of Aram. And Elisha refuses the money, and Gehazi takes it and gets Haman's leprosy. But now everyone knows about Elisha, and he's the go-to guy. Again, in a polytheistic context, if Baal is working for me, I'll worship Baal. If the Lord is working for me, I'll worship the Lord. People are transactional that way, and religion itself is highly transactional. And so the king fell ill, and so he says to his right-hand man, Hazeel, hey, take a whole bunch of stuff and go find Elisha. And lo and behold, Elisha's in town. Hazeel, take a gift with you and go to meet the man of God. Consult the Lord through him and ask him, will I recover from this illness? He probably sent a delegation to the priests of Baal as well. Hazeel then met Elisha, taking with him a gift of 40 camel loads of all the finest wares of Damascus. Now bear in mind, this is a day in time when you would have one or maybe two things to wear. This is unbelievable wealth. Elisha is regarded with such enormous stature by this point in his career. And again, go through and read the stories of Elisha. He went in and stood before him and said, your son, oh my goodness, the king is placing himself below Elisha. Your son Ben-Hadad, king of Aram, has sent me to ask, will I recover from this illness? This is what we want from the gods or the Lord or Baal or the prophets. We want insider information so we can control and manage the future. Now this has certainly not gone away. If anybody in my church believed that I had the gift of prophecy and could tell them what would happen in the future, well they would come and ask me this. Instead, they just ask me for prayers. Elisha answered, go and say to him, you will certainly recover. Well, 40 camels worth, done. Nevertheless, the Lord has revealed to me that he will in fact die. There's a twist. He stared at him, meaning Elisha, with a fixed gaze until Haziel was embarrassed. What's going on here? Then the man of God began to weep. What on earth is going on here? Why is my Lord weeping, said Haziel? Elisha replies, because I know the harm you will do to the Israelites, he answered. You will set fire to their fortified places, kill their young men with the sword, dash their little children to the ground, and rip open their pregnant women. Haziel said, how could your servant, a mere dog, accomplish such a feat? The powerful kingdom that the House of Omri and Ahab has established? The Lord has shown me that you will become King of Aram, answered Elisha. Then Haziel left Elisha and returned to his master. When Ben-Hadad asked, what did Elisha say to you? Haziel replied, he told me that you would certainly recover. But the next day he took a thick cloth, soaked it in water, and spread it over the king's face. We've got Old Testament waterboarding here, so that he died. Then Haziel succeeded him as king. Now within this story is a whole, whole lot to think about. And a whole lot of questions that make you really uncomfortable. Did God just engineer a coup? Did, why did Elijah not do this years before? What is this about? Well, this is about judgment on the House of Ahab. But Ahab's long dead. Why would God get involved in politics? Why would God have his prophet get involved in politics? Does this mean that we should get involved in politics too? Does this mean that we should stay out of politics? But now notice that is God responsible for this coup? He just said what was happening. Haziel knew what to do, knew how to do it. Did he use God as a justification? Now, there are a few relationships more complex with us than God and money. You see, wealth and fortune can be a sign of God's favor. Wealth can be a product of godly living. Wealth can corrupt us and lead us astray. We should look to God to meet our needs. Using God or the gods as an avenue for serving money, mammon, greed, what have you, is seen as the height of folly and rebellion. But it almost seems that God invites this here. One of the things that you'll notice if you read the Bible, and I don't mean just casually dipping in here and there for inspiration, how most of us read it for devotions, is the strong theme throughout the Bible that God raises and God tears down. And the strong theme throughout the Bible is that God raises tyrants and has them do his bidding, most often by attacking God's people. And appearances can be enormously deceptive because according to the appearances of the Bible, Ahab looked like the most successful king. Couldn't we surmise that like Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, that Abraham had God's favor? I'm sure there are plenty of prophets of Baal and the Lord and Samaria who are telling Ahab and his sons just exactly that. See, good king Ahab, you have God's favor. And I'm sure the prophets of Ben-Hadad were telling him exactly the same thing. But also if you read the Bible, you notice that God works over long periods of time, often generations. And Ahab, unlike David, or Ahab like David, if you get a little later in the story, will repent for what he does. He puts on sackcloth and ashes and he cries to Elisha and the Lord listens to him. I preached about this a number of months ago. And the Lord says, okay, Ahab, I'll let your sons take the hit, not you. Ahab being the man that he says says, glad I'll let my sons suffer instead of me. What a great father. Unlike David, the judgment is delayed. God's judgment is seen as sweeping. And God uses the evil and the unjust to judge and purify his people. This God cannot be confined to simplistic and facile readings of are things good? God must be smiling me. Are things bad? God must be judging me. Nope, you really can't do this math. And if you need that summarized in one book, one very long book, but you can probably get the message from reading the beginning and in the end, read the book of Job. One of the things in our contemporary conversation where we wonder about oh, I'm going to put something else in. In 2016, we had a big conversation as a nation and the populists were the ones who really took everyone by surprise in that election. And a lot of talk about income inequality. And if you pay attention to the conversations, are we talking politics? Are we talking religion? Are we talking economics? An interesting book by a man named Walter Seidel that I've mentioned at a couple of my sermons. He did a big study from the Stone Age to the 21st century asking how does inequality actually get addressed? And what he basically said was that our mass violence and catastrophe is the only forces that can seriously decrease economic inequality to judge by thousands of years of history. The answer is yes. And that's essentially the point of his book. So how are we to think about Ahab and God's judgment? These are themes that have almost departed from contemporary Christianity and they're seen as out of style or inappropriate or embarrassing. But the thought here in the Old Testament is that God waits. I remember as a child hearing this quote, the mills of the gods. I can't remember the last time I heard it quoted and I didn't know where it came from so thanks to Google I can look it up. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Though the mills of the gods grind slowly, yet they grind exceedingly small. Though with patience he stands waiting, with exactness he grinds he all. You have the mural from the Kansas State Capitol of John Brown. You have the song of the battle hymn of the Republic. Mine eyes have seen the coming of the Lord. He is trampling out the vineyard where the grapes of wrath are stored. In an affluent day we forget what things are like. That's something else. Elul ends his chapter on Haseel with this. Historians who think the history told in the Bible is pious and distorted ought to ask themselves why it is that these biblical historians who supposedly want to prove something always tell us about the disasters under good kings and the victories under idolatrous kings. For us the question is that of the respite which can be granted to a people. The growth of its material prosperity, its glory, its tranquility, its culture. Satan has fallen from heaven to earth like a flash of lightning because the Son of Man is the Son of God. The respite of peace should be for us a warning to greater watchfulness and to greater love. In our little lives we are not kings. We are subject to the seeming chaos of history. If the economy is good we might do well. If misfortune strikes us we might suffer. God seems to give us what he chooses yet we also have a hand in it. You can't take it with you we say. And as I keep telling you the age of decay will rob us of everything. Thieves, moth and rust stalk us at every turn. You've been listening to this whole story probably thinking mostly of yourself and maybe God or whatever you are imagining your relationship with history, fortune, fate, the gods or the universe might be. This is normal mammalian anxiety. How can I get rich? How can I be secure? How can I be happy? How will I survive? The insidious editors divide this. Which shows us that the son of man invites us to number one serve one master not two because he says you really can't serve two and number two if you serve that master don't worry. But doesn't that seem strange given everything we've just been talking about? Why on earth would we not worry if this Lord unlike the bales and all the other gods of creation both supernatural and natural among us keep simply never seems to offer what exactly it is that we want in a predictable way. The other gods ancient and modern supernatural political physical always offer what we want and what we need for what we hope to be a reasonable price. This God doesn't seem reliable doesn't seem practical doesn't seem responsible. Now of course it was Jesus who starts this off in his sermon on the mount. It's Jesus that invites us to serve one or the other. Now I think probably most of us would have to confess we're always trying to split the two. We don't really believe him that we can't serve both. Creflo Dollar certainly doesn't believe him. He's put them both together. But Jesus was the greatest king. He had greater power than any king because nature obeyed his words. Jesus was the greatest prophet. He was dependent on the generosity of others for his daily bread. He lived it. Jesus was the greatest priest. Most other priests put animals on an altar offering them up to the flame of God. Jesus sacrifices himself for our benefit. Now people sometimes ask for a real short summary of what Christianity means and this is my best take at it. Do you trust Jesus more than you trust yourself? Because here's the thing about money. Money is really trusting yourself because I imagine that if I can get it, if I can secure it, if I can manage it, if I can manipulate it, if I can do things with it, I can secure for myself what I need. Jesus says you can't serve two masters. Do you see Jesus as having all authority in heaven and on earth? If you do, the answer gets easier. Do you see Jesus' incarnation, crucifixion, and resurrection being on your behalf? If you do, it gets easier. Do you believe that this short, hard, painful little thing that you call your life, which is really a story of sorts, is just the beginning of an everlasting story? If you do, belief gets easier. Now, again, you might notice that I end my sermons with misery, deliverance, gratitude, which is the structure of the Heideberg Catechism, which is one of the doctrinal statements of my denomination. It just recently celebrated its 450th anniversary and for those of you watching this video, you can find it online and read through it yourself. One of my favorite, I don't know if favorite is the right word, one of the most meaningful Lord's days, it's split up into 52 Lord's days so that churches can deal with them on Sundays, is Lord's Day 10. And it asks a really hard question. How do you understand, what do you understand by the providence of God? Is God working in raising up kings and queens and tearing them down? Does God's mill grind slowly but exceedingly fine? Does God actually pay attention to those children who will be dashed on the rocks that Elisha saw and the pregnant women who will be cut off open? Does God in fact look upon the sparrows as Jesus will continue to say, are we not more important than the sparrows as Jesus will say in the Sermon on the Mount? Providence is the almighty and ever-present power of God by which he upholds as with his hand heaven and earth and all creatures. And so rules them that leaf and blade, rain and drought, fruitful and lean years, food and drink, health and sickness, prosperity and poverty, all things in fact come to us not by chance but from his fatherly hand. Now if you actually think about this, if you actually understand the ramifications of this, this will bother you in all likelihood or it may comfort you. But this is not something that you will likely just look at and ignore and say, yeah, that's in fact a reaction too. How does the knowledge of God's creation and providence help us? Is this supposed to help us? Shouldn't this make me like Bart Ehrman reject this God and want to instead have my own God that by my own smarts, by my own power I can manage for myself all the things that predictably mechanistically work within this physical realm? We can be patient when things go against us. Thankful when things go well. And for the future we can have good confidence in our faithful God and Father that nothing will separate us from his love. Notice it doesn't say nothing bad will happen to us. Notice it doesn't say we won't starve. Notice it doesn't say we won't suffer. All things are so completely in his hand that without his will they can neither move nor be moved. Well that will give you something to think about.