https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PuzvcCLnrfI

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to keep looking at this Elon Musk conversation with the BBC. I did a video about it last week on beasts and swarms. Twitter is sort of a swarm, but Elon, in a sense, is organizing the arena for the swarm. And what I'm trying to get at are all of these extended bodies and how they function in our culture with respect to the principalities and powers that are among us. Now, Musk, Musk bought Twitter towards the end of last year, and when he made a bid for it, there was quite a bit of hoopla in terms of people weighing in on whether this was a good thing or a bad thing. Senator Elizabeth Warren's comments were some of the most famous. This deal is dangerous for our democracy. Billionaires like Elon Musk play by a different set of rules than everyone else. Yes. But, you know, it's like, yeah, so do senators. Accumulating power for their own gain. We need a wealth tax and strong rules to hold big tech accountable. Okay, so basically seem, you know, using this for our own political points. As a result of the sale, Twitter will now be a privately owned company, which is an interesting thing. You know, the difference between a privately owned company and a publicly owned company. To what degree is that? And then in the, as we listened to a bunch of what Musk said, there'll be a lot of nuance in terms of why he bought it, what he desires for it. And, and in a sense, the degree of altruism, you know, the more you listen to it, it doesn't sound like Musk was accumulating power for his own gain in this. But I think, you know, to me, people are all over the place with respect to Elon Musk. I also want to say again that the purpose of this video is not to have Musk bad or Musk good or BBC bad or BBC good. You're all going to have your own opinions on that and you're absolutely entitled to them. But to try to get at these spiritual bodies that we have in our world that are holding sway over the body politic and all of our various ecclesiastical and all sorts of other bodies that are in play. Musk, who has said that he would buy Twitter in order to restore the platform's adherence to free speech. And we're going to get into that free speech principles. Free speech is the bedrock of a functioning democracy and Twitter is the digital town square where matters vital to the future of humanity are debated. Okay, one can very much ask a question whether Twitter is actually a good debate format, or a good debate forum. But again, we're going to look at sort of the arenic powers inherent in this and agents within sort of the arena of the swarm, let's say. I also want to make Twitter better than ever by enhancing products with new features, making the algorithms open source to increase trust. I think there's something to that. People with knowledge might be able to look at that code and make up, you know, find things in it or not find things in it. But most of us wouldn't be able to do anything with it. Defeating spam bots and authenticating all humans. Twitter has tremendous potential. I look forward to working with the company and the community of users to unlock it. Now in order to facilitate going through these, I made little clips so I wouldn't have to go through the whole thing of just some of the salient parts. But let's, let's begin with this. Let's begin with this once I have my computer set up properly. This is the first clip right at the beginning of the interview. Why did you agree to do this, this interview with the BBC? I don't know, I like spontaneity. And I know there's a lot going on. It seems like I actually do have a lot of respect for the BBC. Although sometimes we get what the BBC does for you. So he's asked why did he agree to do it and Musk comes off playfully and this comes on the heels of Musk. Now we're going to talk about sort of the arena for the swarm. And as you have with YouTube and many of these other things, the arena is trying to shape the agent. Now when we talk about the Medi-Divine realm with respect to Ezekiel Kaufman and his ideas about the Old Testament, you have the arena, you have the arena and the agents within the arena. And the arena has laws and rules which shape how the agents respond to one another and in fact even respond to the arena. Why did you agree to do this, this interview with the BBC? I don't know, I like spontaneity. And I know there's a lot going on. It seems like I actually do have a lot of respect for the BBC. Although sometimes we get what the BBC stands for, you know. But what does it say? Just kidding. You know what it stands for. Yes I do. Now I think this interview was done both on Twitter Live and a lot of the copies of it on YouTube are from people just capturing the Twitter Live and the BBC. I wondered when I first got this, you know, can I find the whole thing? But yeah, I did find it. So yeah, yeah, so there's a lot going on. So this might be a good opportunity to answer some questions and you know, I guess maybe get some feedback too. Now feedback is something that he comments on fairly regularly during this whole interview and he seems quite serious about it. And I think he's a good businessman and he knows that a little bit later he's going to talk about, I don't know if I've included that in the clips that I took, he talks about wanting the user experience to be, wanting the users to be happy, wanting them to be satisfied. So it's very much sort of a customer service consumer mindset that he's getting at. Again, part of what I wish he had thought about in this interview was more the kinds of things that I'm displaying in terms of the beast versus the swarm. What should we be doing different? I know the BBC for example is not thrilled about being labeled state affiliated media. Not exactly. I mean I was going to get to that later but let's go for it now. Now of course state affiliated media sounds like Pravda and there's obviously an inside joke in there. I'm actually objected to that term. Do you want to respond to it? Yeah, yeah. So I mean I goal is simply to have, you know, to be as truthful and accurate as possible. So I think... Okay, truthful and accurate as possible and that's going to be something that sort of haunts this whole because truthful and accurate according to what? Now state sponsored and publicly supported, that's going to be sort of the swap that they make. Now both are true. One has a nuance that the other doesn't have and so this is where this gets difficult in a political sense. I think we're adjusting the label to be publicly funded which I think is perhaps not too objectionable. We're trying to be accurate. I'm not the BBC but... Okay, so we're trying to be accurate and accurate, we tend to think of accuracy again as sort of correspondence. Now and he says I'm not the BBC. Well right there, okay, so you're a ways down in the hierarchy of the BBC but there is a hierarchy in the BBC and in a sense, Elon is at the top of the hierarchy of the swarm container. Let's find language that works like that. Publicly funded is how the BBC describes itself. Okay, so that would be accurate. If we use the same words that the BBC uses to describe itself, that presumably would be okay. I'm not asking you for a yes or no since you're not running the BBC per se. It seems to pass a reasonable reason. Okay, now right away here if we look at let's say Elizabeth Warren's comment, accumulating power for their own gain, you look at the agent arena relationship. So in some ways, Elon Musk is going to be manipulating the arena. Let's think about it that way, the container in which the swarm lives and now this arena obviously is within a much larger arena, let's say the public discourse or the public world and so in that way, Twitter is sort of a containerized swarm and what's interesting is that now the BBC likewise has power and they're going to get into the relative power of these two entities as again they go into it a little bit more. So you're going to change those labels on the BBC Twitter feed and also MPLs as well? Yeah, yeah, publicly funded. Basically that's returning as accurate as possible. Okay. But in rough numbers, revenue dropped from $4.5 billion to $3 billion and expenses went from $4.5 billion to $6 billion creating a $3 billion negative cash flow situation. Okay, now Elon's going to get tagged here on the question of care, which is interesting because again, we're looking at the container of the swarm and there's an expectation or at least a duty on behalf, expressed on behalf of the people who were fired, I imagine he's being an ally to the people who were fired and now Elon is basically stating the business case that this container this container actually has to have a life of its own in order to sustain the employees that sort of make up the container. And Twitter having a billion dollars in the bank, that's four months to live. So unless drastic action was taken immediately, this company's going to die. Let's talk about that drastic action because almost immediately you sacked a lot of Twitter workers. Yeah. And I spoke to them, it's very easy to speak to them when it happened. Of course it was easy to speak to them. They're all unemployed. And the way they said, pretty much everyone said is that it felt quite haphazard. It was. It felt a little bit uncaring. Haphazard, he says he agrees with that. And uncaring. Now this is interesting because again, the quality of this container, this container is supposed to have an agency of its own and that agency is supposed to include caring. Now what's the relationship between that agency and Musk? Now again and again, you'll say, well, you're the CEO of Twitter. No, I'm not. My dog is. And that's kind of a little inside joke. But so now you have care, which is, well, we're looking at the agentic quality of the arena. I wouldn't say uncaring. The issue is like the companies are going to go bankrupt or if we do not cut costs immediately, this is not a caring, uncaring situation. It's like if whole ship sinks, then nobody's going to drop. Right. But a lot of people just lost their jobs like that. And they didn't even know they'd lost their jobs often. They were just frozen. So let me ask you, what would you do? Well, you might want to give someone some notice. I mean, you might. By the way, I'm not running Twitter, but this is the criticism and this is what actual, this is what staff members say. A little bit of notice. Now I understand if you have four months to live, 120 days and 120 days, you're dead. Now, now, so now we're putting it into personal terms here. So you have four months to live. So before it was sort of a boat metaphor. And now we have a life metaphor. So how, so what do you want to do? How much are you worth? And notice that, well, he's going to put it on him and, okay, well, you're a rich man. You should pay your own pocket. So now we have all these different ideas about pockets. I don't know. But you're talking about around the $200 billion mark. I mean, it's not quite, you're framing it in, in a way that, that, you know, that it had a few months to live. You're quite a rich man. I sold a lot of Tesla stock to close the deal. I did not want to sell a Tesla stock. Okay. Do you have any regrets on the way that some of the stuff would let go? Okay. Now, now he's, now he's going to talk more about the Tesla stock and the ideas now, and now in some ways, so don't expect, you know, Tesla is bailing out Twitter. So now we have these two entities out there and there's where these two corporations, corp bodies, these two bodies, these two corporate bodies, and they're going to go back to this and this regret question, we quit, we quit, silly wadit. These, this we quit question continues to come up again and again. I mean, people were given, you know, three months of severance, some cases more. So, but, you know, we're, like I said, the companies need to run on their own cognizance. And it's not, it's not so easy for me to sell stock as you might think. I have to sell stock during certain periods. I can't sell stock during other periods. So there's only, there are only brief windows where I can sell Tesla stock. And then this is often taken as some lack of faith in Tesla. And in fact, the Tesla stock sales caused the Tesla stock to plummet, which is not good. Do you think those two were connected? Well, the people couldn't, couldn't parse the difference between I'm selling Tesla stock because I've lost faith in Tesla, which I haven't, or that is desperately needed for Twitter. This is a remarkably bad interview. And in Musks in some ways sort of wants to have it in a conversational style. And this guy keeps looking at his phone and pulling these questions off, and he can't keep track of the questions that he asks. And then after that, after you let go of a lot of stuff, obviously Twitter became slimmed down a lot. And then he started making some more policy decisions. One of those policy decisions was to bring Donald Trump back. He hasn't actually tweeted yet. Right. Okay. Now policy, okay. So that's sort of the, this is sort of the agentic quality of the arena because policies, these are the rules, these are the rules that govern the swarm. And we're looking at this within the larger politic, and now we have Donald Trump and we're going to bring Donald Trump into the conversation. Do you expect him to come back at any point? Like have you, have you spoken to him? I haven't spoken to him. I don't know. He may or may not come back. But the point is that Twitter should be a town square that, that is, gives equal voice to, you know, the whole country and ideally the whole world. It should not be a partisan politics, you know, and the more of a partisan politics that are in the very far left of the spectrum. San Francisco, Berkeley politics normally is quite niche. But if Twitter effectively acted as a megaphone for very niche regional politics and megaphone that to the world. Okay. So now we have the question about, we're going to manage the swarm by sort of regulating the rules and, you know, say Berkeley, San Francisco politics is impacting the overall body pick, body politic because of the way it's using the swarm. So by allowing Donald Trump back in, you're going to, and of course, who knows, I think in a lot of ways, Trump just sort of poked the bear with a lot of his stuff on Twitter. That's just tends to be a lot of what Donald Trump does. So if in order for something to serve as a digital town square, it must, you know, serve all people from all political persuasions, provided it's legal. So the legal thing comes in quite a bit in the interview and he's going to talk about restrictions of speech and different legal entities that will get into India in a little bit, but I didn't, I clipped that one out. So, so they're going to be weighing this stuff. Yeah, close to half the country voted for Trump. I wasn't one of them. I voted for Biden. But nonetheless, free speech is meaningless unless you're a lot of people you don't like to say things you don't like. Otherwise it's irrelevant. And if at the point where you lose free speech, it doesn't come back. I think the issue some people have is that a lot of people were brought back. I mean, some people were brought back who were previously banned for spreading. Okay. So he basically said the way the swarm works is you just have to let it swarm. You have to let the people do what they think, do what they want within this platform, within this container. And that basically then it functions. And that way Twitter, this form can, the swarm can function sort of on the whole. Things like, uh, QAnon conspiracies. You have people like Andrew Tate, who were brought back. He were previously banned for things like hate speech. Do you think you prioritize freedom of speech over misinformation and hate speech? Okay. And this is the part that, of course, got everybody's attention because the idea is, okay, so you've got this, this, this swarm that's an agent in the larger arena. And if you let hate speech into the swarm, then that will then of course impact the larger arena. And Musk is going to challenge him on, okay, talk to me about this hate speech. And they actually never get anywhere with respect to this conversation. Well, you know, who's to say that something is misinformation? Um, um, who's the arbiter of that? Is it the BBC? Yeah. You literally, literally asking me. Yes. Well, no, you, you are the arbiter on Twitter because you own Twitter. Yes. I'm saying. Okay. So now, oh, you're the arbiter on Twitter. Okay. So suddenly the arena has a function as an agentic function within itself and within the larger arena of the body politic. And Musk says basically, you know, who's, who's supposed to decide. And the whole concept of the swarm is that within the swarm, things are sort of going to be able to be worked out. I want to jump into the Megan Phelps roper conversation at Oxford union, because Twitter actually plays a pretty important part in this. She makes the point that Twitter was central to now the language here is interesting, um, disenchantment. So in other words, the, the spell she was under when she was there with her family was an enchantment. That's enchantment as a negative thing. The spell she was under was an enchantment. And then Twitter was important for her disenchantment. The important there, there, I started to say some of this, there were, there were a lot of things about Twitter that, that helped me see outside of Westboro's ideology. And it started first, I think, with a change in how I communicated with people. So first, the fact that there were only 140 characters at the time, there wasn't space for the kind of insults that we used. Just always my mom, every time she mentioned George W. Bush, she would call him bombastic, blowhard, big mouth, bimbo bastard, like every time. Like, and those are the, they, they did that like all the time. That was the, just the way that they communicated. It goes back to that, like, well, if, you know, God can get the message across no matter, no matter how you talk to people. And so that was, um, that was part of it. So I stopped, I stopped using those kinds of insults, first because there wasn't space and second because I realized that it almost immediately cut the conversation off from being about this profound theological point that I thought was so important. Okay, now that's really interesting because she obviously had been, had grown up within a frame within a different container that had allowed for longer theological discourse. This was the kind of thing that she was looking for. This was the kind of arena in which she was imagining her and her ideas and her family's ideas would have been victorious. And the, the, the, the rules within Twitter prohibited that from actually happening. To, you know, being this kind of playground coral. Um, and so I stopped that. Um, it, it showed me sides of people that I never saw IRL, right? In real life. I, I, whenever I was in physical space with other people, even though I went to public school, like I just, I never felt safe. And having this like physical distance, this buffer. Now this is really interesting too. She, she never felt safe. She felt like all this language about self spaces, safe spaces. Public school was a dangerous space and you can get that from the background of her family. They were very much on a war against this other larger realm. And so being in school, but now suddenly with the internet, she was sort of separated from everything. And, and now Twitter both at, on one hand made her feel safe, safer than when she was at school. Between me and these other people, it made me open in a way that I never could be, you know, in person with other people. Um, when, when it, you know, it almost like I, I've been talking recently about this. I was talking to an anthropologist who said she defines shame as being the feeling that we get when we know we have violated the norms of our community. So for, for most of my life, I had grown up in this culture that celebrated death and tragedy. And then I got on Twitter and over time, because I started, you know, making these, you know, real connections with other people, um, they started to become an alternate form of community for me, the first, you know, other form of community that I'd ever experienced. And when I was seeing their reactions, when, you know, mass shootings or, you know, the death of a celebrity or some well-beloved person, you know, over time that I started to, in other words, I felt kind of like, like, like I could feel the empathy that I would naturally have felt outside of a group like Westboro. So it kind of enabled me to actually feel those things. And eventually that was what I, I never felt shame for what we did at Westboro until I got on Twitter. After. Now this is very interesting because, so let's look at the beast. She would have, let's say for the New York Times or the BBC or any of these beasts that she would associate with beasts, they wouldn't communicate for her, give her sort of an arenic relationship, an agent arena relationship where she could mind read and feel what others would. And the swarm afforded that for her. I'd been on Twitter for a while and had been in conversation with outsiders in a way that let me see their humanity. And how did that develop into actually leaving permanently? So eventually it came to that moment, painting in the basement. Like it was just this kind of pile of mounting doubts. And there came this moment where, you know, trying to resolve the contradiction between, you know, all of these things, like, so these theological points and then the way that church members were treating one another, the way that they were, you know, lying about, you know, protests like photoshopping themselves into pickets that they had, that they had not actually, you know, participated in and trying to deceive people. Like, so how do you, you know, resolve this contradiction between these points, these doctrines and practices that to my mind were so clearly unscriptural? And then this belief in the infallibility of the Bible and in Westboro's interpretation of it, one of those had to give. And in that moment, it was the latter. This is just such a classic story of a worldview shift where there's dissonance, it's rising, it's arising, it's arising. What's really interesting is that the flip of her worldview will still be based on all of the foundational rules that she picked up in the religious community. Who is to say that one person's misinformation is another person's information? The point at which you say that this is misinformation. Like, who is going to decide that? But you accept that misinformation can be dangerous, that it can cause real-world harms, that it can potentially cause... Yes. There's a lot of language being played here. Misinformation, I mean, miss is almost like mistake. And it's sort of a polite way of saying, of not saying you're wrong, but still saying you're wrong. And again, what Musk is saying, that in the swarm, there's a certain dynamic between differences that Musk feels will be productive. The point I'm trying to make is that the BBC itself has, at times, published things that are false. Do you agree that that has occurred? I'm quite sure the BBC have said things before that turn out to not be true. Whatever it is, 100 year history, I'm quite sure. Yes. Even if you aspire to be accurate, there are times when you will not be. I think in the grand scheme of things, the BBC does aspire to be accurate. But you accept that. And again, part of what's happening in the overall conversation is that accuracy itself is no longer a sufficient standard. Now, when you look at Megan Phelps Roper's... I don't know. Is it a conversion story? I don't know that that's the right word, her transition. But that word is now freighted. Megan Phelps Roper's change from her departure from West Borough Baptist. The accuracy was important, but again, accuracy sort of puts everything just on the prepositional. There's the perspectival. There's the participatory. And these are the procedural. That's in terms of behavior. But the perspectival is definitely coming into play here. And so part of what is impoverishing this conversation, I think, is part of what is fueling the conversation in this little corner that you have to... Just talking about accuracy is not going to get at it. And we've mentioned this many times because it's not just the accuracy of the information, but the relevance realization and the selectivity of which information is actually important towards, I think, an overall well-being. It has to be a line in terms of hate speech. I mean, you're not looking at total 100% unrestricted speech. Well, I mean, I generally am of the opinion that if the people of a given country are against a certain type of speech, they should talk to their elected representatives and pass a law to prevent it. So for example, you cannot advocate murdering someone. That's illegal in the United States, everywhere really, I suspect. So there are limits to speech. I mean, I guess taking your argument to a logical conclusion, then, do you accept that there's more misinformation on the platform if it's not being policed in the same way? And again, there's more misinformation. What does that mean? There's more error on the platform. What does that mean? And I don't think any of this language is really getting at what either of these two want, which is, let's say, a better world. Okay, how do we understand a better world? What makes up a better world? How do you have a conversation that actually pursues a better world? So this information or misinformation doesn't really afford what both of them want here. I actually think there's less these days because we've eliminated so many of the bots which were pushing scams and spam. Okay, so and this is what gets mentioned in the New York Post piece, the quote that I just read. So what are bots and scammers? Scammers are basically crooks that are looking to take money from people who don't know any better. Bots are basically signal enhancers for certain ideas and the idea is to influence the body politic, manipulate the swarm in such a way, but obviously there are many other elements to the swarm. Previously, previous management turned a blind eye to the bots because their bonuses were tied to user growth. So you had a procedural issue that was allowing for corruption within the swarm. If your conversation is tied to user growth, well you're not going to look too closely at some of the users. That's part of the problem. So I think we've got less misinformation because we don't have the bot problem that we used to do and we also have given a lot of attention to community notes. See and his information misinformation. Now of course with propositional knowledge you want to be as accurate as possible, but that doesn't help you with the selection of which propositions and which little tidbits of knowledge are actually the relevant ones in terms of a much more perspectival pursuit of well-being. Which corrects with community itself, corrects misinformation. It's been very effective. I would only just add that we have spoken to people who have been sacked that used to be in content moderation. Now at this point we've spoke to people who are in sack that used to be in content moderation. So he's trying to bring the ideas together, but that doesn't answer any of the question because okay do these content moderators actually, what is their end within the swarm? Very recently who were involved in moderation and they just say there's not enough people to police this stuff, particularly around hate speech. Okay and now we're getting into okay well there's not enough people to police it. So in other words do policies within the swarm, are they actually effective in terms of helping the swarm pursue its tell-offs? In the company. What hate speech are you talking about? I mean you use Twitter. Right. Do you see a right? Now this is sort of the famous section where Elon sort of takes the guy apart. Why isn't hate speech? I mean just a personal anecdote like what do you do? I don't. Personally my for you I would see I get more of that kind of content yeah personally, but I'm not going to talk to talk to the rest of for the rest of Twitter. You see more hate speech personally? I would say I would see more hateful content in that. Content you don't like or hateful? What do you mean to describe a hateful thing? Yeah I mean you know just content that will solicit a reaction something that may include something that is slightly racist or slightly sexist. It's amazing how he struggles to describe this this hateful thing. Those kinds of things. So you think if something is slightly sexist it should be banned? No I'm not saying anything. I'm just curious. I'm trying to say what you mean by hateful content and I'm asking for specific examples and if and you just said that if something is slightly sexist that's hateful content. Does that mean that it should be banned? Well you've asked me whether my feed whether it's got less or more. I'd say it's got slightly more. That's what I'm asking for examples. Can you name one example? I honestly don't. You can't name a single example. I'll tell you why because I don't actually use that for you feed anymore because I just don't particularly like it. A lot of people are quite similar. I only look at what my followers say. Well hang on a second. You said you've seen more hateful content but you can't name a single example. Not even one. I'm not sure I've used that feed for the last three or four weeks. Well then how did you see that hateful content? Because I've been using Twitter since you've taken it over for the last six months. Okay so then you must have at some point. Now there's a lot of back and forth here. Later in the interview Musk is going to challenge him on whether or not reporters are actually the most competent people to and I think if Musk were given better language to afford the perspectival knowledge that is so essential in evaluating the kind of relevance, procedural, multi-formulated knowledge that actually pursues shalom, well-being, all of these things. I've seen that you've for you hateful content. I'm asking for one example. Right. You can't give a single one. And I'm saying. Then I say so that you don't know what you're talking about. Really? Yes because you can't give a single example of hateful content. Not even one tweet and yet you claimed that the hateful content was high. Well that's a false. No what I claimed. You just lied. No what I claimed was there are many organizations that say that that kind of information is on the rise. Now whether it has on my feed or not. Give me one example. I mean right. You literally can't name one. Something like the Strategic Dialogue Institute in the UK. They will say that. Look people will say all sorts of nonsense. I'm literally asking for a single example. Now what's interesting here is that the reporter now points to a different swarm and that's what justify. Oh that's a multi. Now he's pointing not to a beast but to a swarm and say well they're there there there and it's like wait a minute. You're looking at the swarm within which Twitter is a smaller swarm. Well you can't name one. Right and as I already said I don't use that feed. But then how would you know? I don't think this is getting anywhere. You literally said you experienced more hateful content and then couldn't name a single example. Right and as I said that's absurd. I haven't actually looked at that feed. Then how would you know if it's hateful content? Because I'm saying that's what I saw a few weeks ago. I can't give you an exact example. Let's move on. We only have a certain amount of time. Now again now he's pointing to another authority. Another arenic authority. It's just limitation of time and space and an implicit priority. Musk's not going to take it right away. Well COVID misinformation. Amazing. You've changed the COVID misinformation. Has BBC changed this COVID misinformation? The BBC does not set the rules on Twitter so I'm asking you. No I'm talking about the BBC's misinformation about COVID. I'm literally asking you about you change the labels the COVID misinformation labels. There used to be a policy and then it then disappeared. Why do that? Now look it could be COVID is no longer an issue. Does the BBC hold itself at all responsible for misinformation regarding masking and side effects of vaccinations and not reporting on that at all? And what about the fact that the... And again a beast is more liable to this kind of thing because supposedly it has a unified structure and it's a unified agent that is supposed to do within it the relevance realization and produce that as a product. Whereas at least with the swarm it's supposed to allow in a sense viewing agents to facilitate so in that sense you know again Twitter is much more arenic whereas the beast that is BBC is much more agentic. BBC was put under pressure by the British government to change the editorial policy. And because it is now suddenly the the beast is more subject to manipulation because it's univocal it's more subject to manipulation from another beast which would be in this case the British government. Are you aware of that? This is not an interview about the BBC. Oh you thought it wasn't. Okay now we're gonna have some now we're gonna have some arenic rules about the interview. I see now why you've done Twitter spaces. I am not a representative of the BBC's editorial policy. I want to make that clear. Let's talk about something else. Okay now we're going to go back to the regret questions. So the second time he asked it. But I guess but look do you have any regrets about buying Twitter? I think it was something that's needed to be done. It's been quite difficult you know. I'd say that like now again you can see just like with the article he feels he felt a sort of a moral ethical reason to the poor guy gets gets challenged for sacking these people for for it not caring. But now on the other side to what degree is is the steward of the arena the this this this swarm arena within the larger arena he sees the responsibility and the necessity for it. The the pain level of Twitter has been extremely high. This hasn't been some sort of party. So it's been really quite a stressful situation you know for the last several months. Not not an easy one. I I'm but apart from the pain I mean so it's been quite painful. But I think at the end of the day it should have been done. I think that were there many mistakes made along the way of course. You know and but you know all's well that ends well. And so I feel like we're headed to a good place. You know we're roughly break even. I think we're trending towards being half low positive very soon. Like literally in a matter of. So getting back to the business side of this arena. Of months the advertisers are returning. The I think the quality of recommended tweets has improved significantly and we've taken a lot of feedback from. Now now that's interesting. The quality of recommended tweets has improved. Now a number of years ago Twitter made the controversial decision that when you open your timeline you don't just sort of get the flow. Although I believe is there still that little button that you can switch to that mode. But for the most part we get these recommended tweets which means that there's an algorithm in there that is supposed to be delivering quality. Which is a very interesting concept and assertion. And now again he's made the point that the algorithm is now publicly you can see the rules by which the quality is being discerned. And again it's probably going to be a quality based on looking at the kinds of things you've looked at before. Well what is the quality is it's pursuing it's probably pursuing attention because just like all of these platforms it wants to maximize the amount of time that you have. And that's either going to be with a sense of meaning and purpose and satisfaction or some degree of addiction that you sort of mindlessly just stay on the thing because you stay on the thing. People that have looked at the open source recommendation algorithm and we've we've made a lot of improvements even since that was made open source and we're going to keep doing that. So overall I think the trend is very good. So you know. I mean it was actually something I was going to ask you. You mentioned the pain but you actually tweeted I think in February you said the last three months have been extremely tough. I wouldn't wish that pain on anyone. Are you talking emotionally? Can you explain? This is a stupid question. I wasn't stabbed or anything. Right. Right. Like some people right here. Did you catch his answer? I wasn't stabbed or anything. No it wasn't physical pain. Yes it was emotional pain and they do spend some time. He talks about the crime in San Francisco which is something that's picked up on. I might jump into a Glenn Lowry video from here. We'll see. First time in the woods we're in. It is or it can be but just can you just talk me through the emotional strain of this? Yeah I mean look I'm under would you would you cry for me? You're under constant attack. I mean it's sort of like I you know have a stone cold heart or something like that. You know if you're under constant criticism attack it's and then that gets fed to you non-stop including through Twitter that it's rough you know. Now at the end of the day I kind of think that like if you do lose your feedback loop. So in a sense here he's saying I am willing to suffer for the swarm and you know the number places in this he comments on the necessity for feedback and criticism for not only the health of the company but for obviously signal discernment and it's really I'm pretty impressed by it. That's actually not good. So you know if so I think it's it is actually important to get negative feedback. I don't turn replies off and I actually got rid of I removed my entire block list. Again he doesn't turn replies off which means now there's so many to him he can't possibly see them but he turned off his whole block list so nobody's being blocked from it. That's a really rather that's an amazing thing. So I don't block anyone either. So somebody can you know so I get like a lot of negative feedback. What's actually good to get negative feedback? Right when you talk about the emotional strain you've gone back to feedback is that the thing that's been most of it? Would you please cry? I'd like you to cry for us. The sort of negative feedback. Yeah I mean if the media is writing non-stop stories about why you're a horrible person I mean you know it's hurtful obviously. I'm interested I've written down a lot of these questions but I haven't written this one down but it's interesting it feels like you have quite a kind of interesting relationship with the media because in one in some ways you're quite skeptical quite critical certainly of established media. So now the focus is going to go back to this question of the media back to the question of these beasts that are sort of lined up they have editorial boards they have perspectives they have a degree of audience capture in that they have a symbiotic relationship with their subscribers or their and so now suddenly we have this other much larger arena in which Elon Musk participates. Also you kind of get hurt by what the media writes and you seem to get your news still from the BBC as you've already said. I literally follow the BBC on Twitter. So do you feel you have a kind of odd relationship with the media? Yes. Go on explain. No it's it is somewhat of a love-hate relationship although I mean it might be tilted a bit more towards the hate but you know it's it's you know I think this is a sort of part and parcel of having a free media situation which is that you know I do I do I do take a part in in that the media is actually able to trash me on a regular basis. Now he's sort of leveled up here because you sort of have the swarm of Twitter but now we have this larger arena and and in a sense he's saying hey I'm the rules of the swarm I'm trying to have them to one degree or another even though they are they are manipulated and controlled by the algorithm and by the policy decisions and by the rules that that I in conjunction with whoever he's listening to with respect to Twitter makeup there is a broader swarm that's going on and even though that swarm costs me and is painful to me I'm not going to cry for you right now that's important too. In you know in the United States and the UK and whatnot whereas you know in a lot of other places you know Vita cannot say mean things to powerful people which is amazing because if we pull up once again Senator Warren's this deal is dangerous for our democracy billionaires like Ian Musk play in a different set of rules than everyone else as if there's some uniform set of rules by which we all play that if you don't have power and status and wealth that living in America is a very different thing than if you have no status and no power and no wealth but then many who live outside of America will say yes but your votes here in America count worldwide and so on and so on and so on and so on. Okay so I think it's better that we have a situation where the media can say mean things media can say mean things to powerful people. In other words he's okay with the swarm. Swarm's a good thing. Okay now we're going to get the journalist quote. If we're talking about the media let's talk about verification labels. You obviously want to create another revenue stream that's subscription based. Now what's amazing here is that in a lot of ways anybody who can afford $8 a month which is not nothing but it's not an enormous thing unlike the old verification system and now I think there should be some layer of verification that happens so that people are in a sense who they say they are yet you know he's criticized for not being egalitarian enough but the new system is designed to be more egalitarian in some way so that I can have a blue check just like the BBC. Is verification the way to do that because we have a kind of a situation at the moment where the New York Times doesn't have a verified badge whereas anyone else who can pay whatever few few bucks a month can. Is that can that be right is that what you envisaged when you bought Twitter? I must confess to some delight in removing the verified badge from the New York Times. Honest confession of his on his part. That was great. Anyway they're still alive and well so they're doing fine. But on a serious note. Yeah New York Times reach is far beyond the reach of Paul VanderKlaai. It could flame disinformation again if you have verified accounts that are from anyone who can pay money they simply they go up to potentially the top of feeds they get more action on Twitter and traditional media that may not pay for verification doesn't. Do you see how that could potentially be a driver of misinformation? Well I mean I think the media is a driver of misinformation much more than the media would like to admit that they are. I mean that's a different question. Yeah but it's not a different question. Do you ask that sort of saying like who knows best the average citizen or you know someone who is a journalist? And this I like what he said there and this again is an evaluation between the swarm and these beasts because and he just he just lays it out night right now because he's dealing with reporters regularly. And I think in a lot of cases it is the average citizen that knows more than the journalist. In fact I mean very often when I see. And again knowledge here in terms of perspectival, procedural, this and even propositional in many cases because if you're local to something you can see it and this in fact has been one of the reason that Twitter sort of took off because you could have sort of normies and randos out there at least affording a little bit of knowledge and information and putting that into the swarm and the idea was that if everyone realized it might be right it might be wrong but you know you'd at least have a chance to know things that wouldn't necessarily go through gatekeepers. It's really at the heart of all the social media stuff. An article about some something that I know a lot about and I read the article it's like that they get a lot wrong. And if you've ever been covered by media you see that immediately. I mean the some of the few instances that that I've been covered by various media sources they get enormous amounts of things wrong and you can see that yourself if you know even even just practical things and yeah they might they might correct it you know three or four days later at the back side of something but by that point the impression is passed and you know sort of the best interpretation is there is someone who doesn't really understand what's going on in industry has only a few facts to play with has to come up with an article now it's going to be you know it's not going to it's not going to hit the bull's eye. This is this is what I find regularly so a reporter the reporter you've got to you've got to write a story today about this and so you know you do a little bit of research and put in out you go and say well Vanderklaay you're doing the same thing yeah but I don't have New York Times or BBC it's like I get stuff wrong like I can't say 4chan without saying 4tran because I'm an old man that took 4tran when I was a kid in college and every time I hear 4chan but that's that's Paul Vanderklaay we know he messes up that stuff or maybe we don't but when I say 4tran instead of 4chan most people listening are going to sort of mentally say he means 4chan that's just that's just that's just that crazy dude. So then like generally this is what how it makes it to other people if you read an article that's something you know about how much of that or how accurate is that article now imagine that that is that is how essentially all articles are they're an approximation of what's going on but not in it not an exact situation so if somebody is actually let's say in the fray or like an expert in the field and was actually there and then and writes about their experience of being actually there I think that actually that that's in a lot of cases going to be better than than a journalist because the journalist wasn't there. And again some of these the four P's of knowledge here would help him and you wind you find that on Twitter you find people who are expert that that happened during COVID. Now again you still have to do all of the sifting do I believe this expert or that expert but you can find people who who don't have a dog in the fight and often I mean that's part of it which is that people begin to understand that certain news media sources usually if they're aligned with a particular political organization will have a bias and that bias is going to be reflected by the product that the beast is producing. I think you said the legacy verified blue text are going to go next week? There have been a few deadlines on this. 420. Yeah I see the joke. That number will never leave me. I had to look up the joke. I clearly. It cost you a lot of money. Well fortunately it didn't in the trial. Well yeah right for the SEC right. Yes we're going to ask for a refund. Yeah okay yeah good luck. Let's move on from that. But blue text in theory all legacy blue text gone gone gone next week and this is and at that point you'll kind of work out whether this is going to sink or swim. Yes. What's your what's your hunch? I mean you've obviously. I think it's going to swim. Yeah. Yeah it'll swim just fine. Okay what are you looking for in terms of in terms of a revenue stream on that? What are your goals? Well I don't know if it's like necessarily a giant revenue stream. You know because even if you have sort of a million people that are subscribed for let's say a hundred dollars a year ish that's a hundred million dollars. And that's that's a that's a fairly small revenue stream relative to advertising. But what we're all we really try to do here with verification is to massively raise the cost of disinformation and bots in general. So my prediction is that any social media company that does not insist on paid verification will simply be overwhelmed by advanced AI bots. This is an interesting point that he makes. I mean chat gbt is essentially a zillion instances of chat gbt. How do you even know? Is that really what you want on the platform? Do you want big news? And again now this reporter is that really what you did you and what's funny is he's sitting there looking at his phone while Elon is talking and you're thinking he's not really listening and when he asks the question is that what you you mean do do I really want to not have millions of instances of bots on twitter you know spooning out whatever it is that those I mean this whole thing is set up you know Elizabeth Warren says it at the beginning this whole thing is set up as this is an we have to resist Elon Musk because this is an elitist game because he's a billionaire and now obviously you can you can debate different specific procedural innovations that he's putting in here including increasing the cost of participation but I think it's obvious that we don't want for those values I mean he's trying in some ways to level the playing field a bit understanding that there is no such thing as a level playing field a perfectly level playing field these organizations being overwhelmed by bots so they have to pay so the point is that you won't be if you pay but a lot of organizations have already said they're not going to pay like the New York Times well then the dude doesn't listen you know that's up to them if they you know gonna make them pay um it's a small amount of money so I don't know what their problem is um so Paul Vanderklay can afford to pay eight dollars a month but the BBC can't uh but we're going to treat everyone equally so what we're not going to do is say that there's some anointed class of journalists who are the special ones who get to tell everyone what they're what they what they should think that it should be up to the people what they think um and even if an article is we're still replaying the Protestant Reformation completely accurate and um comprehensive and everything if they're still in in writing that article the media is choosing the narrative they're deciding what to write an article about so I'm hopeful that this can be more a case of the public choosing the narrative as opposed to the media choosing narrative but the media can choose at least at least a combination of the media and the public choosing the narrative um and the the public getting to to weigh in on stories if they if they think that they should add something to it or we got something wrong and over time I think if Twitter is the best source of truth it will succeed and if and if we are not the best source of truth we will fail and now the use of source there is really important because the idea is that there will be information out there and the relevance realization done by individuals will carry the day this was a little one but it was interesting someone comes in and offers you 44 billion dollars for Twitter right now would you take it no no would you consider it no why well I take it back it depends on who I suppose if I was confident that they would pursue that would they would they would rigorously pursue the truth um then I then I guess I guess I would be glad to hand it off to someone else so in other words quite clear at least Musk is saying that you know he spent 50 billion dollars of his own money in order to bless the public good you know it's got a perspective he's got a bias of course we all do but I don't care about the money really but I I do want to have some source of truth that I can count on and and I hope that's here basically I want it this way so the money yeah but I bought it for me it's like wow well I have my channel for a similar reason and our aspiration with Twitter is to have a source of truth that you can count on that's it's also real time it's an immediate source of truth that you can count on and that gets more accurate with time as people comment on particular things well if you don't care about the money you could just give it to someone that you that you think is a good person to run Twitter who do you think that might be I'm not the boss of Twitter yeah terrible well that's you might still have an idea but who could run Twitter yes honestly I have no idea who could run Twitter but yet I'm asking the questions yeah that's a hard job okay let's I mean let's move on okay last clip user Elon as user in Twitter I mean have I shot myself in the foot with tweets multiple times yes do you feel like and again I mean people are going to have a lot of different opinions on Elon I know Grim Grizz has his uh he's I haven't checked recently if if Elon's avatar is is in the costume of a of a disciple of of Bale but you know he's he's being honest he's he's he's coming to this interview and I think he's I think he's being honest about about who he is like him or hate him you know and this this is a quality I think we saw in the Babylon Bee interview as well and you know maybe what these things show is that if the if the reporters aren't going to be I mean if we come to the interview with the same kind of honesty and humility it's not going to go well we need bulletproof shoes at this point you've I mean you've definitely done that the issue is that you're now Twitter owner do you do you feel like you should be look at your tweets more you have more a higher responsibility when you tweet something out for it to be accurate I think I should not tweet uh after 3am that's the rule yeah well maybe that's the new rule yeah something like that okay so there's a blanket ban I should have it now I want to mention Laura's comment about it was it was no it was it was on the Catholic conversation on Grail Country about Jordan Peterson on Twitter and it was Daniel Jordan Woods comment about hey you know standards for Christian behavior have long said that leaders should exemplify the wisdom in their public behavior and you know I I'm gonna give musk points here for learning I shouldn't I shouldn't uh what are your Twitter what are your Twitter rules I mean I've heard some people say never tweet when you've been drinking or never tweet when angry what are your Twitter rules well I think those are two good rules yeah don't tweet if you're wasted um and uh or you know really upset about something yeah I probably uh I mean a good friend of mine um actually had a good suggestion it has helped uh which is that uh if you're going to tweet something that uh maybe is controversial uh save it as a draft and look at the next day and see if you still want to tweet it and that has been a good rule of thumb in other words incorporate the future self in your present self when you're tweeting now I want to end up with this video on black leadership which I I really love Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter's conversations I I love these guys and and this was this was a great conversation that kind of a clickbaitable thumbnail and title which I'm guilty of myself sometimes but they're they're interviewing someone who's who's making charter schools in the Bronx and trying to lift up the black community and you know he's a conservative Lowry's a conservative McWhorter's uh I'd say McWhorter's a moderate um let's say a liberal a liberal pragm uh pragmatist let's say and but but I was really struck here by this four-point plan and where the conversation once went afterwards and and the four-point plan doesn't really get too much at the whole conversation of the swarm and the beast but it does get at being an agent in a chaotic arena and how to at least pursue ideals let me try something on you um Ian I noticed the title the subtitle of your book four-point plan for all children what I want to try on you is maybe we're barking up the wrong tree here and talking about black leadership maybe we should just be talking about leadership and maybe looking for a black leader or a black voice is you know not the most productive way of spending our time and not likely to be the most effective uh maybe we ought to go frontally at what some of the really deep issues are I've said capitalism I happen to be an economist I happen to be a neoliberal economist if you want to put a label on me a person who believes in markets enterprise I think socialism is a bad idea a bad idea I think you don't let me speak for you believe in traditional family values otherwise you wouldn't have had family and religion as the first two tenets of your four-point plan yes it's called it's called free it's not called earth well let me simply observe that not everybody does okay not everybody does and I'm going to mention one other thing here which is patriotism yeah because what now now it's part of what's interesting here is I've talked about both Glenn and John's religious postures before Glenn I'm still waiting for his I don't think his memoir is out yet but I'm really interested in his memoir because I very much want to read it and I know I don't really chase after celebrity conversations or interviews but I would do Glenn Lowry because I think his story just fascinates me and really interests me John McWhorter likewise John McWhorter is not religious and he's going to say some you know he's going to say some of these you know religious is for the the common folks it might not be for me but but for the yeah and also with respect to the family values both Glenn and John have in some public ways struggled with maintaining marriages and struggled on the family front and so I found this to be really interesting respect with respect to Nicole Hannah Jones of the 1619 project with respect to Ta-Nehisi Coates of you know the I ain't buying the American Dream hype and whatnot like that belief in the ultimate goodness of this country and its institutions not withstanding the terrible difficulties that it has had to surmount not forgetting about slavery but remembering about emancipation not forgetting about Jim Crow but remembering about the revolution and civil rights knowing that the the bedrock institutions on which Martin Luther King stood he planted his flag on those institutions are still with us and nurture the hopes of our grandchildren I mean in other words don't make it about race at all yeah well there's something to that I mean I you know I've I've had the benefit over 20-30 years of working at you know running schools White House MTV Teach for America Gates Foundation that I've worked with every kind of kid white kids black kids Hispanic kids Asian kids poor kids rich kids foster care kids homeless kids and I've seen kids in very challenging situations domestic violence poverty family breakup all of it and yet as they made their decisions into young adulthood the kinds of decisions they made essentially recreated the same disadvantage that they grew up in but I've also seen kids in those same situations make different kinds of decisions decisions that actually allow them to break the cycle of disadvantage now what I really like this is is there is very much an arenic an agent arenic quality to this and he's noting that transformations can take place even in a chaotic swarm-like arena where individuals can make choices and then also the the the kinds of can we say it the kinds of powers they need to pursue well-being within that arena and that's where free comes from because these young people as they made their decisions as they you know in their early 20s mid-20s the first most fundamental thing they recognized it wasn't about the family that they were from it was about the family that they are on the pathway to form and that's where we talk about the success sequence and young people who broke the cycle now I really like that I really like because it's it's sort of okay they're they're striving for an ideal and they have an ideal that's formed and that ideal does have a structure and so they live in the midst of the of all of the chaos which has you know obviously danger and potential they live in the midst of it to now construct something that they are going to pursue of disadvantage in my observation typically we're on a pathway of finishing their education work and if they had kids they were going to get married first that was the first big anchor that's my first big observation the second big observation the reason why this is so important because your point Glenn this isn't about race but my second big observation was that young people who are on the cycle of breaking breaking the cycle of disadvantage usually had some kind of personal faith commitment they usually had coming from some kind of religious affiliation they had it's interesting to see John McWhorter shake his head or nod his head at this and say yeah that's right moral code didn't matter if it was Christianity Buddhism Judaism whatever now I'm going to say again back to my point with respect to sort of this omni-religion point that the vast majority of religious people with the religions that they have practicing in America religions that are recognized in America religions that are valued in America my assertion is that in many ways there's been a deep impact of Christianity and its formations of these religions in America that they they they all sort of have a certain they have some of this quality I'm not saying that those religions outside of America don't have those qualities but I think actually the mixture of them in this country given the history of this country has formed them so that that that Islam that Judaism that um that various forms of Christianity that various forms of Buddhism in America take on absorb things from this from the American religious context that's deeply shaped by Christianity into a particular religious expression and mode but they were part of a community of people that lived by a moral code and that was kind of an anchor of their decision making so that was my second big observation that was so it was f then r the third observation of young people who broke the cycle of disadvantage was that they typically benefited from some kind of educational freedom for school choice their parents by hook or by crook were going to get them into a good charter school they're going to move to neighborhood rent an apartment so so this is in a sense touching on the swarm there were various things available it wasn't limitless opportunity but there were various things available and they could act as an agent within the arena to pursue at least what they hoped would be a better choice so they could go to the local public school but but somehow that third element of education was central to young people who broke my observation and with those first three of family religion education that usually added up to the fourth which was this idea that they developed an entrepreneurial mindset that they were a problem solver in their own lives now this entrepreneur entrepreneurial mindset i think again is sort of an an agent within the swarm that can say i know where i'm going and i'm going to go start picking this and then this and then this i'm going to feed off the chaos and construct something that pursues my goal that's where free comes from it's not race-based it's it's institution-based this is how we develop young people of all races that's why i named the book as i did is it's a four-point plan for everybody i just use black because that seems to be the the our entry point for so many of these issues but the concepts are universal that if you want young people to really flourish we have to encourage young people to understand the power of family not the family that you're from the family that you're going to form the importance of a personal faith commitment usually some kind of religious affiliation education through some kind of freedom and then this idea of entrepreneurship problem solver in your own life so i'm with you glenn i use race because i i actually do believe and this is one thing i actually do agree with nicole hannah jones on the african-american story can be one that is inspiration for everyone in our country of triumph over adversity it says i think we've forgotten the institutions that actually allowed black people to be successful even under the most terrible conditions i think one thing that we definitely want to understand at this point in time also and he and i agree with even though i'm not a religious person i agree with everything you're saying including that religion plays such a big part in people helping themselves and helping other people and i i think that's a great thing you can you can just feel the page turn from new atheism can't you we have to remember that the channel that we get our message out through we have to get rid of a habit that i'm certainly very stuck in but it's not going to be books and it's not because of anything about black people and reading it's about humanity and reading especially in our era where there is so much to distract i think the idea that the main way to get it across and ian it's i'm really glad you wrote a book but the main way that you get it across i don't think is that medium anymore and part of it is because in the publishing industry and i shouldn't bite the hand that feeds me because i it's here i am i've gotten lucky but you know woke racism nobody wanted it if you're if you're looking at the publishing industry and its biases they want to rename people's books okay so now we have this beast so now in a sense we're talking about the beasts again and and in that sense markets and swarms have a a a degree to them of value that allows things to arise you know i'm sure that nicole hanna jones is writing a memoir and it's going to go running out of the stores woke racism nobody wanted it until somebody did and that somebody is very happy because the book is sold very well and i'll bet a lot of people now for the people who are listening and not watching because they they put up the cover that had john mcquarter's book this is a book written by john mcquarter who turned it down and now we considering how they felt but it's not going to change you know they they feel that they're supposed to be you know purveying this sort of three-name person message and also just people have less time to read these days i think the main thing is the podcast i think the way you get to people is through their ears and doing and i don't i'm not trying to give a backhand a compliment to this podcast but if if we're going to make a real movement we have to be represented through something that people can get from their phones and and put in their ears and colman and and the right now what's really interesting too is that even though google and spotify and apple are trying to sort of contain the podcasts you know rss feed podcasts have been the most open the most swarm like element of the internet for a while now you can go out and buy some space on the internet with an internet um you know with a host with a web host and start your own blog but but that's that's almost 20 years behind us now and with youtube you have youtube and the algorithms and twitters and the algorithms so so in many ways podcast is much more of the of the openness and what's amazing is that with all of the hand-wringing that we've had about twitter in some ways without it being containerized some of these elements like podcast actually do better because they are unrestricted now the the openness is also difficult difficult in many ways if you want to get your podcast out there and again i stumbled into this i i did not think any of this through but very quickly i noticed that doing things on youtube with the help of the algorithm with the help of that algorithm within the swarm that is youtube you know can actually get you more of an audience but podcasts are enormously unrestricted i remember when i was setting up years ago when i set up the first podcast of just audio recordings of church services it's just it's it's an rss real rss real simple syndication hey hey see see see i'm an old guy i've been around the internet a little while i might not know i've never been on four chan instead of four tran but i did write four tran in college and cobalt i don't know i can't remember any of it and basic but um yeah really simple syndication out there in the open and free internet there's something to that chaos wraps that's a great idea but it's a very telegraphic form you can only you can't get across extended ideas in a song and so i hope he keeps doing that but i think that in terms of ideas that are of extended form and i'm sure he knows this it's podcast today i think i just want to get get out there that we used to think of that and i'll just add quickly i'll just add quickly in addition to podcasts convenings important convenings you know we're all inspired by a man named thomas soul who back in 1980 was very frustrated 1980 was frustrated at the decline or actual reversal of progress within the black community and he thought associated with many liberal policies this is back in 1980 so he held a conference called the black alternatives more known as the fairmont conference in san francisco where he brought together these incredible people of all races who just had different ideas of social progress didn't have all the answers but this idea of empowering alternatives to the general so again in having you can go to the the quest for a spiritual home but having an in-person thing where people can get together and it's in a sense you know more chaotic sort of like a twitter sort of like a sort of like a swarm where you can you can deal with those ideas narrative i had the honor of partnering with glenn jason jason riley and shelby steel last year to hold a 40 plus year anniversary of that conference in old parkland texas and it was amazing because we brought together some brilliant brilliant people who had just differing views on how we can be successful let me tell the audience ian excuse me that if they search old parkland on youtube they'll find a wealth of video capturing the essence of that conference it's wonderful so if you're interested go look for it yes if you want to have your mind blown about empowering ideas for how people of all races and succeed just spend a few hours watching those discussions we're going to be holding another one in likely may of 2024 similarly to bring together people who think differently than what the general narrative so in addition to podcast john also let's bring people together in a sense of open idea and inquiry of how we know we our community can make progress okay you guys we're getting to the end of the hour and i have a paradox to pose to you now i really like what glenn does here but i'd have to really stretch to incorporate it into the fuller theme of this podcast he basically says you know he basically contrasts karence thomas and barack obama and and um and maybe i'll just play it why not because actually i think the end of it when when he when you know what glenn basically comes down to is the valence now it's the valence that he disagrees with and i think john mcwater i'm not going to play it john mcwater makes some excellent points about this is part of the reason why clarence thomas has not in a sense being able to i'll play it why not and i'd like to hear your reaction to it i'm being devilish here so brace yourself the two greatest black political figures of the last century are barack hussein obama and clarence thomas obama was twice elected president of this great country with a majority of votes cast for him thomas is the senior member of the united states supreme court who's been there for decades served long and had an enormous impact on american law i could go into their biographies but i don't think i need to say much more than that obama's mother was white his father an african immigrant and he grew up in hawaii and spent some time in indonesia and made his way to the south side of chicago where i'm from eventually but believe me it took a long time for him to get there thomas is a son of the gucci speaking gucci speaking sea islands of georgia of african-american heritage as poor as you could possibly want to get and is alienated from the mainstream american society as anyone could be and has made his way to the top of government however whereas obama is lionized by every black leader that you could find who's willing to speak in public about this subject as a great historic figure and thomas is vilified as despicable and beyond worthy of even being discussed by many of those very same people how do you account for this paradise you know there was a time when barack obama prior to him running if you listen to his speeches he talked about the importance of marriage and fatherhood and responsibility and personal accountability and i think for a time the those two almost converge i mean he had he was still socialist anyway but there was okay let me get my controls here i actually want to go back and touch on something that ian ralph said earlier with respect to this because i've made this point before let's see i'm at 53 55 with you john is because for a lot of these folks nicole hannah jones ta-nahasi coats you know in their own personal lives what are they doing they're they're they're leveraging the institutions of our country to lead quite prosperous lives they're getting married they're having children within marriage they're you know gainfully employed they're leveraging capitalism so they are quite cognizant of the power of the institutions that folks like us say are so critical for the uplift of our people and yet they constantly bash these institutions in their public lives so it is very hard to reconcile that there isn't some deliberate attempt to kind of hide the power of what they're doing in their own lives and saying no no no no no but that's not good enough for the rest of us they think of themselves as lucky they think of themselves as lucky exceptions but they figure that it would be wrong to expect the masses of black people to do what they did or to have access to the resources that they maybe think of themselves as having accidentally yeah that's my sense why are you being so why are you being so generous to them this is genuinely the way i see it but we're gonna have to get specific every day on twitter daily there is somebody who is connected with my feed who's calling ibram kendi a huckster that he's you know he's doing all this stuff just to make money he's this trickster i don't like the man he doesn't like me and as a result i find him a very distasteful human being however i don't think that he's a huckster i think he's just limited he's not doing it because he's trying to pull the wool over anybody's eyes it's that he really believes all of these things that he's saying he thinks he's a lucky guy but that most people are barred by this abstract racism that the country has been stamped with from the beginning i don't see him as evil or sly in that way it isn't a necessary analysis it's just that there's only so much he can see and to a man with a hammer everything can become a nail that's all so why doesn't he why doesn't he agree to debate you in public to debate his ideas okay i gotta go back go we gotta go back to the end and responsibility and personal accountability and i think for a time the those two and again both lowry and mcwarder have struggled with these things who almost converge i mean he had he was still socialist anyway but there was a point in which they were not so far from each other and then he became president and then he succumbed in my view to what is more politically expedient and certainly in his post presidency he has not done the things that really could drive our country forward what explains it what explains it flarence thomas has the courage okay now there's something about living within the beast that in that structure you're going to conform to that structure and it can be good or it can be bad if you have a hierarchy and if you have a structure and you have a telos everything within is going to conform to it and so i mean in some ways we're sort of back to chaos and order but that's that's a part of this that what you are living within will will construct you and the degree of the thickness of the institution of the arena for better or worse it will mold you in that shape and so again back to all the way back to jonathan height the elephant and the path if you want to change the elephant it's not the rider so much that changes the elephant it's the path the elephant is on or stand up for the convictions the the principles of this country and unfortunately those are under attack they're under assault there's no other way to put it however he's generally right and he's generally right about the things that advance the interests of black people and people of all races in our country and so i think we're this time of national reckoning it's a time for choosing you know not to steal ronald reagan's line but it's a time for choosing are we going to choose equality of opportunity as individuals that's equality or we're going to choose equity the absence of disparities of outcomes between racial groups they're two very different strategies in many ways i believe embodied by larence thomas and the barack obama of present day we got to choose and i'm putting my thumb on the the lever of equality of opportunity for individuals we got to go down fighting for that because we know at the end of the day that's what's best for society at large and certainly for black people specifically um thomas has an optics problem and i truly hate to say that it is partly his doing there are people who would despise him regardless but i think that he could push the needle if there were two things he had done or maybe would do now his silence on the court means that you don't get a piece of him you don't get a sense of what is behind his views you just okay so this is really interesting because he's not participating in the swarm get the views on the record which often can look rather heartless especially if you're not familiar with looking at race issues from many angles and let's face it you know most people aren't why would they be most of us aren't familiar with most things but if you're used to looking at race in one way then when you hear some of the decisions that he makes it looks like he's you might think he's a terrible person when he isn't but you don't get in the news a regular you know series of quotations of things that he's asked and things that he's said where you would get an idea at least of where he was coming from and you might be able to see that he's not crazy he's not malevolent he just sees things differently that's partly his doing and i don't believe that the reason he doesn't talk is because he's insecure about his Gullah Creole background i think it's any number of other things but that silence has been a problem and then another thing i say and i it's a genuine question i don't know what it is when he put out the autobiography um some years ago it was rather opaque and not because of things that he couldn't have said but for example when he was describing how he came to be against affirmative action now that must be a very interesting story he dispatched of it all in a few pages and didn't really explain what his beef was when he was a young man except for a few quick lines now i don't know why i don't i maybe he's a rather private person but it means that you could read that book and what you come away with is you know learning that you know he had a difficult childhood and he was very poor but once he's at at yale you lose him he's not willing to explain what his thought process was and next thing you know he's married to jenny thomas and smoking cigars and it's just and so there's a transparency issue here of of of playing in this arena of participating of of being known if you're going to participate in the swarm you're going to have to at least go out there and and and and expose yourself to it and and be exposed by it to at an appropriate level it's it's him in a way he needs better pr and i genuinely don't know why he has been that way i don't know but i think some of it is that he's a cipher unless you know him personally as opposed to barack obama where there was just better better pr that's what i think okay thanks uh i put that challenge to you both i think i should probably respond to it myself and my thought is uh barack obama is was and is a pragmatic progressive he was the guy that was going to complete the fdr lbj program with universal health care he's he's a man of the left a community organizer somebody who's fighting for progress as understood by the left of the political spectrum moderate left pragmatic left so there's a always another arena there's another container parents thomas is a principal conservative he's not a legislator he's not a executive he's a judicial guy but it within that realm he adheres to a philosophical doctrine that one identifies with what republican presidents are looking for when they appoint people to the bench and the from my point of view the issue here is whether or not we african americans are married to the left whether or not in the essence of our striving we have to plant our flag in a politically ideological left of center position i think the answer to that must be no it must be known for patriotism this is a great country let us not i i love listening to glenn laury speak i might not again i cannot say i might not agree with him on everything without listening to to nate and laura talk about that phrase because i there there are few people on the internet that i see speak with such passion and conviction i love i love listening to glenn laury talk not forget all the blessings that flow from the greatness of this republic it matters in terms of traditional family values there is no substitute for a mother and father raising their children and again these are this is something that you know glenn and john have struggled with but yet they they talk about it and i i think they talk about it with conviction and they talk about it with integrity and they've been very open in the ways that they um they have not achieved the goal it matters in terms of opportunity you've got to make your wealth it's not falling from the sky and nobody's going to give it to you unless you live in san francisco you they in the early in the earlier parts of the um of of the video they talked about let me play it right at the beginning later what have we gotten we should talk about that ian rose also a fellow at the american enterprise institute where he runs a shop that's interested and all their pathway and john always an honor to be with you that you are we here to talk about the topic anniversary is american history a lifetime for the country like that not to put words in his mouth but you're up to the that kind of activity i shouldn't i shouldn't edit while i've got the thing recording but i'll leave it i'll leave it there i'll leave it there and yeah just again continued thinking about the swarms about the containers about the beasts about the the agents within chaotic arenas having to construct something towards an ideal towards a telos um as best they can we certainly do so all of us imperfectly and um and and with confusion sometimes but the the the reason for allowing enough chaos in the midst so that agents can see this is where the title is going to come at the end of the video that's that's the way it's going to come after i turn it off we're going to sit here quietly i'm going to think about it and then there will be a title so thanks for watching and leave a comment