https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=6ZLxOrDYkwk

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to talk about Rabel. I want to talk about attention. I want to talk about persons. And I want to talk about deconstruction. So Rabel, recently I noted in the video I just put out a little while this past Monday a very interesting article in the LA magazine on featuring Rabel an evangelical icon finds salvation in West Hollywood. Sometimes articles are perfectly titled. And this one is. Rabel is an interesting case because as I charted out briefly in the last video Rabel is one of these figures from the emergent movement that is a reaction to the seeker movement in evangelical Christianity. And the emergent movement fractured between the progressive evangelicals. Among the progressive evangelicals Rabel would perhaps be a poster child. And Mark Driscoll, who was young, restless, and reformed until just becoming plain old mega church junkie. Rabel, you would imagine, would continue to be a light to the progressive evangelicals. But he is comfortable doing his shtick on his podcast. I certainly can't point fingers because when I listen to him talk about his podcast I think he's doing the same thing I'm doing. Maybe I'm comfortable decadent like Rabel. An evangelical icon finds salvation in West Hollywood. You might say Mark Driscoll still hasn't found what he's looking for. Mark Driscoll's like opposite doppelganger Nadia Bolz Weber. Now she's sitting at the top of the Lutheran denomination all tatted up, former standup comedian. Now the mainline Lutheran church decides to put her forward as she is the face of the denomination. She is what we call evangelism. Nadia Bolz Weber. Meanwhile, Rabel well, his Oprah gig didn't pan out. A lot of his gigs didn't pan out. He's doing podcasts and he's doing a lot of He's doing podcasts. He's no longer writing books that anybody talks about. On Amazon you can find a documentary about Rabel called The Heretic. And the whole shtick of that Heretic is about employing conservative evangelical rage against his squishy position on hell as articulated in Love Wins. So so much of progressive evangelicalism is reactive and is basically analogous to Peugeot's parasitic storytelling. Once you're no longer hated you no longer matter. And so to the degree that Rabel can continue to make a good enough living to afford the lifestyle that he has become accustomed to in West Hollywood, which is a nice place. You know, not too far from Venice Beach, Marin. I mean, there's lots to like about down there. I go down there semi-regularly to, you know, vacation, hang out, visit my son, doesn't live far from there. There it is. Rabel, evangelical icon finds salvation in West Hollywood. He, in fact, is skeptical about hell, but perhaps he has found the heaven he's looking for or not so much. So in that video, the Heretic, he they had some clips of some of his preaching. Some of his preaching sounded absolutely ripped from a page of Tim Keller. And that's where you have the emergent before all the splits. Now, this morning, Job tweeted at me. Job before has tweeted, I think, Ralph Deegan at me before. He's a someone who's into psychology, this kind of thing. Pretty amazing, pretty amazing quote he drops here. People report feeling most authentic when they are doing what external society values, not when they are acting in accord with their actual personalities. Now, when he's talking actual personalities, he's talking big five personality profile, which many of you are familiar with, thanks to Jordan Peterson and his test that you can take that Peterson and others have developed. Here's the quote. A first blow to the idea of the true self-conceptions is that people's opinions of themselves are distorted, usually in a favorable direction, which surprises none of us. It seems that people report feeling most authentic when they are doing what external society values, not when they are acting in accord with their actual personalities or their big five personality profile. Introverts, for example, report feeling most authentic when they act in extroverted manner, thus the opposite of their objective personality. There's so many buzzwords in this, but for the sake of not delaying the punch too much, let's keep it going. The same is found for all of the big five personality traits. People high in neuroticism felt more authentic when acting in non-neurotic ways and so forth. Yet another problem is that the true self was more about conformity and harmonious interaction than about standing up for one's unique beliefs. That has deconstruction written all over it, because of course where are we finding the template for our authenticity, but in these black mirror screens that has attracted our attention for a very long time now. Many researchers assume that being authentic meant being impervious to external influence, the buffered secret sacred self. The data indicates the opposite. People feel authentic when going along with external influences. We are communal creatures indeed. Why is it Rob Bell finds heaven in West Hollywood? Of all places, who would have known? Yesterday I posted I there's HBO Max had a little ad for some Harry Potter reunion with all the child actors coming together. Now cute children don't necessarily grow up to be the cutest adults. Sorry. And noting how regularly family comes into these conversations. This time on the lips of Ron Weasley. These screens with their stories on them work powerfully to recalibrate our sense of the real. It's amazing how the word family continues to have resonance even among many persons many people disparage even as though many people disparage hope for that in meat space. In other words, Harry Potter is more their family than their biological family. And that's pretty common. In a sense, we're outsourcing our hope into the story screen matrix and looking for participation there because we imagine it cannot be found in flesh and blood around us and between us. There's certainly something rather gnostic about myself included disembodied on this flat screen talking to you, colonizing your brain maybe through headphones at night while you're jogging or doing dishes or something of the sort. The screens have become the alternative not only to family but to church. Our greatest hope of participation is viewing these crafted edited images. How sad. Hashtag paintball for Jesus at GrimGrizz hashtag break the fourth wall. Prophelicity from Hans Georg Museum of Art Prophelicity from Hans Georg Mueller. I know some of you said persona, but I like Prophelicity because it adds an additional dimension to it. Especially the Iceti almost like Felicity. Prophelicity. This is a search for happiness through created images hosted by social networks and projected upon or projected through these black mirrors. You find your authentic self in the panopticon of the mass media images through profiling ourselves on the same screens. I put myself out here to be watched and then I watch myself. This is essentially virtual larping that we are doing all this time. It's substitutionary betterment and cybertheosis. Now I do have an Instagram account. I never use the thing, but Instagram seems to be the height of this in many ways. Substitutionary betterment and cybertheosis. This morning I caught on the Twitter likes to colonize me with their little tweets about what's really important right now. There's a battle in Texas over what's in libraries. The battle in schools over books has flooded out into what's in libraries because the battle in schools is to try to stop the authentic LGBTQ books like Black Flamingo, which is one that's noted in this article of some queer young man drag queen and they're trying to keep that book out of the library. But here in California when I listen to what's going on in the elementary schools, all the fight is about Indian in the cupboard and Little House on the Prairie. I'm sure Sounder isn't far behind. Hmm. The article about book bans. Our culture now is between Little House on the Prairie versus the Black Flamingo Half Pint versus the Drag Queen. And then someone tweeted, which I thought was an excellent tweet, Book culture at Barnes and Noble is literally the whole wall of manga aka comic books printed backwards and cooking in fractional book shelves shelf and fractional book shelf space for business, religion, history. Hmm. Just like I think oh, we're looking at the center of the swell, which is usually what the what the pollsters are looking at instead of the cutting edge and manga manga instead of religion. I'd say manga is religion. We implicitly know this with our children. It's their attention that we know we must control if we wish to shape them for the future. We want to place images before them that are heavenly. And so we fight over books, movies, games, which is all about attention. And then with a bunch of the tweets along this line that I was putting out into the world this morning, Mikael Brockman, who started following me a few months ago and started tweeting at me a little while ago. Hasn't been on the channel. Maybe I should have him on the channel. Sounds like a very interesting guy. Laid down this thread that he had tweeted back in February, which I'm going to read because I think I think we will find it of great interest. Whoops. Come on. Work for me. Work for me. You can do it. Okay. This tweet was so good. I used the old thread reader and here it is all in one place. And for those of you who are not on Twitter and you want to know some of what I tweet, at least what I collate from my tweets, you can find them on my sub stack because that's sort of the how I'm using sub stack as a doc, as an archivist for my tweets, putting them into blog posts for people who don't have time to watch overly long, rambly videos. I would like to write something about how I found God to be very interesting and useful entity to relate to, but it's kind of weird. It started with a book recommended to me about a new metaphor for understanding Aquinas' modification of Aristotelian virtual ethics. Wow, this sounds wonky. But I assure you, it's quite understandable. You have to explain it to a rubber ducky. You can ask. You can follow my tweet thread for that. The metaphor is based on the concept of joint attention from social recognition research, which is like the main thing that autistic children won't do with their parents. The meaning of minds that comes from playing together, looking together at something. Now autistic children, I've had some experience with children with severe autism. We had one in our church years ago. People on the spectrum. Very interesting about this concept of joint attention. It's what people with autism struggle with and seems to be something utterly foundational to the formation of a human being. And we implicitly know this far better than we explicitly know this, it seems. It's news to me, but it's very interesting news. As a parent, I had never thought much about this phenomenon, but immediately when I read about it, I realized how important it is. And I started paying attention to this daily thing of seeing together with my toddler son. It's also present in friend relationships and when working together. But with two adults, it's something a bit less clear. Because you're both so individuated, it can be kind of rare to really meet in this attuned way. But when it happens, we feel love, don't we? We feel phylia, which is brotherly love. But there's such fascinating types of transmission that happens in the parent-child relationship when this joint attention is active. It's like I'm lending my mind, my gaze, my perspective to the child. The child doesn't know where to look. How could the child know where to look? The child is young. The child has not had experience. The child has not been formed. And so what we are teaching the child is where to look. Now, if you understand movie making, movie making, visual storytelling, is all about directing our attention. I made a comment about Keegan not being in focus. And I don't, I must have misspoken, which I do all the time, said aperture because I do understand something about depth of field. Right now, I'm using this fast lens on my Sony A6400, which makes everything behind me blurred. But this Sony camera is very good at following my face. And I move all over and I go in, I go out, I go in, I go out, focus stays there. This and many other tricks we use in visual storytelling to keep attention because focus, think about Jordan Peterson talking about the fovea, talking about the whites of our eyes. I think that was in the Four Horsemen video. This is what we're watching. We've got these big whites in our eyes because we are very interested in where each other are looking because in many respects, what we're looking at is what we're thinking about, whether we're consciously doing it or not, which is, of course, all about the male gaze. I'm gazing at you right now. You, you, always you. So, yeah, the camera, the camera can follow me because, and you're really annoyed if I would turn the autofocus off and it would, well, if I put my hand up here, see, this Sony is so good. Ah, now, finally, on my hand. Back to my face. Back to my hand. Back to my face. This is the kind of camera you want if you're doing this work. Attention. Attention. Attention. It's all about where we're looking because in many respects, where we're looking is a pretty good dead reckoning of what we're thinking about. It's also present in friend relationships and when working together, but with two with two adults, it's something a bit less clear because you're both so individuated. It can be kind of rare to really meet in this attuned way. C.S. Lewis finds, what was his name? Arthur Greaves. You like the North stuff? Just like me? It has your attention. It has mine. We can be brothers. We can be brothers. We can be brothers. We can be friends. We can be brothers. We can be friends. But there's such a fascinating type of transmission that happens in the parent-child relationship when this joint attention is active. It's like I'm lending my mind, my gaze, my perspective to the child. The child is not only immersed in the same world I am, the child starts seeing the world in the same way I see it because the child is learning to see through my eyes and I as a parent am disciplined about seeing the world through their eyes. Oh, be careful little eyes what you see. Oh, be careful little eyes what you see. For the Father up above is looking down in love for judgment. So be careful little eyes what you see. Oh, be careful little ears what you hear. Oh, be careful little ears what you hear. Yes, there's a lot in that little song. Like I can physically hold the child in my lap and hold his hand as he walks into an icy road and there's this kind of subtle joining in our joint attention which happens through subtler attunements. And so I can also imagine that it's like a child, it's like for a child to have the presence of a safe care, caretaker not only in terms of hand holding but also this subtle subtler guiding presence in the whole arena of attention and perception. I think this is deeply tied to personhood. If you go back to my conversation with oh no, I can't remember his name but I do remember his face. He was deconstructing. He was an engineer. I told him we can have another conversation because he's wrestling with this. How can you have a relationship with a personal God if you can't see the God? Ah, but we see patterns. And when people see God whether it's T.H. Lerman writing about them, when people see God it's because they're seeing patterns. And that's how we sort of mind read each other. We follow the patterns. And we learn to see the world through their eyes. We talk that way all the time, don't we? This is exactly what we're doing. So I can also imagine what it's like for a child to have the presence of a safe caretaker. Oh, be careful little eyes, what you see for the father up above. Not only in terms of hand holding but also as a subtler guiding presence in the whole arena of attention and perception. Of course the point with Aquinas is that adult humans can have an analogous relation with the guiding parental presence they call God or Christ. I'm especially interested in this because I basically researched the phenomenology of ADHD and how such attentional disorders could be thought of from a virtue ethical perspective given that they seem to disrupt basic virtuous capacities. First I looked into the general literature about virtue ethics and disability and I shouldn't have been surprised to find that the dominant strains in that weave is exactly the Christian intervention of the surrounding Greco-Roman ethics of strength and excellence. Paging Tom Holland. Paging Tom Holland. It was fascinating in itself because I thought virtue ethics and disability was a rather obscure intersection of interests but when I realized it's actually the center of the whole story of Christianity. Oh boy. Aristotelian virtue ethical teaching starts from the assumption of a healthy well-raised property owning male free citizen of the Athenian polis and provides him with a framework for understanding and further developing his practical skills and virtuous relationships. What's the relationship between Aristotelian ethics and English nobility? That's out there in my consciousness Congress. I can't pull up the source right now. Sick and disabled people along with women and slaves are more or less scoped out of relevance to this style of training and excellence. of relevance to this style of training and excellence. of relevance to this style of training and excellence. Jesus comes along and specifically preaches God's love for the sick and disabled for women and slaves. Oh boy. The Christians proclaim a gospel where the most important kind of happiness and indeed salvation doesn't depend upon the virtues glorified by the Greco-Roman culture. It's universal in the sense that its fruits aren't contingent on the bodily strength or virtuous excellence. Now Aquinas is the pinnacle of the synthesis of Aristotelian philosophy and Christian theology. So it's really interesting to see how he brings these seemingly radical different perspectives together. But it seems clear, but it seems that clear intuitive understanding of the Aquinas system is not easy to find. MacIntyre wrote after virtue because he became a Thomist, and he was rather it is vaguely skeptical towards him. rather it is vaguely skeptical towards him. rather it is vaguely skeptical towards him. Let's see if he has the... Oh he doesn't. I should probably go to the Twitter thread. Okay good, we're not to the quotes yet. So I didn't miss any. So in 2012, Andrew Pinson, I should be able to turn this to the black theme. Hang on. Ah, much better. Mostly the explanations that he gives to the Aquinas are not really the same as the other two books. Mostly the explanations, he's complaining about MacIntyre, mostly the explanations seem dry and weird. He changes the definition of virtue a bit and then adds a whole new set of different virtues. And it all seems pretty confusing and epicyclical. A bunch of religious metaphysical nonsense strapped onto pagan virtue ethics. So in 2012, Andrew Pinson published a book called The Second Person Perspective in Aquinas's Ethics, Virtue and Gifts, which laments this lack of intuitive explanation and proposes joint attention as a fundamental image to illuminate and make sense of the whole scheme. Pinson tells a story at the end of the book of how his initial idea came after seeing a parent and a daughter playing and having a sense that he could see almost in real time how the daughter was growing as a person. Attention. Love. Agape. This is how human beings make persons through love and attention. Attention. It's all there is. Attention. Worship. Paging, Peugeot, and Peterson. He could almost in real time see how the daughter was growing as a person through this infusion of attention provided by the parent. About a decade ago, I watched my father play a game with one of my nieces who was about 18 months old at the time. The game was very simple involving hiding and discovering matchsticks under tumblers. The girl was obviously fascinated and delighted by the game and her attention constantly shifted from the tumblers to my father's face and back again. What fascinated me, however, was to see the effect of the game on the girl. In the course of the game, I could almost see the girl changing, her intellect and character blossoming before my eyes. Think about the experiment between the toddler and the chimp of getting the little gift. The toddler duplicates all of the non-relevance realization practices that the adult does whereas the chimp cuts through that more intelligently in a way and grabs the treat. Why does the child do all the tapping on the experiment? Because the child, what the child really wants and what the child is learning, is not so much how to get the goods, but the child is learning how to be like the parent. That's the real value for the child, not the little candy treat. He thought about how Aristotle didn't have much concrete to say about a situation like this, which is so different from the self-reliant habituation that grows the Aristotelian virtues like muscles grown in a gymnasium. Now the question is, Nevertheless, I could find no trace of any understanding of this interaction in the works of Aristotle, who wrote comparatively little about children and sometimes classified them as animals to be guided by the reigns of pleasure and pain. Oh, haven't we heard that, Pavlov's dog? Woof, woof! I began to wonder if Aristotelian tradition was the last word on the virtues and whether such a relationship of extraordinary importance had been so important that it had been hidden from the learned and wise and revealed by mere children. Nice Jesus intimation there. Aquinas having subsumed Aristotle under the Christian theology is able to discuss the habitual trained virtues alongside other qualities such as transmitted in a different way. With immediacy that seems mysterious from a pagan perspective. Aquinas does acknowledge that we can acquire virtues in the Aristotelian manner by repeated good actions. He refers to such virtues as acquired. Aquinas also claims, however, that perfect virtues are not acquired but infused in us by God. I think of Amy Grant. He has his father's eyes. What does that mean? So there's another kind of channel for acquiring good qualities, different from the worldly virtues of athletes or architect. And this channel is open right away even for infants. Aquinas claims that even infants and the intellectually disabled can have infused virtues. Since such persons have not had the opportunity to acquire Aristotelian virtues, these virtues are clearly not prerequisites to possessing the infused virtues. I get questions about why do you wear so many layers of clothing in your office? Does it get cold in Sacramento? Yes, it's about 37 degrees out. I keep the church temperature low because why burn all this heat to heat an empty building? I'm sorry, I'm ADHD. I think. I didn't get diagnosed as an ADHD. I think. I didn't get diagnosed as a kid. I don't know if they had it. So the gifts in Aquinas' system are qualities that emerge from being in a state of joint attention to God, with God, not just to God, with God. And in many ways, I think this is part of what makes narrative, scripture, and poetry so powerful because before we had visual media like film, visual storytelling, we had storytelling in narrative. And narrative is all about attention because narrative is this compression engine that compresses the world down to salient components. And in a sense, certainly, certainly it is showing us things, but by showing us things, it is drawing our attention to specific things. And if you look at specifically how Hebrew narrative works, they're masters of helping us see what they see. That's their brilliance. The gifts in Aquinas' systems are qualities that emerge from being in a state of joint attention with God, where I can address God in the second person as you, even in the informal, the and thou, which is the familiar, not the formal, because he is felt as present within my field of experience, not as an object, but as a cooperative subject. Why does personhood always trump impersonality? Because we need it, because that guides us, because it's the only way we can live. One of my favorite illustrations of it comes from the movie Avatar, where, well, it's like the force. It's this impersonal, it's this impersonal well of potentiality that I, with my personhood, with my power to direct my gaze, with my power to direct attention, my power to direct the attention of the deity towards, isn't that what prayer is? Oh, God, have mercy on me. Draw your attention to me. Oh, God, where are you? Why aren't you looking at me? Jonah goes to the bottom of the sea and calls out, don't forget your servant. It's attention. Noah is out in the midst of the renewed Tohu Wawohu sea. And God remembered Noah right at the middle of the story. It's the turning point in the story. It's divine attention. Impersonality doesn't have attention. It's basically the definition of a person, a person. You can have a person's attention. The rock, the stone, the sea has no attention. We might say, oh, I think I am personifying the sea so it has attention. Does the sea have attention? But God has attention, persons. The GIFs enable a person to be moved by God in a manner that can be understood metaphorically and in terms of a person appropriating the psychological orientation of a second person in joint attention. Expressed from the standpoint of a first person before God, I take your stance towards something in a desired union of my soul with you, since by means of the GIFs, one's cognition and appetites are moved in a second personal way. First personal, second personal, third personal. He got there first. A gift could be characterized as a second personal disposition, classifying a virtue by contrast as first personal disposition. For me, this was all revelatory as why Christians would insist God is a person with whom one can have a personal relationship and why the previous strange seeming practice of praying to a father or a friend is a person. It is a person praying to a father or to a Lord who doesn't appear in the world. It provided an exceedingly clear psychological explanation for the power of such a relationship, regardless of the ontological status of God himself and regardless of the historical status of Jesus performing miracles and being resurrected. So in my secular frame, it quite suddenly made a lot of sober sense to just start trying to see what happens if I invite God into joint attention with my own perception. Act as if God has attention to give to me and act as if I can pay attention to what God cares about. That didn't mean I have to try to reach God to see him or hear his voice. I only had a kind to shift my mindset into one where I assume I might be alone with my own gaze at the world. So I hypothesize that I am a child. Henry, I can't talk to you right now. I'm making a video. And it's going to be a little longer than you like. I know. So I hypothesize, get the word right, VanderKlay, that I am a child, my attention wavering and unwise, but that just outside my field of vision, there is a heavenly father whose wisdom and stability I can only vaguely surmise. And I let this being see with me. I try to see together with him. Joint attention. Now it is possible for me to make any use. Now it is possible for me to make any use of a heavenly wisdom that I don't actually possess. Well, that seems almost like an experimental question. And my feeling is that God, taken as a hypothetical source of wise attunement, in fact, is somehow present with me. I can feel this while making no supernatural claim. He's in Jordan Peterson land right here. Because it's just compatible with an explanation like this. God is just a projective intuitive perfection of a wise inclination that my mind is just by virtue of innate evolved intelligence. Even so, it feels like a discovery that such a projection can be efficacious and inspiring when I put it to work as a parental figure in joint attention with me, pointing myself to the posture of playing a child guided by the wisdom of innate parental conscience. Pinsent proposes that this that this Aquinian way of understanding faith can illuminate secular interactions such as between parent and child. Of course, I have no ambition to be like a god for my child. But you are a god for your child. Your child will meet many other gods. But I have to play the role of father in our joint attentional relationship. Just as everyday joint attention in which two persons share an awareness of the sharing of focus helps provide an understanding of how Aquinas thinks that the virtues develop in relation to God, his work may also highlight the effect of everyday joint attention on the development of virtues in relation to others. In particular, he may help to highlight the way in which commonplace instances of joint attention, such as that between a parent and a child, help to shape the formation of virtues in ways that are often overlooked. This is a very long thread. For some time now, I have been praying on a regular basis, meaning I take some time to address God as you while attending to the circumstances of life as a kind of meditation that charges the mental atmosphere with wisdom and glory. It feels like a remarkably potent, fascinating, beautiful and intuitive psycho technology, calling John Vervecky entirely aside from what I might believe about the ancient hallucinations of the Israelite prophets and whatnot. That's all for tonight. Oh, you gave us a lot. He even added POTUS. We'll see if Joe Biden picks up the call. But there it is. You didn't at me. Oh, there you go. You got me in there. And this long thread, I probably missed it because it was so long and you didn't have my attention. Well, you have it now. On this long thread of a secular atheist discovering prayer after reading an academic book about joint attention as a unifying metaphor for Aquinas's modification of Aristotelian virtue ethics. Yeah, you have my attention now. You win. I don't know thread of the month thread of the year. Wow, what a thread. That thread is so good. It deserves the termination of this video I had more slides, and maybe I'll just turn the slides into another video, because I don't want to distract from the profundity from how profound. This really is. So, I'll leave it there. Hey, I make a lot of videos. This one for me is really top shelf. There are some breakthroughs if I can use charismatic language in this videos, and I think, I think, Michael Brockman nails it. So, let me know what you think.