https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sNB0zxTgff8

 Hi, this is Paul and some of you might have sort of a deja vu moment, but I ended the recording and all these other ideas started bubbling up. And I thought, well, shoot, you know, we're wasting this stuff and this can be, I mean, the one video can be more of a promotion and this video we can talk about some of these other ideas and maybe give you a sense of what this group is about. So, all right, well, go for it people. Jacob, did you want to start with. I was going to ask Caleb, can you start just by like summarizing the embodiment idea. Yeah, so the idea that we've been exploring, and it sounds like a lot of discussion and bomb has been about the same thing is, how do we go from, like for us as artists we discuss these ideas a lot and we produce art as well. And we've been exploring what far more time is spent discussing, which is very rewarding for us, but we feel like it's disembodied that we haven't really taken what we're learning and made it into something transformative for the world and for life and. And we've been exploring. Well, how do we do that. And what we've been looking at as artists is, is that our place in sort of the meaning crisis thing is artists can take things in a more abstract form and start to create embodiments of it in art that might not have to be as technically or maybe philosophically sound, but they're engaging their, their intuitive, and that may be by doing that, it's more accessible for outside audience, it's more experiential. And then from there that might start to propel the embodiment and might start to give people who are more technically minded or network minded or whatever concepts and ideas of how to start embodying what we're doing and how to start making something more real out of this that can affect sort of the material. So that's sort of an overview of what we. I think to add on to that you could say that if you really want to analyze an artwork with theological meaning embedded into it. You kind of have to have a good theological understanding yourself. And, you know, secular people don't really have this, so they're kind of out of the boat, when it comes to, you know, experiencing religious art. And it's, you know, it's a shame because the people who don't understand it are the people who kind of need it the most and, you know, so it's a real struggle to try to bridge the gap between, you know, the artist and the theologian and the layman. But it's also one of the things that the art discussion group is great for just to, yeah, just to not just understand deeper but to understand more broadly as well, I guess. We've also been discussing, like I know on various channels in this corner, it's, there's been some discussion about like onboarding and how do we share all these ideas that have had such a big impact on us with people who can't spend, like, however long, watching these videos are listening. And so the, we're kind of discussing the question as to whether we can somehow incorporate our skills as artists to help to bring some of these helpful ideas or helpful ways of looking at the world to a wider audience or to people who don't necessarily get involved in all the talking as much. That's really true because we are just all, we all have different gifts. And some of us are talkers and some of us are artists. I mean, artists, that's, that's, you know, it's basic theology in terms of the gifts of the spirit. So, and this little corner has tended to be, I mean, Peugeot is obviously an artist, but this little corner has tended to be expressed in the medium of thinky talky video. And, I mean, you guys are right. That to put this stuff out. And the other thing is, is the amazing thing about, you know, we spend, if you listen to verveky, you know, and Peterson do it agree. And talking about the non propositional now theology has been quite propositional in the modern period, and anything that that tends to be conveyed by books which is the been sort of the main written text has sort of been the main vehicle for theological work. The, I mean, all of us have an understanding that art in various media has a power that that communicates quite broadly beyond just, you know what written texts can do. And so, you know, I let you know we were just talking about film I mean film is amazing because it brings in. It brings so many different media together into one, as does video games and video games obviously have some of the integral nature of media but then also the, the interactivity. So, it's, it's pretty important stuff. That's, I mentioned just now before recording the study by Jordan Peterson that the, he didn't conduct it himself but the oversaw it. And one of the things they notice in there is that when people engage with fiction. They apparently, they, their brain uses the same mechanisms as they were to perceive reality. Of course, there is a small difference in there. But, you know, some people say oh, why bother with art, it's all about you know and embodying it in the, in your own life, and that's very good you know to practice. But I think if you don't know what kind of example to follow. It's your art can be so instructive, and so, such an example to follow the study that Jordan Peterson did called, but not even do it but called bookworms versus nerds. It differentiated bookworms and nerds, bookworms reading fictional stories and nerds reading more technical manuals, and the bookworms scored better in social interaction skills than the nerds, because the fiction they engaged with, in a way, help them prepare for real social interaction, compared to the nerds who just gained more technical knowledge. So, yeah, orange. There was Neil planting, who taught at Calvin Seminary for a while was running a seminar where he would tour the US and Canada, and I participated in one of these we had one here in the west coast in San Francisco, or basically all we did was read and discuss fiction and and And then plantica believe that that was actually vital for preachers who had to craft sermons to have that inform to have that inform our preaching, you know, didn't just give us illustrations but I think the illustration you just made it sort of helped in the of our capacity to to broaden what we do let's say in homiletics. I think one of the interesting things about what you're saying, Jacob is sort of that idea that you run simulations in your head so that you don't have to like, make mistakes and die like you sort of that's what ideas are is when you think about like story and structure. I think when you when you engage with it as if it's reality. If, if it's believable. If it has genuine difficulty and then it's successful. That's why like a story is so rewarding, because it's like you're, you're getting a mini model of what might work in reality. And I think one of the things that's very demoralizing about a lot of modern storytelling techniques is they sort of just, it's like the brain kind of paranoid making a bunch of models about how everything is negative and everything's going to fall apart and everything's going to lead to your demise behind every corner, there's, there's something worse there's another secret there's another terrible thing. And I think stories that are very motivating and uplifting that engage with that genuine struggle like something like rocky causes a stirring that's almost an eight words like you want to immediately go and embody that in some way like you want to go and engage with that because on such a deep level you're seeing how engaging that model is and that it, it's, it's likely to to succeed. I think there's something really powerful about And also with, like you mentioned rock and it just made me think about music as well. Because, you know, good music files a certain pattern, when the notes it just right. That's the part that you feel rewarding, you know, and so I feel that there's definitely a relation between what's happening with films, what's happening with music that we have this disparate And I feel that it just, it just made it that reflects society in general. So I see how that connects in different fields of art. All right, any, anything else. I have, I do have one question. Okay, question. I do have one question. Okay, question. It's a it's a philosophical concepts that I think was started by the Greeks called me masses. And when I dug into it for a little project. I found that Socrates Plato and Aristotle, all disapproved of art that sort of doesn't really imitate life faithfully. I guess in these in the sense that, well, if we engage with fiction and fiction is like reality to us in a way that we should have fiction be imitating reality as closely as possible so that we don't get confused. And I also found that there are a lot of course, you know, the some some very beautiful pieces of music and thinking of Mahler, you know, I feel like those are more towards a kind of extravagant transcendence than merely, you know, trying to imitate daily life. So my question would be how do you look at this concept of me masses Do you believe that art should be as as faithful to reality as possible. Are you asking me or asking anyone. Anyone, but you in particular. Okay. So, you know, someone just sent me a timestamp of Jonathan Peugeot talking to. I don't know who the guy was the guy, I think the guy is a health motivational YouTuber or something like that. And the guy asked, asked Peugeot the literalist question, and this, we deal with this issue a lot in terms of dealing with the Bible, because the most fundamentalist fight was all about accuracy of representation, and this continues to reverberate in in in common discussions, there was, you know, when john when Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Peugeot had the conversation with Douglas Murray, everybody wants to know, you know, did it really happen. And Peugeot basically made the point in that video I put it on my Vander clips channel. Peugeot basically made the point which I think is something that I have, I have grown in being able to talk about this in the last number of years that any, any representation involves a has to involve a selection and a perspective and a point of view. You cannot have a representation without one by virtue of what john Reveke talks about in terms of combinatorial explosiveness. And so the sort of weds with Peugeot's, Peugeot's perspective which is that there's always sort of a top down. When you see a table. There's actually a whole group of things that come together to produce a table. Now when you come into any representation. Our artists, artists have to use particular representations to create any specific thing in the world. And this has been true of biblical narrative. It's implicitly true even of what people would imagine when they talk about the Big Bang or revolution. You know, CS Lewis pointed this out in his book miracles all sorts of pictures flood into their head, but all of these pictures have within them implicitly point of view perspective. It's a view from somewhere. So, I think there have been, I know astoundingly little about art history that's one of the things that I wish I could go back in college and take some art history courses. But, you know, there were there were times when people tried to, especially before the advent of photography, tried to create things as realistic, I think about Vermeer in the Netherlands, you know, astoundingly. But once once you once you recognize that there's, there's no view from nowhere and there's always a view from somewhere. Even the idea of accurate or representation gets really complex, because there's always selection involved. So, I would imagine that for some to have a representation that intentionally refuses to help the participant in the art do so naively might have value. Because if you, you know, for example, there's a picture, let's say there's a picture in a newspaper of an event, and a description in the story of the event. So, we in our culture, tend to participate in that naively, because we think, well that's what really happened. And so therefore we sort of prioritize this one perspective or point of view, and not recognizing that in some ways in modernity when we say what really happened. We are sneaking in this again this is a postmodern observation we are sneaking in this implicit priority of perspective. And so art that at least acknowledges and owns the perspective it's using and sort of breaks the viewer out of this naive posture, perhaps as value. I don't know that's, I don't know that makes any sense. I agree completely. Wow, I think you could even say that, you know, the Christian story transcends shown room. It's more than a comedy, it's more than a tragedy. And you would even say even transcends me masses versus anti me masses. I'm an animator, when you learn to draw. You have to. You have to learn like which details matter, which is probably the hardest part because like, in some ways it's easier to just draw what you see exactly but when you're drawing a character. You don't know which details are actually important. And they're like they can be like really small details like the width of a line in a certain part of the face. It's not going to look right. It's more about like finding the patterns that are deeper in some ways. Same with like caricatures and stuff like why. Why does this difference, make it not look like the person. Well, exaggerating this it still looks like the person just looks a little exaggerated. I don't know I look at it when, like when we're writing stories it's probably the same like, doesn't adhere to the deeper patterns. And that that's something that's, I've learned a lot from Pajot as well I feel like. Yeah, whether it's realistic in this sense of style is not maybe as important. I'm curious with this Mimasa's idea, is it when it's talking about, you know, art that is realistic. Is it is it is it in the sense of realism as like, like recreating something completely accurately, or is it in reflecting, does it accurately reflect life, or is it something that is sort of maladaptive, because that's how I understood it when you were discussing it, I was thinking of like the allegory of the cave, and sort of. I think about the allegory of the cave a lot. When I think about film because you can easily as a filmmaker end up in a trap where you're, you're luring the audience in and giving them a show and kind of getting them addicted to the show and then they forget about real life, and that's something I think of as an artist is a lot because it's not something I want to do but it's something you would have to do if you're approaching it and sort of a consumerist keep the audience kind of way. But I think like really good art is the art that is so true to life, even if in the details it's absurd is so true to to the real life and reality that when you leave the film you're more thinking about your own life, and you're more thinking about changing something in your life, then about the film, like the film left you with something and sort of told you to get out of the cave. I, like, I think that's where how I took it when you were making this distinction is the difference between something that consumes you and something that helps you get a huge hit of reality and a tiny dose so that you can find your place again and sort of adapt again to life. If I remember correctly, because it's been a while. I think like what those Greek philosophers were speaking out against is kind of, you know, plays with a lot of spectacle and weird masks that the actors were wearing. And just, you know, using speaking melodically. One of the things that they mentioned is that speaking should be monotone, because you're just saying the words. So I think, I think you're right, it's bad for someone to get lost in the story but primarily because the story might not be, you know, representing or reflecting reality in a useful way to them. It's just making them unprepared for reality. Maybe yeah you can use those kinds of exaggerations to emphasize certain parts, but I think it's tricky. I think it's a fine line. It's remarkably difficult I mean we so blithely talk about real life, but if you sit down and. Well, you guys do it all the time because you're artists but if you sit down and try to think well what on earth am I talking about when I talk about real life and Peugeot makes this point quite well often, you know, most of most of what I've done today. Let's say you put a PV can PVK cam on me would be remarkably benign and dull you know there's eating there's bathing there's sleeping there's getting around from place to place there's doing chores. But, but, you know, maybe in the meantime I'm thinking about things. It's this. I think we tend to be. We tend to be shaped by were clearly shaped by the representations that are among us and so when we see a photograph. We, we tend to. Okay, well that's a photograph and the truth is now we know also know that what our eyes are seeing is not, you mean, our eyes are just tiny moving very very quickly and a bunch of different things to fill out the pattern. And so we try to represent this image in front of us. And so then we try to represent that but that's not actually, you know, in terms of what our eyes are seeing and we're finding this out now especially as we have, you know, more and more sophisticated cameras in these phones that these these phones are constructing us and as we have various phones in competition with each other. I mean, the pixel phone and the Samsung phone and the iPhone and I mean, part of what we're wrestling with is the fact that this, we are increasingly realizing that that experience is way more complex than we ever imagined it was. And there's lots of reasons for that now and so. Yeah, yeah. I think the best example of how complex reality is, is the book of Revelation, or anything that has to do with apocalyptic literature, because it's supposed to be an unveiling. Right, so it is perhaps like even more real than, you know, the events in the historical sense. And so, you know, it's a way when it shows what is really going on and when we see the images of these visions. They are quite tripping right so people now for a lot of people cope by saying well this has to be some sort of like a mushroom trip or something because it's like hallucinations you know whatever but those things are more, perhaps more real they're like what's behind the veil that we don't normally see. But these crazy images tell us things that are that are more real than you know, than the things that we think that we see. And we really don't, you know. So I think that considering how trippy those things are I think you can feel safe, considering that those surreal images can really tell us more about life than you know the realistic images. Right, I've long noted that if you go on let's say Google image search and you search for. You try to search for people's attempts to draw or visually create images from the book of Revelation. Once you look at their attempts you very quickly realize that a lot of what's in the book of Revelation, you can't draw. It doesn't work. And, but it sort of works on the page. But you can't manifest it in a two dimensional image. And so, and we see this all the time with sort of Jesus movies, and then there are these movies that try to, they're going to stick to the text as much as they can. But there's, you can't do that. Because there's a whole world that isn't in the text in the New Testament, that you have to fill in. So, you know, one of my favorite attempts at a biblical representation was this attempt to deal with David and Saul in this NBC series called Kings, where they, you know, We're not going to have everybody running around with bath robes out in the desert. We're going to, you know, we're going to set this in some fictional place with tanks and, and all of this and, you know, it was, I thought it was a really noble attempt but of course people playing around with this with Shakespeare and how many other things for a very long time, but it's, I think, again, in modernity part of what we wrestled with was our imaginations have been so informed by specific technologies that reality, we assumed was a certain way, and that's all breaking down. I mean, what else can get Christians to talk about re-enchantment and pagan gods and that kind of stuff. Who have thought that? Well, here we are. But, you know, it's like we have to, you know, we have gone so far astray that, you know, people don't just realize that everything that they make is religious already. For example, in my channel, I tried to analyze different words, you know, words, you know, that are, you know, what you would call secular or whatever. And, but I'm surprised when I started like digging into them and trying to really think about them like, wow, I'm seeing a lot of things that conform to this pattern and, and, you know, even if it is logo centric and all that kind of stuff. And, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, and then, And so I think that I think people felt in modernity being tethered to sort of a physical communal assumption and agreement. And now that that's giving way. Yeah, it's gonna be interesting. That's why it's good that is people with a Christian mindset trying to do it. Yeah, before before somebody else comes in, you know. It's gonna happen all at once. All right. That was an interesting conversation and anything else you want to bring in before I stop the recording again. Well, maybe that's a good place to land the plane. So, hey, look at this I got two videos out of it today. So, again, send me any links that you want me to put in the notes here. All right, can I plug my channel, you may plug. On the shot then. Okay. Is that a fine, let me open up. Let's see. There's the channel. All right. Thank you. I will, I will include that. Good. And again just send me an email any of you want to plug anything else that you want me to put in the notes, feel free. Absolutely. I will just add that. In addition to the United States timezone meetings for the art group. We also have a European meeting because it's one am for me right now and those meetings were from quite late in the night. So to cope with that, we started a European or African timezone meeting. Awesome. Well, that's good to know. All right. Thank you all. Thank you. Thank you so much.