https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Solk71a2ico

 All right. Why don't you introduce yourself. Let us know a little bit about you and how we're talking today. Yeah, so my day job is I'm doing AI research. Okay. In Paris, I have a team. We work mainly on bringing AI to engineering systems, like real technical, real physical systems, which is not necessarily the mainstream in AI today. We have a lot of fun with it. I've been doing this for about 25 years. Oh, wow. I did start it in the 90s. So I'm really like, I saw AI going from an esoteric little research domain to this thing that now it's everywhere on the media. So I did my PhD in Canada, 11 years in Canada. Otherwise, I'm from Hungary. I was born in Hungary. I grew up before. Beyond the Iron Curtain. Okay. This is maybe something interesting to talk about. So I was born in 70s. So my first 20 years were in communism. And then in 90, we got liberated and then I went to university at the same time. So it was a pretty exciting time. And so in 95, I went to Canada to do my PhD and I stayed there for about six years, teaching at the Montreal University. And 2006, we came back to Europe. To Paris. And I've been living here since. So I started to work in an academic research institute with physicists. So that's another interesting topic. Then we founded an institute in 2014 called the Paris Sacklays Center for Data Science. And that was one of the things that's actually informative for me in terms of epistemology. Like, let's say my value, my mini crisis was founded there. I can talk about it too. And then 2019, I joined Huawei in Paris. And so I have a research team of about 20 working on engineering systems and AI. That's my brief CV. Okay. Okay. Well, shall we start on the AI side or shall we start on your story side, which gets into the meaning crisis? Which would you rather talk about? I'm interested in both, probably more the latter. But I guess you're more interested in the AI side. So it's up to you. No, there's a lot of chatter about AI right now. And there's a lot of concern, fear. But why don't we start just in my experience in terms of a possible audience or even my understanding of you, let's start in the story side because... Yes, yes. That's what I was thinking about when I was saying the AI. Because it connects to AI then. Yeah. And I was reading some of the... I mean, you sent me a video link and some other links and I was looking at it and I thought, you know, Even the questions you have about AI are very much tied into the Verveki's work with 4P's and that. So you were born in 1970 behind the Iron Curtain. Did your... was it now Hungary? Hungary, of course, has a historic reformed church. They've also got Catholics. I mean, was there any religion growing up in your household or not? Zero. It was actually pretty anti-religious. My father was pretty much a devote Marxist. Okay. Which was actually probably not the worst. I mean, it wasn't like he wasn't in the party hierarchy anywhere. It was more like somebody who left religion very early. He never... I think he went... he was baptized and he went to church, but then during his twenties he was out. Okay. And he found Marxism as a sort of replacement. So... and that came with all the classical stuff like religion is the opium of the mass. And so that's what I grew up with, yeah. And did he talk about that? I mean, is that something that he was excited to talk about? Or was it just sort of part of the landscape? He talked about it and it was normal for me. Okay. Also school was the same thing. I mean, religion was pretty much in the peripheries at that time and you really had to be pretty devout to maintain the culture. I didn't really even have friends who... I didn't know if they went to church, you know. Nobody was talking about it. Yeah. It wasn't forbidden. It wasn't really... I mean, probably in your career you suffered if it was very open. But otherwise there was no persecution in the 70s. Okay. So what was it like to have the collapse of communism if you believed that Marxism was the way of the future? Okay. So by the time at the end of the 80s, I think he wasn't... my father wasn't that much Marxist. And actually what happened in my family was pretty interesting because my mother sort of joined the underground opposition. Oh. But more the liberal, classical liberal side. Okay. You know, it was at that time it was united that after the communists fell it scattered. But that time the right and the sort of like liberal, let's say left were together. And so it's actually... there were frictions even between them because of this. But by that time my father wasn't that much into this in Marxism. And by the time communism fell, like everybody knew it was not working. The 80s were really like... even the 70s, but the 80s definitely were like the time of... where nothing was really happening. Okay. That was the feeling, you know. So for him it was probably hard. For me it was the same time, it was like 19 and 89. Right, right. So it was... I grew up and it was liberation and like freedom. And I was active in the demonstrations. And I was actually in the army in 88, 89, which was completely absurd. That was like... you know, before university I did one year. Yeah. Now with the war in Ukraine I think things are coming back, it's really weird. Anyway, so when I got out in 89 there was already elections in April. And so the new system. And then there was a lot of excitement from 90 to 95. We were very optimistic. Okay. What were you hoping for? That we would join the West in every sense. Okay. European West. So it wasn't... I mean religion wasn't on the radar for me. But like economically and politically we would join the West. And somehow it did happen. But it happened in a... like economically it happened in a weird way. It's more like Eastern Europe is still like some kind of colony of Western Europe. In economic sense. Oh, that's interesting. That's an interesting word to use for that. That's fascinating. Yeah. I mean, yeah, yeah. I maybe a bit harsh on that. No, I don't want you to pull your punches. It's an interesting choice of words. What did you study in school? Computer science. Okay. Okay. Electrical engineering, computer science. And it was also like I was the second year in Hungary who studied computer science in 91. It was very new. And it was sort of the elite of the university. Okay. Like the best students went there. It was a lot of math. Officially it was electrical engineering, but I studied computer science. Yeah. A lot of early computer science stuff was electrical engineering. I remember that when I was in school. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so AI was already there. It was the winter actually, the second winter, first winter, whatever, whichever winter was it. It was the time when the good old fashioned AI like the rule based systems were already out. But machine learning wasn't there, wasn't yet in. But people already started to talk about neural nets. I remember that and I was very much attracted to it. Okay. For various reasons. Well, let's define some terms here because AI everybody sort of knows it stands for artificial intelligence. But what exactly are we talking about? So what is artificial intelligence? What is machine learning? Because, you know, what are we talking about when we're talking about this stuff? So, you know, both on the side that can't wait for more AI and the side that believes it's Terminator coming down at Skynet, you know, ready to destroy us. I don't hear a lot of defining. Okay. What exactly are we talking about? Yeah, that's actually a problem. Usually AI researchers don't talk about AI. But in our domain, it's much more sophisticated, more details and more specific terms to denote some of the things we do. So what I, you know, even in people's in computer science, I would say I work on machine learning, not AI. Since, you know, AI, there was this lab leak and now everybody knows AI, it's easier for me to talk about AI because it's well known. And machine learning is a more technical term. So machine learning is part of the AI. Okay. And so what do we mean by machine learning? So machine learning is an alternative paradigm of how to program computers, basically. The usual stuff we do is that we have some structures in our mind and we put it into code and then you have an app, you have Zoom, you have an operating system that we use and all those kind of programs, those are programmed by programmers, right? And AI or machine learning would say there are things that are really hard to put into code from my mind because it's complicated. Like how do you define a cat? How do you recognize a cat on an image? It started by how do you recognize the digit nine in a tiny image? And then the first efforts were like, okay, let's do it the traditional way. Like, okay, the nine has a loop and then it has a stroke here and then let's try to code in those rules. And it worked to a certain extent, but you know, nines are coming in all kinds of shapes and forms and it wasn't very successful as an application. So machine learning said, okay, let's forget the rules. Let's just collect a lot of data, a lot of nine zeros and one, a lot of digit. Let some humans label them. So then we have pairs of images and what you call labels or classes. And let's design algorithms. So those algorithms are classically designed. Like I programmed the algorithm, but the algorithm is the one that we learned the mapping between the nines and the labels, the images and the labels. And that's basically how much learning works. The rest is a lot of details and a lot of complexity and algorithms that do those mappings and do the learning from data. And this paradigm is actually the same today. What changed was a lot of computational power, a lot of algorithmic tricks and a lot of data. And the big breakthrough like let's say 10 years ago came from all those sites. That's machine learning. That's it. Yeah, that was really good. That was really helpful. Now let's drill down a little deeper in that, because when we say, because we're going to connect this I mean at some point we're going to connect your story to Verbeke too. But in some ways when I hear you say machine learning, that the machine, when we are watching the machine, it's getting better and better at what Verbeke calls relevance realization. That when you're looking for outputs, there's a whole lot more things that you and I intuitively recognize as the number nine and fewer false positives, which are a fat man with skinny legs, you know, taking a picture of whatever a false positive for nine would be. Is that what we're talking about? So I would say today, we realize the relevance for them. Because most of the relevance comes in the labeling. So I will not tell to the machine, okay, survive, I will tell it, this is a cat. Maybe you could massage in relevance realization into like, what does it look at in the image to recognize a cat? Like the ear and the eye triggers some kind of signal inside the machine and that's, but they wouldn't call it relevance realization. Right. It's still pattern matching. Yeah, exactly. So if you do a lot of cats, it will learn that they have an ear and the ear is an important feature of the cat and it will look for that ear. But it's, I would, I'm not sure what it's relevant to other than the catness of the image itself. Which gets us sort of into the question. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. What is what is the catness in cat that even after the age of, you know, a small child can recognize a cat. It doesn't mean you can't fool a small child with an animal which is some degree of catness, but the child has the child has a sense of catness that is connected up with all of us. And we all sort of have agreement about catness. We do, and we somehow think that cat is an important category. And that's not something that today's AI does. It expects us to tell what are the important categories. And that's, that goes deep. There's maybe one fringe of AI which goes beyond that but even, you know, the language models which are, you know, very cozy cause a lot of excitement. This year, are learned from data that exists that somebody found to it learned from text. It doesn't learn from any text, it learns from text that was written by humans. And the importance of the concept that is in the text is encoded in the fact that they exist, you know, the existence of the text that the machine learns is the relevance. Yeah, of the data for something that it was relevant for somebody in some situations so he wrote an article he wrote a text he wrote some some blog posts about that. And the machines that learn language, learn from that text. It doesn't go beyond what is already produced by humans. And the relevance is what the humans put into it. So I, so I, when I when I hear her talk about relevance to this, I think it's beyond what they are just today. That's, and that and that's very similar to some of Peugeot's comments on AI, that it, it remains. It basically remains a human tool. There's a fundamental, there's a fundamentality about that human toolness in the entire enterprise. Because we are the ones that are, we are one, we are the ones that are are, it's our relevance that we are trying to, in a sense, our capacity to recognize relevance that we are trying to expand via these tools. Is that correct? Yes, exactly. Yes, yes, definitely. Now, the thing is that today's language model, if we talk about this, they are trained on an immense quantity of text. I think it's like 4.5 terabyte, that went into GPT-3, which is one of these language models that people use, which is, you can't imagine that so it's like everything ever written. I think it's a percentage, like 1.5% of all internet text went into that machine. So, when it produces language, it does look very interesting and new and intelligent. But it's still, you know, it just collected all those texts and rehashed it and connected everything. There was huge intellectual work that went into this, into the machine that could actually digest that quantity of text. But it's still sort of like a very intelligent search engine within that big corpus of text. See what I mean? Yeah, so if you ask it about a topic where you don't really know the answer, it does look intelligent because the answers you think that you don't know. Somebody knew it, but you don't know. Yeah. You know what I mean? Yes, that's fascinating. Because, you know, I've built this new computer for myself and I put a little SSD and a 2 terabyte SSD in just for the regular stuff. And then I put a 10 terabyte SSD in for videos and other stuff that I have to store and manage. And so you think, okay, I could put five terabytes of text on that drive. And then you think, well, that's that's in a sense text in a bucket. And then you think, okay, we're going to digest that text. But, you know, even the use of that metaphor when when I eat pizza, let's say, and that goes into my stomach, my stomach digests it. And in a sense, my stomach is doing some sort of relevance realization because by by virtue of the digestive system that I have, it is looking to select and deselect certain things that the body wants and and process it through me. And so, again, the, the body is doing the relevance realization, you know, spanned over, you know, all of everything that came to be me to have a working digestive system. And so that's a very, you know, I think it's I think it's very difficult for normal people like myself to get a handle on what exactly we're talking about because our relevance realization when it comes to this conversation tends to be shaped by science fiction. I mean, it's all that that's all shaped as well, even though, you know, there was a little conversation among some people in this little corner about AI and one of the people made the point, oh, AI is very much with us already. And that's I mean, anybody who uses Google or Twitter. Yeah, Google is. Yeah, yeah. That Google is telling me what to what to watch. Absolutely. And I think this is. So, maybe I'm biased but I think the most exciting new AI applications are image generation and language generation. This year, my creative pictures from text prompts or language. But I think the most impact of AI is in the recommendation engines. Definitely. And. No, no, go ahead. Okay, well, let's let's jump back to your story. So you're studying electrical engineering, you're getting into computers, all of this in Hungary and then at some point you go to Canada for for your PhD studies. You lived in you lived in Canada for, you know, for a while. What what has been in the time when you first started getting into this as a student until now. How has well let's talk about let's talk about living in Canada as opposed to Hungary. What did what did you what did you learn in that transition? So the very different world. When I write to North America. And even the Montreal is like one of the cities which was supposed to be very European. I found it very strange. Somehow my my my feeling was about temporariness compared to Europe. Things were built for limited time. The cities were like New York. Typically, inner city Montreal is like New York is was very airy. Big buildings and then especially New York you don't see the sky. Yeah, I never had that feeling in European cities, you know. And smaller cities were like I live in Kingston for for a year in Ontario. They were definitely like settlements of limited time, even though Kingston was a pretty pretty old city like the inner city is like 200 years old. Yeah, yeah. I always had this feeling of. Definitely not not belonging and definitely not wanting to live there all my life because I felt that's changed. It was very exciting at the same time and very. Energizing. But I always wanted to go back to Europe like it feels more home. Yeah, homie. Yeah. Even though Paris is also a big city, but then I didn't grow up here. It's like 10 to 10 times bigger than Budapest in terms of everything. Still, I feel more familiar with it. What was it like working in this field? Because I mean different different vocations are very, they're very different. So what's it like working in this field of I mean, it's not just. I mean, you're not a coder. You're not sitting at a desk coding all day. Eventually you got into this area of research, which is basically, I would imagine. I would imagine. Well, maybe you tell me is it setting up coders? Is it helping helping coders figure out how to think and how to do and ways that they haven't thought and done before? I mean, what's what's what's thinking about something like this like? We are definitely coders. So we code the algorithm to learn. Everybody there. So so machine learning was always a very interdisciplinary domain. So the people were from computer science engineering, but also from cognitive science, neuroscience, math. So the subject united us. There was always sort of like this, this, this urge of trying to create intelligence. I think deeply somewhere inside everybody was hoping also to do this for understanding intelligence. At least I went into this from that angle. It was also very strange subject of computer science because other subjects in computer science are more monodisciplinary. So people were doing cryptography or other stuff. So I was a more straightforward computer scientist, whereas the conferences I went to were these mixtures of people from all over the spectrum who were interested in intelligence, the brain and the creating of intelligence. From my side, from the computer science side, we were definitely coders and builders. So we wanted to actually build systems that learn. And so that was the paradigm, like, like algorithms were improved. There were benchmark data sets like those digits, or which we could measure the performance. And so there was a lot of theory to math. And so I was more like, what are the explanations? What does it mean learning and how do you formulate it mathematically? But I was more on the algorithmic side. I was always prefer to actually do it. And doing it was actually coding it. So definitely people who were from the computer science side, we were coders. We are coders. And so it was thinking you're trying. So in that way, it's very much of a science that, okay, thought, insight, try, test, try to improve or achieve. And you basically have that cycle going to work. Yeah, so it is definitely applied differently, experimental. So there are there are two, let's say, paradigms. There's the scientific and the engineering. And it's very interesting to see how it mixes up because like engineering is basically build the locomotive, you know. Like Stevenson, early 1800s, he didn't know about the epidemics. He was just there to build the locomotive. It was very experimental. So there was no other way to do it. Try it, see if it works and improve on it. But you also have experimental science where you have hypothesis that you want to prove or disprove. And you make experiments to disprove them or to prove them like experimental physics. And so in machine learning, you have both because you want to build stuff, but you also want to maybe experimentally understand that thing that you built. Like let's say, you know, Carnot came over and understood the vapor machine and thermodynamics came out of it 30 years after the locomotive was built. So there is this angle to like, okay, we build these neural networks. Let's try to understand them scientifically. And that can be theoretical or can be experimental. So you try a lot of things, not necessarily to improve them, but to pull them to see how they work and what do they do. And maybe what does it tell us about real intelligence? Why do you think we want to know about intelligence? But somewhere it's the top of some evolution, like the best. Like we sit on the top of this hierarchy and maybe we want to go beyond. It is definitely the motivation for a lot of people who they want to be enhanced in that. Definitely something that we think about as something good intelligence, like solving problems, making life easier, better, others. I wouldn't say it's not an easy question. My urge to get into this domain was definitely somewhere now that the way I understand it now, it was about understanding myself. How do I work? If I can be at least part of what I do, I will understand it better. Now, if I knew that time that this is my motivation, I would have gone into psychology or cognitive science. My background was more real. I came from math, physics, and like a very art-science-y upbringing. And so that was like the natural path to go in. And the angle of AI for me went through the angle of understanding intelligence went through AI. We're at a strange impasse because you're here talking from Paris and you're a researcher in AI. And I'm a local church pastor in Sacramento who just spent the last hour pretty much carting food out of the cars for a lot of women in their 80s because I'm the one with good legs and I can bring it across the parking lot and set them up so they can have their Bible study this morning. And so I tell them, well, I got a 1030 appointment, so I got to be done getting you all set up after that. And if I would say, well, who are you going to talk to pastor? I said, well, I'm going to talk to a researcher in artificial intelligence across the world. They're used to it now. They'd look at me and say, yeah, that's Paul and his internet stuff. It's okay. We trust him. But how on earth, I mean, so you, Jordan Peterson, John Breveke, Jonathan Pigeot, how did we get to where we're at today? Having this conversation. So I was always a little bit. I always had a little bit of thing beyond what I was actually doing. I was doing technically. I like asking that question why I'm doing this. It was easier not to answer. I was doing this because it was fun. A lot of little shiny objects that I can play with and work on and create. I was a kid that built stuff, you know? But I was the little thing always stay there that was more interested in about like knowing myself and why we are here. Like the big questions. And within that why I'm doing this. I was so so sometimes I get pretty depressed about it. And then I just went back to my shiny objects and that pulled me out of this impasse. But somehow in 2019 I think it was. I don't know how. I don't know why the algorithm brought it to me. But the first thing when I met the subject, it was the Peter and Harry's debate. Eight hours. And I was like, wow. The religion was never on my radar. I was so. I would live my life like this. Like I would build this shiny object and have fun in the conferences. I have two kids, family. And then suddenly there was a debate where I was supposed to be on Harry's side. And then there's this guy who is saying things. Start to make me thinking about the value hierarchy and the way we act. Now the thing is the reason why it resonated with me was because I was already thinking about the question of value. Meaning in science. And where does it come from and how do we decide what we work on? It's exactly your question, your previous question. And the reason why I was into this, because in 2014 we with some colleagues, we founded an institute called the Center for Data Science. It was the beginning of when I started to get out of the lab and the mission was to bring AI to sciences. It was in a big university where you had all kinds of sciences, economy, human sciences, physics, a lot of physics, medicine, et cetera. And we already knew that what we do, this AI stuff, the extra tools could be very useful for certain things like recognizing stars on astrophysical images or improving the pipeline and the medical pipeline to make better measurements, stuff like this. So we founded this institute with this goal that we take our know-how and put it into scientific pipelines, not in AI, outside of AI. And it worked. But we faced a big dilemma, which was we had limited resources. We were doing it a little bit on the side. It was not our core research thing. So we were few. We had some funding for engineers, but we were few. There were more demand from the scientists than we could satisfy. So we had to choose. And I had to choose between very different domains like astrophysics. So what is more important to improve a pipeline where you deliver medicine to administer medicine to cancer patients and have to make sure that the dosage and the medicine is the right one? And we can use AI to make this quality control thing, or is it better to use AI for recognizing galaxies on astrophysical images? These are questions that are completely unrelated, yet we had to choose in which one we invest. And my scientific background gave me no tool to do that choice. I had no principle to do the choice. We had some technical things like, do we have data to do it, but it's more like, can I really do what you'd like me to do? Like, do you have data? Do you really know what you want to predict with the AI? Do you have labels? As I said, you know, you have to pattern match. You have enough data and does it make sense? And can we do this? Those questions were more like what I could answer. But at the end of the day, we had like 30 projects and we had to choose 10. And so this question of how to choose what is important came up. And this was every year we had what we call a pitching day where scientists came and we asked them not necessarily to tell us what they do. Of course, we asked them that too. But we asked them why are they doing it? Like, what's the value in it? Exactly your question, your previous question. They usually get angry. Because I mean, if you're like a physicist or chemist and all your life you've been doing the certain thing that you were doing and somebody questions why you're doing it. The first thing is like, who are you? I'm used to that as a minister. Everybody looks at me and they're like, why are you doing this? Anyway, go on. And so we had to deal with that. We sort of like designed a formula where people could sort of like tell us why they do it and what the value is in it, you know. And then we had to choose. So this was basically my job for three, four years to select and then to do the job. And then again, shiny objects. We had a lot of fun with them. But this was like, you know, something that made me think about, you know, how do we decide what we do in life in general? And that's when this Peter Zung guy comes and then talks about value hierarchy and acting and meaning and how is it external to science? These questions. How it is not possible to derive from a scientific stance. And that's, it was revelative. So this is how it started. And then. I got a little bit like you, like I got hooked on him. Bad. I'm a little bit less now. It is new stuff, but I mean, I still the scientific, for example, the COVID, COVID interview that it was so interesting from this point. This angle to actually maybe just open a parenthesis on this, because I was so surprised by this because basically the main question of the interview was, why don't we put resources on investigating where COVID came from? Yeah. And how politicized it is. Yeah. But if I listen to him, really, of course it is politicized. And of course, this is a value question, right? Yeah. There is truth. Of course there is truth. And, you know, as a scientist, you are going for the truth, right? That's your top, top value. But which truth? Yeah. You know? Yep. Yep. Which truth? Because there are so many truths out there that we could investigate. Why are you going for the chemistry truth and not the astrophysics truth? Yeah. And in that framework, it's completely understandable that we don't want to investigate it, you know? There are other stuff. It's not a scientific question. I would be very interested in to know where COVID came from. But I also understand the value decision of not doing it, you know, like, I don't know, like the Royal Society refused the debate on this. Yeah, I understand why they are angry about it, but I also understand that it's possible to have a system of values where this is not a question I will ask. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right? So I was a bit surprised that this didn't like, like he... It was like a blind spot, somehow, because from his own theorizing, that would be obvious that there are some truths that are more important than some others. And for him, it's an important truth where COVID comes from, but it seems like for society, it's not for various reasons. Right? So, anyway, so it was just strange to see him walking into his own trap in a certain way. I would have asked him this question. There is no way to derive from science why knowing where COVID comes from is important or not, right? Right. Science can't tell you that. Science can't tell you that. You're exactly right. Yeah, science can tell you that. Exactly. So I got into this and then the year after it was awakening from the mini crisis, like I went through it in the summer. And that was like, it was a revelatory lot of things and still like digesting it. So really heavy stuff, but it puts a lot of things in order for me. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So for people knowing and everything. And so what I'm thinking about is maybe you can talk about this, like that angle, like where about that angle to analyze AI from that angle is very interesting. I saw in your video, I guess there was, and I didn't catch it when it came out, there was some controversy at Tesla over the rolling stop, which, you know, part, I mean, part of what's happening, part of what's happening now is that when I turn on, when I open up YouTube, when I turn on my computer and I open up a browser and I go to YouTube.com, I know that AI and machine learning is going to direct my life to a degree, because at the, again, I'm conditioned to first look at the upper left hand corner, because that's where we start reading. That's going to be that upper left hand corner, little square is going to be the number one video that YouTube says you'll be interested in this. You should watch it. We watch it. YouTube is one of the best ones actually for me. Yes. The AI engine is, and I know a little bit about this. Why? Which is kind of interesting, because YouTube is an old app. So they started doing it a long time ago. And there are competing algorithms in YouTube. It's not the one algorithm that gives you the video, but you have like, let's say a handful. And it's hard to get rid of them for various reasons. And so what they do in YouTube is that they allow these algorithms to propose videos and then they just take the best one from each of them. So it's sort of like a mixture. And I think it's good because it's not optimizing really anything. The worst on this scale is TikTok, which was actually built on this principle. It's just a dopamine maximizing machine. Yeah. Yeah, I looked at TikTok. Yeah, yeah. It scared me to death, I thought. I swear it was like someone had put a drug in my systems. It's like, I could just keep doing this all day. And I saw the direction that it was taking me. It's like, this is, you know, as a Christian, this is not taking me where I want to go. And it's so interesting. I actually wrote a blog about this because I got rid of Facebook for the same reason. Same reason when they had the short videos coming in and that was bringing me into a direction that I was like the day after I was like, no, I went into cage fights. You know, these are MMA and got hooked on the fights and I was sitting there and I had all the adrenaline in my muscles. I couldn't process them. It was really heavy and took me two weeks to say no. And the only thing I could imagine to do was just to delete Facebook from my phone, which I did. But the interesting thing is that I was thinking about like, what is this? You know, like, why did I go to that direction? Yeah. And I decided to go down in the dojo and learn to fight at 50. Really? Wow. Yeah. And that's one of the best decision of my life. Interesting. Two years ago. So we can talk about that too, but in terms of AI, what I wrote down in the blog is that actually you could use it as a therapeutic tool, even TikTok, if you can manage not to really get hooked on it. You can actually just observe your history and analyze it like a dream. Like what you would do in a therapeutic session and then what, you know, do something with it. You know, like, why did you go in that direction? And what would be the action in your life that you could do to be consistent with that? It's like a subconscious. Really, these things are really pulling your subconscious. And your subconscious is full of things that are probably useful to know and interesting. So this is one of like this is a non-orthodox ways to use these AI engines to therapy. But at the same time, you know, the addictiveness is crazy. Yeah. And actually, you know, Facebook lost me because of that. So it's an interesting thing what's going on in these companies because they definitely want to get you hooked. But on what time scale? And this is where, you know, Peterson comes in again like, you can get me hooked for the night. And I stay there, maybe I even watch your ads. But the day after, you know, my other self looks at this and says no. And if you're Facebook, you don't really want to do that. Right. You want you want me to just give a little bit of dopamine so you stay and then you stay for longer, long term. And it's not very clear what is the what should we optimize for that? This gets really into Peterson stuff. Right. Like, what is the time schedule? My life is, you know, longer than that. Yeah. And so what should you to give you so you stay on YouTube for your life? And then it might be actually that if you figure it out, the recommendation engine will do good. Right. It will want to transform you. What I mean? Yes, I do know what you mean. It wants maybe if you think about this, then now that whether it's possible or not, that's a big question. Because for now, what I see in these recommendation engines is that they have one formula. The magic formula, which a lot of information goes into this, but the formula is still hand designed. It is not a like some engineer or group of engineers who sit down and design the formula that then they optimize it. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that's actually the limit of AI. I don't think I could design the formula, because that goes really into this question of like, you know, why are we here and where do we want to be making 10 years or in 100. That's that's that is such an interesting observation. Because, you know, obviously in my in the area of my vocation. I mean, the entire. So on one hand this morning, I was helping little old ladies get their crock pots from their cars to the Bible study. And I arranged the tables and chairs and they then put out the table cloths and I had just little verbal check ins. How are you doing today? And you say, I hear a little story. I'll give a little hug. And then right before this, the soup wasn't hot enough. So, Paul, Paul, come out here. So I had to come out there and I had to move the crock pot and pour it in and heat it up on the stove and get a little hotter. And I had to do this before I have my conversation. So ran out there and they're already neck deep in their Bible study and they've got their, you know, so I'm doing a lot of that. But the question you just said, I mean, the question of why are we here and and and where do we want to be? I mean, that's the question of my vocation. That's the conversation that has been stewarded for now thousands of years. In some ways, that's the that conversation is the backbone of what we call civilization. And and so then you have this this strange you have this strange reality of, you know, people looking at me and they'd be like, you know, you don't you don't really have a job that does anything, do you? I mean, there'd be lots of people that say that you're, you know, the the atheist would say you're just shilling you're just shilling fantasy stories for dupes to help them feel better. And then other people are like, well, but that's not such a bad thing. It's better to feel better than worse. And it just goes on and on and on and on. But but the fact that there is no there is nothing in the machine world that has that need. But we somehow do, which has to be a tell about us. And the machines and the machines. Yeah, yeah. So, well, I've I've I can I can go until what will be noon my time. So it's almost eleven thirty my time. So I got another another another half hour or so. And I've I've pestered you. So I want to make sure to to see where you want to go with the time we have remaining. What questions did you bring to this? Because because you approached me and said, I'd love to talk to you about this stuff. And of course, that was before I had all that stuff this summer. And so, you know, then finally we were getting around to it now. So what's on your mind? Where do you what do you want to talk about? I'm very interested in religion. And my mood and my obstacles and why am I not yet a Christian? So there is one thing about it, which is pretty straightforward, like my partner said before I talk to you. OK, just please don't convert. And I empathize with her because. Like the religions, like the actual stuff that happens is very scary. Going into church where you never been to church, it can be very overwhelming. She said that she feels like. And that comes with shame. So it's really hard to do this. This sort of sort of stuff. I was listening just before this to Jonathan Pazzo, who at least he came from a Protestant church. And I was like, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. And I was listening to Pazzo who at least he came from a Protestant. Culture that for him to go in going to Orthodox Church in Montreal, which it was very ethnic, right? The Russian or Romanian or some Serbian. It wasn't easy. He had to really find his way. And it was sort of like an intellectual reason why going into Orthodoxy because it was his calling. So it was this step for sure, which is really hard to find a local community. But then there are also other like, like, like, I'm thinking about, you know, I'm completely with Jonathan Pazzo and you on the level stuff. The fractal thing, like you go below and we go up. You see all these same kind of patterns. I'm completely OK with assigning consciousness of the levels up, but also down. I can also see that if you do that, then there is something on the top. So it's sort of like this no platonic structure. I'm fine. But then this is what we're like, of course, the nomological order, right? But then the narrative stuff, it's really tough. Like, I understand the need for the narrative to basically bring down this complex structure to the Earth, literally, right? And I understand that because when I talk about AI, it's a little bit like, you know, how to make it tangible or the structure that I live in. That's what, you know, marketing and product design departments do. I mean, it's a very, very. I mean, I don't know if you like the metaphor. So I understand the reason why, why, why, why the right narrative stuff is important thing. And the stories also talk to me. The Jordan Peterson was the one who actually broke that thing. Like the stories in the Bible are really, really deep. But somehow, you know, accepting that it is a truth, even though I know that it's not a proposition, it's tough. I'm struggling with this stuff. And there is another angle. I don't know if it's related, and maybe it's, you know, I'm just, you know, just putting more complexity on what I'm saying. But there's another thing is that spirituality for me somehow went through embodiment. Like, I started to have spiritual experiences when I could get out of my head. And that's, that's like, no, I, I, I've been living in my head and still it's very tough for me to get into my body. But I know that this is my way to get the spiritual experiences. And I don't find a lot of that in Christianity, like going through the body and getting into the body. And it's somewhat also related to the feminine, which I find not very present in the in, you know, what I want to, when I'm looking at you or Jonathan Pajou or other religious podcasters or. So I have I am at this, this, you know, point where I'm thinking about the results of the community question. Like the big question that John Verback is also struggling with like, OK, if it's not Christianity, it's no platonistic structure and the one and also the practices he does. But how do we organize a community around it and make sure it's not Christian. I don't know if it's actually a goal or not. But somehow I feel that if you start doing that, you will go back to Christianity. Yeah, in some way, maybe it's a new another reformation or some kind of some kind of novelty in how it's organized. Yeah. Yeah. But if I put together the platonic structure with the narrative needs. It will become something like that. Yeah. Yeah. So I'm actually more and more attracted by that than, let's say, my partner or other people I talk about who are also in this crossroad. Who are thinking about something that we need beyond that, what you know, what you can hold in your hand. But it's tough for me. So I love your everything you do when you do the Sunday sermon. It's a little bit more esoteric for me, but it's probably, you know, it's hard for me to connect with it. Yes. And it's I actually, you know, I'm not sure whether after you know this history of like 20 years before behind the curtain and then 30 years doing engineering, I am actually able to absorb the cultural part, you know. I don't I don't know that I don't know that. I don't know that it's it's it's an impossible thing. I don't think so at all. But the questions you're asking are very on point for a lot of people. The question of embodiment is a big one right now in in the West. A lot of people who were raised in a Christian environment are playing around with Buddhism, yoga, these kinds of things. And I think part of the attraction to that is very much because the primary forms of Christianity we've seen in the West have been very much in our head. The Protestant Reformation is a very head thing. Primarily. And I think it as it actually gets lived out, it's far less that than it is in theory, because we can't help but use our bodies. So, you know, the irony of this morning for me is that given the fact that I am a not quite 60 year old man who can has no no bit mobility issues and can carry things. And I mean, so so for me, Christian practice on Tuesday mornings means setting up tables and chairs, moving casserole dishes, escorting ladies across wet parking lots, all of this stuff. But that is different from let's say the kind of formal practice that people seek out and let's say a yoga experience or martial arts, martial arts, I think for a lot of people is also, I think yoga has attracted a lot of women. I think martial arts have attracted a lot of men, because I think at this point we very much are beginning to recognize our embodiment issues. And so if you know if you look at a guy who's doing stuff like Rafe Kelly, I mean he in some ways is very much into that question of, of embodiment and so to me it's not. It's not a huge surprise that Facebook led you to, you know, mixed martial arts or something like that because the surprise to me. Yes, there's a there's a really interesting book about trauma, entitled the body keeps score, which when I read that book, I learned a lot. And part of what's difficult now in terms of Christian practice and community. I think Christians really have a big advantage in terms of networking in terms of community in terms of theology and philosophy. I think Christians have a lot of advantages in that area, but Christians are struggling in terms of embodiment. Yes, okay I'm so happy you say because I was not sure what you know like, whether it's like a soft point or something. I'm very happy that you know I very much realize that's part of the reason now why the interest in Christianity that was triggered by Peterson, very much as heavy on the sacramental traditions like orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, Anglicanism to a degree, because in the Protestant menu in the English language the world Anglicanism is very heavy on is a little bit heavier on the embodiment but not really as much. Much more medieval Christianity and, and let's say ancient classical Christianity had more things in it such as monastic traditions, where you clearly had more embodiment and community traditions. Pilgrimage. One of the things that has been very interesting to me is how many people have the Christian practice of pilgrimage has made a revival. Many people are now from North America going to Spain, Portugal, walk the Camino. So, what we're seeing now in Christianity is, in a sense, a, an attempt to recapture embodiment traditions within Christianity, but in terms of competition. And then, other, you know, like other religious traditions have had more embodiment that sort of remained in their portfolio. But if you let's say someone stops going to church because it's not meeting their needs and they start going to a yoga studio. Well, they're going to start getting heavy on embodiment. But then in my experience what they begin to get out of yoga studio is something in terms of the philosophical theological and religious, it's probably going to be something on the level of a self help book they pick up in in a book. And it remains fragmented. Yes, yes, it remains very fragmented. Because if you if you go to your yoga studio and they start talking about your chakras. And then you go to your medical doctor and you say, Oh, doctor, got to do something about my chakras. Your medical doctor is going to say, Cross Blue Shield or Kaiser Permanente doesn't really deal in chakras. Okay. And, and whereas Christianity Protestantism and Catholicism, I mean, in the United States, the whole hospital system was developed by Christians in many ways. The government was sort of a recent add on in the United States, but it's Methodist hospital it's Catholic hospital it's Presbyterian hospital it's, you know, sometimes Jewish hospitals so religious people are the ones who actually were dealing with hospitality and health and all of that. So, there's, and we're, I think we're in a position culturally where, in some ways we've gotten so in our heads. We've gotten so out of our bodies that we, even the, the. Yeah, so it's a, you're asking all the right questions, you really are, and you're, you're looking at, you're looking at the struggles, I think, potentially, because of its, its age Europe. And I think it's really important to see in Christianity, if, if they can really sort of get their act together which they're struggling to in a pretty big way, because they're closer to their roots, and as you said, you know when you went to Canada, or the United States. There are no roots here. And in fact some people, you know I live in California so some people will pursue. Let's say Native American spirituality. But all of all of that attempt to sort of leapfrog backwards over the Christian ization of the world. Many people and Pujo, I think articulated this very well. We have no idea what it means to be a druid. Someone who, someone who has read a book about Native American spirituality. They don't really know what a sweat lodge is. So you're not simply going to leap back and worship Thor, that that's, that's not available to us. Yeah, yeah, I realize that. You know why all these arguments go sideways because what I realized was belief is and aspirational to. Yes, I believe in you or I believe you, you what you're saying is because somehow I want to be like you. I like you. And go, yeah, good chance to find a droid or druid. Right, right. Which is in true. That's right. That's just that stuff that's been made up by you know who knows who knows what, what movie. But, so I, you know, for me, and you know for Pujo and I, you know we are answer is, you know, is always, you know, so Pujo is maybe a little bit more go to Orthodox Church, my answer is, find find a church that find a church that's that's probably accessible to you, because the individual components of walking the path to get re integrated into Christianity. So, it's going to be, you know, what churches local to you who are those people do you that's why my my answer to people is always find a friend who goes to church and start there, because, because there's the with combinatorial explosive that there's just too many questions on the board, and you have to start somewhere, but. Yeah, and that's the house of doing it so yeah I know. But it's it's the questions that you're raising and I know I, you know I annoy, I annoy some Christians, when I talk this way, because sort of the Christian, the religious, the consumeristic religious tribal game is my brand has all the answers. And, but I'm talking to a guy who grew up in Hungary studied in Canada is living in Paris. I have no idea where you know where the next where the beginning of your path must start. And I could say go to a Christian reform church. There aren't any of them in Paris. That doesn't make any sense. Yeah, I'm Hungarian reformed well that might be a good place to start I mean there's Hungarian reform, but but you know but given, and, and it's got to work, obviously, when your partner says just don't convert. Well, I've been with a lot of people through those kinds of conversations to usually what happens on the other end of that is it often happens so there's a woman in our church who started coming to our church. She wasn't getting along very well with her husband, and then when she started going to church things got worse because her husband was annoyed, because she was paying less attention to putting getting lunch on the table than she was to going to church on Sunday. But after a couple of years into it. He began to see that she was actually a better wife. Because she, she was less. She was less angry with him. She was more caring for him. She because of Christianity she had to learn to forgive, which if you're dealing in a relationship, learning to forgive. It's, it's one of the foundational things to make helping a relationship work, because if you're in a relationship and one party doesn't know how to forgive that relationship is going nowhere, because both people have plenty to forgive and plenty they need to forgive so anyway, so, but all of those issues are real issues. And so what what you know so what many people have to do is for themselves, start piecing their journey together. And, and again I, I'm a Christian minister and so I'm your partner might say well you talk to a Christian minister of course he's got to recommend Christianity. Right, of course I am. But exactly how that works for any given individual. There's way too many things going on in your life that I have no idea of. And so that's why, for me what I do in terms of my practice is I pray, and I pray that the Holy Spirit guides your path and brings you to the right people in the right places and begins to bring you to life. The, because when I when I listen to you talk or and this isn't just you this is anyone. You know, you want a good thing. You want the best thing. You want the best thing for you you want it for your partner you want it for your kids you want it for your city your nation your world. That's not uncommon to want the best things. Now we might, in terms of if we had to check off a list of the things that we wanted there might be right and wrong answers on that list. But generally speaking in terms of the modality. You want what's better and again going back to the AI. A computer can't answer that. Exactly. Well, what's a better it can. It can. Sorry, it can but it's bullshit. In a technical sense. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So I'm sorry you just triggered a little rant on my part I hope that was fine. It's fine. Yeah, so, one thing I was thinking about is that the funny thing in our couple is that she's the one who's praying. She's not calling it that, but she's the one who believes in. Not now I went with her on that like in the, what we call magical thinking, you know, is that if you start putting stuff out there. You say it. Talk about it or write it down even better. And so it's completely on that side but it's somehow the institutional framework around because she's not the actual, the doing part is fine for her. It was harder for me to believe in this you know like scientific mind it's magic. Come on. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Until I saw it working. But it is the institutional thing and it's this is what you're saying like finding a local church or community. It's so hard because they are not on the same wavelength. It's not like, you know, 50 hundred years ago where you were in the village and it was natural that was there I mean this this sort of choice we are not made for this choice. It would be natural. Yeah. And if it's not then then I'm, I'm somehow you know I'm hesitating between Verwacki's program of trying to reboot it somehow in another way. Yeah. Or Jonathan Pajol who found his, you know, something that already existed. And, you know, I know you will not see them in Jon's program. Well I completely so I'm sort of between Pajol and Verwacki on this because I totally understand rationally where Jon is coming from. Because there's, there's, there are in any institution, there are compromises and things that are compromised. I totally get that. What I'm skeptical of is if you can white paper this thing if you can just, you know, take a blank sheet of paper and design it because nothing works that way. Even in technology and engineering, you're always building. Yeah, I mean, I know enough about coders to know that you go to GitHub or something like that oh I need a piece here and I need a piece there and, you know, you're all not writing all that code from scratch. You're, you're pulling things in and putting together coding machines and off you go. It's, you can't, you can't build this from nothing. And if you know, and this is if you begin with the premise that, and I think it's true. Communities are smarter than individuals. Communities that are well networked are smarter than individuals. And you are able to include the, the wisdom of the dead. And, and so I think you know john has really sort of migrated on this and he's not much more talking about say the Silk Road, rather than a religion that's not a religion because I, you know, and that's been his story to. He's, you know, now, you know, Platonism and I mean he's, he's appropriating from the past. And I think that's in continuity with what's always happening. We're always doing that we can't build it. So yeah, that's, and for me, so then you know there's always a lot of people asking well, Vanderklay when are you going to go to Catholicism or orthodoxy or something like that, and it's like, but that that same issue is within me. I don't have a reason to depart from my tradition. There's, there's a stability, staying in my tradition that it affords me and yeah I could, I can see some advantages to other traditions over my own and select areas, but in terms of who I am, and how my life is I don't, I don't see any reason in leaving my little tradition. Uh huh. That's for me. Yeah, yeah, I understand this. So question to you would be, are you looking for any, anything transformational in your life, you know, because I'm very much a junkie of transformation, you know, like, because, because I don't feel like I'm settled, the way you are. Yeah. I there are certainly some areas of my life that I am praying for transformation. I'll say it that way. Relationships. Relationships, a variety of other things I'm certainly praying for trans and there are there are there are things in me that still need to be transformed and of course, for me transformed further into the likeness of Christ. But in Christianity, it's a very funny thing that. Now I'm speaking more in the non Protestant sense of saints. One of the interesting thing about Christian saints are, they're so very different in some ways. Even though we say they're all getting to be more like Christ. Well, but they're not looking like a first century Galilean carpenter, to a degree, but yet they are. And that's where you get into, you know, this, this, this, this journey towards a journey towards our better selves journey towards our inheritance in Christ. I mean, there's all sorts of different language that we can grab around that but yeah, there are very much transformations. I don't think I would be. I make a lot of videos because I am seeking transformation. That's your doing it in a lot of ways. Yeah. I, and, and I have conversations I mean, people might say well he's a minister he's trying to bring others to Christ. Yep. But I, in this, in this conversation. I, you bring things to me, you give things to me that are part of this transformation this ongoing transformation. And, you know, there have been there have been changes in my life over the last four years, by virtue of all of these relationships and conversations and I mean my monologue videos where I'm looking at a video and commenting on it. I'm trying to integrate it, you know. Yeah, yeah, I see that very much. Yeah, it's a good, it's a good method. I envy you. Because yeah, I feel like I have a lot of things in my mind that I absorbed. But to put them into something that's digestible and understandable by others so hard. And I somehow like thinking about doing something like that the commentaries or the dialogues, but it's so hard to make that step for me somehow because because the shiny object are so attractive. Yeah. And doing it doesn't mean. I mean, like I always say I have, I have 10 or 20 videos for everyone that gets made, because, because for me there's so many shiny objects out there and my wife, my wife last night said to me sat down said, Do you know your ADHD, I said yeah I've never. Oh, look at this video. Oh, look at that book. Look at it. Look at all these books. They didn't. And they're all shiny objects. I mean it's ideas are shiny objects. Oh, but then I realized I'm living in my head and I need to live in my relationships and I need to live in my body and live in my world. Yeah, and somehow we always do that. Sometimes the urge is stronger, and sometimes it's less strong to put it out. Yeah, sometimes I feel like I'm fine. Just, you know, embodiment and all the stuff I'm doing. Why, why am I, you know, trying to be more visible, but, but at the same time there is this thing that tells me, yeah, you have to put it out put it out, you know, well and and certainly there's this ego aspect of it, which is there, and to deny it would just be lying. But for me, the, the fun of it has been because I put it out there now I get to know you. And you bring things to me. And, and if part of the, you know, I'm really glad my, you know, I'm really glad my channel isn't way larger than it is because what I've learned is that it's, you know, it's harder and harder to get on my schedule, which means I, you know, now I don't get a chance to talk to you because I'm always talking to the people I've always talked to and it's good to keep talking to the people that I've always talked to because we're all growing together, but you still also have to. But you still also have to include new people and to get that balance right. Yeah, the renewal. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, well, I've got, I've got to land the plane here. I'll, I'll send you this link and you can decide whether or not you're happy with me sharing it or sharing a part of it. I thought the first kind of the first, but, but yeah, just let me know if you want to keep it private. That's fine. It's totally up to you. Okay, thank you. And thank you for having me. Thank you for having me. It's it's been a it's been a real pleasure and I've, like I said, I've learned a ton from you and I will, I will pray for you that. Thank you that you that you find the transformation that you're being drawn to. Thank you for. All right. Take care. Thank you very much.