https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qzSpDbAyUvg

 All right. Well, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Yeah, so I'm an ESL teacher. Oh, where? I live in Canada, Saskatchewan. Okay. Regina. And yeah, so yeah, I lived in India initially, of course. And I moved here about four years ago. Okay. I did some studies in Toronto and then I moved here. My parents live in Saskatchewan, so. Okay. Yeah. About four years ago. All right. Yeah. How did you find my channel? I am reluctant to say so, but I think it was probably through the algorithm and through like the Jordan Peterson videos. Yeah. I was an initial fanboy of his and jumped off the fanwagon, as you've probably seen by my comment. Well, tell me more about that. That's interesting. Initially, of course, I think it's something that you've addressed quite thoroughly in your videos where you've talked about like how he kind of caught the wave right at the point when it was rising to its peak. Like there was all these questions that were bubbling under the surface. Yeah. In terms of what people would, all the neglected questions that people failed to ask in popular discourse. They were just bubbling out of the surface. So the moment somebody addressed like any one of them even like tangentially it's like, oh, finally something. So that's why he bubbled up. Why did you jump off the wave? Yeah, because I was just like looking for someone vicariously to express like even like some semblance of the questions which I had, which weren't being addressed anywhere, even like in the more obscure online pathways. Okay. More obscure like online debates which don't even get that many views. Those points weren't even being brought up there, but he managed to bring up quite a few of those. So when the resonance hits you in different like levels, kind of like makes you want to latch on to them and you're kind of rooting for them. It became a bit of a hero worshipping thing. Yeah. Yeah. So what are you interested in? Philosophy for sure. Philosophy for sure? What kind of philosophy? Of course, I'm just a novice and a rookie and all that. We all are. There's too much philosophy to be an expert of it. There's not many experts. Yeah, metaphysics probably is like my primary of interest. Okay. Just like what lies at the surface of our apprehension of any topic. Like even my primary of interest is especially like when people talk about science and mathematics, like what lies right below the surface? Like when you understand something, you're always understanding it based on some prior knowledge. I don't know if you can use the word knowledge, but some prior ability to apprehend it. Like anything, no matter how complex the topic is, all the mathematics and all the philosophy that exists in the world, all the science, it's presumed that we can somehow apprehend it. Like that's part of that. That's another, that's like an unspoken presumption of the scientific method or mathematics that all of this could be apprehended in some fashion due to some ability. That's like understanding that ability is my prime concern. Okay. Okay. Are you religious at all? I grew up Methodist. Methodist. Okay. Yeah. And yeah, now I'm as usual that as with many people in this meaning crisis world, I'm grappling with all those questions. Okay. I mean, of course, the Methodist Church and its doctrines, of course, I know I'm not like a strict adherent to any of that, but just the faith itself. Okay. Well, what was on your mind? What did you want to talk about today? I've got a list. Oh, you got a list. All right. And to be honest, I'm a bit of a fanboy, so a bit starstruck to be honest. Oh, that'll pass. That'll pass. Don't worry about that. Let's start. Okay, so that's actually I want to talk about Calvinism a bit. Oh, okay. That's a fun thing for a Methodist to want to get into. I mean, I'm not here to defend Methodist versus Calvinist. That's fine. Actually, to some degree, I'm a bit ignorant actually to how you would constru the concept, how the concepts in your conception of determinism and that dialectic between determinism and agency, how that fits into your conception of Calvinism. Well, so Calvinism, Calvin is a funny thing because Calvin is always known for this specific area, even though in terms of his writing, it by no means was a predominant area. It came to predominance about a hundred years after Calvin when I think what was happening in European philosophy was that God number one was sort of receding, deism was coming to the fore. And so all of these issues of determinism versus free will sort of got thrust onto the theological stage. And the major Calvinist doctrine that looks at the major Calvinist document that looks at this question is really the canons of dork. Which came out of the Senate of dork in 1619 and that was in many ways a multinational Protestant ecumenical synod, reformed ecumenical synod that had a lot of other forces going on as many things in the history of Protestantism did. There was very much an urban versus rural dynamic to it. There was very much a new enlightenment thought versus kind of an anti-enlightenment aspect to it. And so what my tradition, the Dutch Calvinists that I grew up in, sort of were the Calvinists that kept, they were kind of the perpetual opposition to the newest thing down the line. And so the way that works, the way that worked itself out would be a strong doctrinal priority to things like divine election, perseverance of the saints, all of these five points of Calvinism that come down through the canons of dork. But what has always caught my attention about this is that number one, if you read Calvin, so there's a Richard Mueller was a Calvin scholar that taught for a number of years at Calvin Seminary, my alma mater. And part of the, he wrote a very interesting paper and gave this talk in a few places asking the question was Calvin a Calvinist because these points weren't necessarily prominent in Calvin's thought, partly because these points were shared by Lutherans and Roman Catholics. These were not controversial points. And I think the reason they weren't controversial points was because philosophically they were simply uninteresting because in a number of ways it was the action of God in things like Providence that you can read about that in the Heidelberg Catechism, Lord's Day 10, where God brings fat years and lean years and God is doing all of this choosing. Once God sort of continued to recede through deism and then through ongoing secularism, the question of God being an active agent in the history of the world that could stop things like floods and fires, that suddenly became an issue. And so all of these new ideas became battlegrounds and they were treated as battlegrounds of conservative versus progressive movements. And so when you get to say Methodism, the Methodism very much comes on the wake of people saying, okay, well, we have to choose, we have to choose. But that has all sorts of philosophical stuff behind it getting it to that place. Because if you go back and you look at Calvin's life or read his Institutes or read the Bible, well, why would Calvin preach if he didn't believe that the people listening to him had to choose to do the right thing? In other words, Calvin very easily was able to hold his double predestination in the same book as all these admonitions towards all kinds of things people were supposed to do. So in my opinion, whatever Calvinism should mean, it certainly means a certain sort of compatibilism where we very much see God as a chooser, which you see in texts like Ephesians and a whole number of biblical texts, but also an arena where we are active agents who have will and choice. And so I think, and what happened in inter-church fights between Armenians and Calvinists is that Calvinists begin taking on this weird position where they've got God doing all this decreeing and then at the same time when they go into church, they're admonishing people to live holy lives and do all kinds of things. And so at some point you begin to wonder, well, what's with this? And so for the Armenians, it was just easiest to just, we're just going to get rid of all of this talk about predestination and election and all of that and we're just going to make everything about choice. Okay, the difficulty that you have when you do that though is what do you do with all these passages of the Bible where God knows everything in advance and everything's written in the book and all of this stuff. And so the problem is that you had worldviews that very easily were capable of holding a very sovereign God and human agency. And so to me, in fact, the older traditions of which Calvin is an heir is able to hold that and so I'm reluctant to throw out this very sovereign God because either way, because of the philosophical issues that came to the fore, either way you're going to have a problem. And so I'd rather sort of be someone who says, well, you know what? I think we're going to keep a very sovereign God like we find in the canons of Dor and also say, well, people have responsibility to choose because I don't see how we're going to get around that either. So ask me to square it. I'll just tell you I can't. I don't know. I see that in the previous videos as well. Yeah, so that's sort of where I come down on that and then people want to bring in Molanism which is I see people using all of these ideas of foreknowledge and I look at that and I say, well, okay, we're sort of trying to rig something up. Was Molanism the one where God has foreknowledge of the unknown variables that we can't see? Is that the one? Yeah, it has to do with foreknowledge and almost every, see even Arminianism is a way to try to, it's a Calvinist heresy actually. You know, it's sort of like all Protestants are at a deeper level Catholics. Arminians are at a deeper level Calvinists. They're just protesting a certain aspect of the rest of Calvin and that's kind of the way it is. And then Molanism is a way to sort of square it and I don't find that debate terribly interesting. So when people want to fight about it, I usually just shrug because I don't think we know enough to answer questions about what it's like to be God. We don't even know what it's like to be us. So then a lot of questions like that. I simply tried my best to defer to scripture and say this is what scripture seems to teach. So I'm going to go with that and call me a heretic if you want. That's I can't stop you. So if you're nice and you just want to think it and not say it that's okay too. For me the question with the determinism in again in the age of decay in the current age. Yeah. Since like I don't how does the fall fit into your doctrine because Okay, so let me try to get this off so abstract. So at the fall like in my conception of the fall like I mean, I don't again. I'm not completely clear on this but at the fall it's quite clear that human beings the gap between human beings and God emerges. Yes, but then at the same time does the rest of creation also fall? and human beings because I think that's that's a key issue when it comes for me to square God's determinism of God's predestination because if creation also fell in the fall and first of all did creation have the same kind of free will or agency that man has so that it could warp itself in its own way or did God specify exactly how it would be warped because both of those I mean the first one is less disturbing than the second option where God says no and now there's going to be like baby like baby birds which come out and smash their brother skull in that that seems I don't know on an aesthetic metaphysical level that seems disturbing to me. Yeah. That's how it harkens back to like a pagan God almost. Yeah. I mean and so how does the dialect how does how does the fall fit in with like a version? I mean again, I know this is not like but just for me just for someone like you with your knowledge to try and help me square this. How would you place the fall in line with God's because I do agree between like the narrative structure is like the narrative structure of history is a way for God to his glory to be revealed But at the same time was like with the fall how does that change God's initial picture of how the narrative would flow like what would your best guess be? Well, so there's a there's an old fight in my tradition that came about in the early and mid 20th century between infrolaps Arianism and superlaps Arianism and that fight essentially pits some basically asked the question to what degree to what degree does did God to what how did God think about the fall? Did he ordain it? Well, that would make God the author of evil. So you can't say that so so so when did God think about this? Basically, so you have this problem you have the question of divine election. So did God elect people before the fall before the foundation of the earth? Well, why would God elect people before the fall? If well, he knew the fall was going to happen. Okay. Well, how did I mean that hosts of questions come up that we can't answer. Okay. And what's what's part of what's interesting? Is that and these questions are still live and these questions these questions are are by no means new or brought up by the Protestant reformers Church Fathers like Irenaeus wrestled with questions like this origin, but what's interesting when you look at say the wrestling of some of these questions in the 20th and 21st century and you'll see the wrestling of these questions in the let's say the second and third century. The philosophical and historical context of these wrestlings are also quite different. So I like to say things like the you know part of what let's say in Genesis one. We have this thing that when I was taught reform doctrine as a youth we called the cultural mandate which is be fruitful and multiply and have Dominion over the earth and and one of the things that Genesis early chapters talks about is human human Dominion over the rest of nature. And so what happens when we rebel from God? Well, there are lots of ways to talk about this one way to talk about it would be that when we rebel from God nature rebels against us and that seems to be a fairly a way of talking about it that resonates with people the difficulty that that far beyond Christian conversations have wrestled with has been why does nature seem so hostile to us and the the conceptualization of the rebellion in the fall is one way to answer that. You know, obviously other pagan ways to answer that were Gnostic ways that said that the the creator of the material world was a second-rate God as opposed to the creator of the of the immaterial world. So you have these dual isms. So there's there's all these all these kinds of ways to engage that what what you know what Christianity and Calvinism in particular tries to lay at our feet, which is a tough thing to lay at humanity's feet is okay. So the the evil we find in creation was brought here by us by humanity. Now that then runs into issues like well our tsunamis evil are predatory animals like lions and tigers and bears evil. So questions just go on and on and on and again, I can't pretend to know all of these answers. The best I usually do as a pastor is do a lot of listening to someone and try and find a framing of a reformed answer that might address their questions as best I could rather than create rather than concocting some overall, you know, monarchical vision answer that answers all of these questions and all of their potentiality. So that's so so again for me. Alvin Plantinga who's who's a philosopher grew up Christian reform taught at Calvin College. His brother was my his brother Neil was my theola was my Systematics Prof at Calvin Seminary Calvin Alvin Plantinga in his book God freedom and Evil basically runs through the problem of evil and says it's not really a philosophical problem, but it is a pastoral problem and I take that to heart. So when people bring me questions of this nature, I try to offer pastoral answers to do something to frame their suffering within a larger picture, but answering these questions is so so hard. So I thought maybe that's a tremendously long and unsatisfying response to your question. I don't know. Well, it's a I did and of course, I think anyone who thinks of this like just even without having read the literature would like I kind of like the idea of like creation rebelling against man that makes again, like you said has a resonance and to me it makes metaphysical sense perfectly but then there are perversions in nature which are like beyond the scope of how nature interacts with us. Yeah, I mean of course you perversion of course you think perversion you're using we see that God standards God standards against God against God but Like so the way I see it is like of course I like you said I cannot use God standards against him, but he has put those standards in me and he has he has like even though I have the broken image even though the broken fallen image of God we there is still there is still like when we try and understand something about the Bible we are still trying to apply this process of using some part of us to understand or whatever broken compass whatever broken internal resonance that we can have we're still trying to use that to navigate the Bible and I think I see us shelving that of course within the church shelving that for issues which are difficult shelving. So well, I'd say we shelve them when we're probably on stage on Sunday morning because the vast majority of our audience is usually dealing with fairly common issues, but those issues are probably not shelved in the quiet of a home visit or a pastoral conversation. And that's part of what so now we have this thing called YouTube where we seem to have near limited bandwidth to talk about just about any obscurity under the Sun. So now actually on YouTube we can do some of this processing whereas church time has a very limited bandwidth which which right now in contemporary America basically a pastor has sermon time between 20 minutes or an hour to deal with something and maybe a Sunday school where you get another hour, but people don't afford Church a whole lot of time, but as you go down lower into Bible studies or or discussion groups or something like that, you can begin to work on some of these issues and actually in all fairness in the church, there's lots of stuff written about this kind of stuff, but sort of what I think we've gotten used to in our culture is a certain laziness which says I've got this idea. I want an answer to it right now and in you know, I think the answer would be well, this might be something you're going to have to work on for the next few years. We're like, why do you mean next few years? I want my answer now and so even via YouTube or the internet or something you can actually get quite a few of the menu answers quickly, but there are so many of these kinds of questions out there too that it does take a community and an organization to work on them and but they're really hard. I like on this particular question. I like a lot of what CS Lewis tends to do with it because he tends to reach back and see nature as a fairly wild thing and that wildness CS Lewis sort of manages to frame as something which is you know, it is it might not be to our liking but Aslan, exactly, but sometimes it is and and so there's there's a lot more going on there than we usually are ready to admit. Again, no, I don't I don't really ask this question out of just pedantic curiosity. It's more because like it gets to the heart of like almost like one of the major differences between even Eastern and West. I mean and Christianity Eastern religion where like again, I'm making a broad oversimplification but like in the Eastern or more big in realms good and evil are just like co-actors or like you can play the role of the evil person. You can play the role of the good person. So the so the good isn't really ultimately truly the good. It's kind of they're both on equal footing of sorts. So when I ask the question like when I like again language trips me up when I say there are perversions in nature what I'm trying to get out is like is what in my broken image I can still kind of see as ultimately good good and the beautiful and the pure and whatever Paul says in that verse. I don't know. Is that really the good or if it's not and there is some way in which this all just has this narrative structure and you need both the good and the bad this it kind of goes back to Eastern religion or like that kind of a dial the the fallen dialectic be at the heart of reality or the in Yang dialectic being at the heart of reality which I don't know. Yeah, I was trying to avoid. Yeah, I think I think part of what happens in Christianity especially in some Western traditions like Calvinism is that God is so sovereign. God just fills up everything that in sometimes some unbiblical ways and certain biblical scholars have been playing with because if you if you you know, if you actually read the Bible which is supposed to be the thing that critiques my confessional my confessional theology you have the Elohim you have you know, just I was at a classes meeting and we sang the old, you know, we sang praise God from whom all blessings folks place got praise God above the heavenly hosts and every time I sing that now I think now what are y'all thinking in your mind those heavenly hosts are are they are they gods and even in the New Testament you have these principalities and powers in other words so often a careful reading of the Bible shows that there's a lot more going on than our Protestant Western imaginary seems to afford and and Missy Allah just have been making this point for a number of years. There's the excluded middle and and for example in the reform doctrine that I was raised with you know, there was is you know, to what degree does this category of chaos fit into into what we're talking about and and what is God's relationship with chaos and and again, if you read the Old Testament and the new there are passages where there are passages where you know, okay, so God brings God brings the hordes of Babylon on down against his chosen people and this is God's choice for them and we listen we hear that we think all that raping and pillaging is that is that what God wants and and so I think some of the tightness of of certain traditions that we inherited from say the Protestant Reformation that didn't have a lot of knowledge that we've sort of dug up in the last 200 years in terms of archaeology and and learn from other cultures. It didn't really wasn't really able to incorporate those things. So there's there's a lot going on. But again in most church systems churches sort of lead with okay, this is what we can we got to fit this into this spoon, you know, there's a lot out there, but I'm just going to give you this spoon and that's part of what goes on in church. Hmm. Yeah, I mean. Again. It's so hard to like just like again that the way like if I could just lay it I'll just and this will be the last on this this topic because I know this is going to have a lot of words that fudge in it. Yeah, a lot of Christian language that yeah, you're going I mean if you do choose to post it people would be like what the heck they thought this one's fun already. No, don't don't don't don't this is a fun video. This is what people will want to watch a lot of it's kind of like like a scientifically minded person would look at it and say I mean you loosely using that word would be like a bunch of gobbledygook. Yeah, just like a word salad. It's like exactly but and yeah, and the Christian people will be like oh, it's still still pedantic. Or they'll just shoot at us for our various positions because that's true Christianity in some ways is like trench warfare and World War one. Everybody's defending their lines for fights that everybody else is like why are you fighting over that? So how I've squared it my brain like so far I like again it's going to sound simplistic as a God created a perfect order again. Why did it why did the perfect triune God living in perfect love and Union suddenly decide to make the world and have this narrative structure flow? That's the question but God had a initial perfect plan man truly rebelled truly creating a plan which was not the initial plan but also at some point. I don't know how chronology even works metaphysically and in terms of the details of Satan is in the world because he's he's operant. So that is the thing piece I was initially missing earlier. So Satan who was an angel of considerable power was able to maybe affect the perversion that I that I would call perversion that is apparent throughout the world and and at the same time when Adam and Eve sin they go into rebellion and nature who was like CS Lewis says is a sibling is now in contention with humanity. So that's one part of the foreign dialectic and the other part is Satan is now running a mock in creating and that's the only way I am able to like square it. Well, that's a very good way and that's that squares with a lot of the Bible. And the only reason I can put a little bit of merit in my notion of what perversion and evil is is because again, like I think I've I posted on one of your comments not that you would remember any of you have thousands of comments, but I posted like once saying metaphysics and I'm such a fan. There's only there's a certain point which will get it to you. There's a certain point which it will get you to just by following the logic but some point you need the revelation and the revelation of what to goodness or the face of God is to me is Jesus. So so by looking at Jesus I can get a fair idea of what he would consider perversion is just by and I would consider some of those things. But now we should also keep in mind if we're going to be canonical Christians, there's Jesus and Matthew Luke, Matthew Mark Luke and John. There's also Jesus in Revelation and Jesus in Revelation, you know begins as this, you know, the son of man figure with a two-edged sword coming out of his mouth riding a warhorse and and the the people of the earth screaming, you know, you know for the mountains to fall on them because save them from the the one on the throne and the and so I mean, it's difficult things. I resolved by that by saying that I only look at what the Jesus who was recorded on earth. See and what it see the book of Revelation is one of my favorite books in the Bible because of for so many reasons. It's it's just said it's an it's an astoundingly complex masterpiece of revising Old Testament material with the revelation of Jesus Christ and so it's applied and but it's applied in terms of this in terms of this in terms of this, you know dramatic symbolism and so yeah, yeah, but no, you're exactly right. Jesus calls us Abba but part of the picture of Jesus is his crucifixion. In fact, it's very central and what does it say about God? To abandon his son on a cross. I mean you can't you can't just look at you know, some of the stuff that Jesus says and not incorporate also the crucifixion into that but also the resurrection. So it's but the crucifixion was still. Perpetrated by man. The yes. Yes. Well, shouldn't God like send down warm fuzzies. I mean, I mean that's the heart of the the classical world. I was just listening to Glenn. I would say his name wrong Scrivener talked to Tom Holland and you know that the thing that the classical world could not understand and Islam has the same objection how God could let his son be crucified. I mean that makes no sense. If you've got a fairly if you've got a worldview that looks like Job's three friends and that alignment of God allowing his son to be crucified is incredibly important when we see things in the world that we say how could a loving God allow that to happen and I can go ahead. I can kind of I mean I can see that that's a major a major momentous symbolic event slash continuing event. I mean on continuing event but something of continuing import but I could I could always kind of understand that because in my my own heart. I was thinking since as by nature humans we were aspiring creatures. I always thought I always like but I can kind of understand Lucifer aspired to be God and in fact without Jesus coming down it doesn't if they would and and bang and actually suffering we would there would always be that gap between us and God in the sense of but it's easy for you to say because you haven't suffered you haven't you haven't actually and then he's like, okay, I'll come down and literally take the worst possible. Oh, that's the best stuff. That's the worst possible. I'll do that and it's like is gap close now and now it's like okay now Christ our brother but Christ is God. He's our father now where now we're in the now there's no there's no more separation. So I could always kind of understand that in that way, but I still see that is man still perpetrated the evil but again going back to the initial question. Why did of course God in God wasn't just reacting to what was happening. So I do see like how any the arguments of God's perfect ordaining of everything is there because God knew at the beginning like that's the biggest question. Why did if God is so perfect trying? Why did he even create this entire? That's a big question. And again, so so even even your framing of it before because I can frame it in another way. I can say, okay, well, let's say let's say that you have a daughter a precious daughter a daughter that you love and she's wonderful and innocent beautiful and perfect. Think about the worst neighborhood in the world that you know, would you let your daughter go into that neighborhood? And if your daughter went into that neighborhood unescorted by you and let bad things happen and then your daughter cries out to you and you could do something fairly simple. I mean if a couple of angels can blind the whole town of Sodom and lead, you know getting Jesus off the cross would be no big deal, which is exactly what Jesus markers note, you know, he saved others. He couldn't save himself. And if you see the amazing things that Jesus does in the story, you know, and even at a very human level the whole up the whole way up to the cross. It's shown step-by-step as you know, Jesus talks to Pilate you the worst attorney in the world could get Jesus out of that. I mean pilot did not want to crucify him his wife's like don't touch him and pilots like I don't want to do a favor for these people. I hate these people. Give me a chance to stick it to him. Just say something and Jesus is like and so, you know, the narrative has built into it. All of these all of these complexities that I think are are extremely helpful for affording us the idea that God is I see this all the time God cake takes the kind of risks that we look at as irresponsible and and so that's why I say tell people don't play chicken with God because you think you take risks read the Bible God takes the kind of risks that none of us would tell anybody to take but then again, God this gets into another one of my things that God is more so God is more loving and more hazardous and again, Lewis brings that into Aslan and and I think that's I think Lewis Lewis and in terms of the 20th century, I think was able to talk about these things better than a lot of people but they challenge us. I think at all of the ways that we you know, Freud imagines that we sort of project ourselves up into the sky and imagine ourselves to be God and that's fair. That's true. We do that and then God keeps doing things that say you think you're God watch me do this you think you're good. Watch me do this. You think you take risks watch me do this and and at some point was we have to say I if I'm God if I'm my own God, I've got a really bad God but then of course the whole issue comes down to trust. Can I trust a God who would let his cherished son go into an awful neighborhood be brutalized by its inhabitants and give him amazing power and he does nothing and then Garden of Gethsemane. I mean the whole story is just that the more you understand that story. It's just it's it's it's revelation. That's why I see it. I mean, yeah. There's nothing more I can do the add to that. Now I'm if it's I just want to like nose completely take a like turn. Yeah time is limited you'd use it. I'm sorry. That's probably talking too long. Yeah. No, I don't want to talk. I want to hear you but on on these particular topics. So I have this one. I don't this is just random out of the blue. So causation and like now these are just like two not just realizations thoughts. I don't know like challenges almost to a lot of people challenges to the concepts of causation and also challenges regarding the concepts of emergence. So this is to more secular minded the secular minded view of both these concepts with causation. How can I don't understand how anyone talks about causation without the idea of an agent for example, for instance of everything every everything in the universe is perfectly correlated. If I would let's just say the causal chain the caught the chain of correlations is unbroken. For us to even go in and say that a certain event leads to another event. How can you even say that without invoking an agent because everything is correlated perfectly. It's all you don't you don't know. So the way we do it is we go in and say we interfere with the system and then the system morphs we interfere with the system again it morphs in another way it mocks in another way and then we find the similarities between the way the system morphs and say, okay, this is the real principle underlying system. Oh, this is the real principle that underlies the system but that couldn't even happen if there was no agent like even on the most basic metaphysical level. How could how can you even speak of it? How can you even speak of something causing something else or these this is the ultimate structure of reality without even bringing in the agent. It makes no sense. That's just a challenge. I'm throwing out to the comment section and I want to hear your thoughts on it. No, that's a great point. I've been I've been I'm always reading too many books at once. So I'm rereading the metaphysical club and and the the American pragmatists get into these issues and they're really hard issues because just as you I think nicely articulated when when you're talking about these these causal events the agent is well, where does the agent come from and and and every even the way we use language kind of excludes the agent as something apart from that and so I can understand the desire to have everything just dissolve into some grand some grand determinism but that doesn't necessarily solve the problems either. So these are these are really interesting. These are really interesting problems and and they're I think part of the reason that they keep coming up all the time is because it's just sort of how we work because things are working in front of us and say, oh I'm causing this and and every that framework excludes me from the causal connection which you know, it's it's so funny because we have these we have these dominant paradigms like like materialism and then we're going all over the place talking about human, you know human caused climate change and it's like, well, wait a minute is if humanity is just simply a part of nature exactly you can't talk about that unless you assume we are capable creatures of you know, everybody doing certain things in order to reverse this and so on and so forth. So now you're exactly right. It's a great point and it's a point that but but to make these points with people it's it's really hard for a lot of people to grasp that because again, we're we're so busy looking for looking for opportunities and avoiding threats and that just grabs our salience landscape and a subtle point like that just over people's heads and it's kind of a point which has no pragmatic utility because it you don't you don't you you act as if that is in fact when I played all this money when Jordan Peterson like says that I'm a pragmatist but like science was very pragmatic like all the assumptions which are built in the science was very pragmatic. So it's not this is not like some new philosophy which is in opposition with science like right the entire like all of material science is based on pragmatic assumption that every level. And it's a pragmatic assumption to assume that there is causes that leads you to have sufficient faith to go in and act as if that happens and then discoveries galore right application. Well and I mean again, I was reading in the metaphysical club today and and I think it was Pierce who in one of his papers basically pointed out in the paper that causation is this is this thing that's just sort of out there that everyone imagines is sort of just out there. It's it's simply a presupposition and can you defend causation? It's like at some point there's just the pieces on the board you have to you play with the pieces that you have in front of you but people act like all the pieces are simply self-evident and no it's way more complex than that. And and with emergence, I think this is like the most neglected point people like I think that's the biggest like get out of jail free car that I ever seen people pull like this happened and it emerges. So, okay, so we have so you're saying ultimately I mean not you but the picture is ultimately everything boils down to the most basic fundamental level of reality what that is. Let's just say for now it's quantum physics where in quantum physics is it encoded that this particular next level of reality is going to be encoded and the quantum particles have no concept that there's that the human beings walking around at some arbitrarily detached level of reality and why should laws of law why should any laws of logic that we could apprehend apply at those higher levels? Why shouldn't they just be completely governed by what's happening below that like why would we act or why would we speak in such a way that evolution for example? There's no randomness in the worldview of the people who propose evolution. There is no such thing as only epistemological randomness there's no ontological randomness. It's all just our failure to be able to comprehend the variables. That's right. That's right. In that sense everything is already predetermined everything is preselected everything is being preselected everything is another time. Why is linear time assumed in evolution? When all the other science says that there is no linear time. So it's just the block theory of time whether past the present the future exist simultaneously. So why would we why would we assume that it makes sense now and any design is explained away because it's moving like this when it's actually not moving like this. It's not moving linearly. I don't I just don't I don't see how those questions go unexplored. Oh because we don't like to explore questions that bother us. We like to we like to explore the questions that we like to explore that usually often questions that that fit whatever worldview we have for whatever motivation is underneath which most of the time we don't even know that either. So oh it's those are those are all great questions. I love that Mike. I might title this talk emergence is the biggest get out of jail free card. It's a great line. I sometimes I'm using Leo Laporte's episode naming strategy where you grab some good line in the conversation and put it as a title because that's a great line. But really because like if you're so if you're so like you're so committed to any of this how can you suddenly like even a deep continuity like John Viveki talks about you're so committed to this. Why wouldn't you talk about it as deep as possible level. Now you will use language like oh because that's just not pragmatically useful but in your ultimate ontology everything is connected. So why wouldn't you why are you choosing this arbitrary level? Is it just a post hoc justification for you wanting that's kind of what I see the project of a lot of people being like from from the from the New Atheist days to now it's to justify in some sort of a physicalist materialist way all the ontology and then just operate as if wisdom and stuff can be talked about in the usual normal common ways that normal people speak about them not normal people but like people usually generally speak about wisdom. So like they might like Sam Harris might be a determinist but then in another in another instance he might just talk about but that they might talk about like consent in some court case between like women and men being some they just talk about in the normal language. Why wouldn't you incorporate the determinism language there. That's right. That's right. Well and I just get out of jail. Oh no because this is humans we've emerged beyond that. No I agree and and someone who I spoke to recently said you know they used to be a fan of Sam Harris until they basically someone asked Sam Harris. Okay, you got all this determinism. Do you believe that with your children? No, I lied to them and it's like well, okay. What on earth does that mean Sam? You know it's and this is a this again is a point that Lewis Lewis just made it again and again and miracles and so many of his other books that on one hand out here. They're making all of this do having all this fancy talk about this stuff, but it's not the world that they live in and and and in all fairness, that's what pastors gripe at people in church about too because they they do all this fancy talk and they don't live as if Jesus rose from the dead for them and we as human beings are are tremendously are tremendously bad at living according to even our own principles. That's true. I'm just going to do this for one second. Okay, we have about five more minutes. I know I know that's why that's why I'm zooming through the notes. Okay, so the last point I think which would be like quick to touch on is like a so do you feel like the do you feel like ultimately since you have conversations with people like John Vaveky and Congress other people who see like and and they have conversations with people like John Vaveky and Congress other people who see like and there's almost this assumed idea that the mission is the same and that mission is the preservation of the species or the flourishing of the species like like the flourishing of the species what a meaningfully like and and all of those for other people like more secularly minded people will be tied towards preservation of the species and some But like in the Christian view ultimately we don't we are not in the hands of preserving our own species. In fact, it's almost been foretold that we will be we will fail at being our own salvation. So even like a John Peterson who says who's kind of his his his telos and his eschatology is kind of like who knows how far we could take this if we all just got and then I get the biblical and and and and for someone who talks a lot about the Tower of Babel Jordan Peterson and talking about I think that that story should have just kind of shot into his brain the moment he said who knows how far we can take it because I think it's been foretold that you can't take it that far. So like we there is a fundament I see there there being a fundamental clash between our vision and not our vision. I don't want to Christian vision but my or the Christian world's vision of what God's God's ultimate purposes and and our ability to save ourselves, which is non-existent and the secular idea of us being able to save ourselves. Yes. Yes. Now that's right. And but but I think there's overlap in that. I mean in I one of my favorite one of my favorite passages of the Bible is the beginning of the book of Acts where Jesus disciples come to him and say now you restore the kingdom to Israel and Jesus dodges them. He says well, it's not for you to know the times in the place, but you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you and you will be my witnesses and I think that is the I think witnesses of Christ witnesses for Christ witnesses with Christ. This is the Christian mission and and this has to do with with bearing witness. And so we bear we bear witness for samples of the life of the age to come. That's what I think Jesus miracles were and I think we use whatever power we have to to do that. And so in many ways the many of the projects of modernity deeply embedded within Christianity have been wonderful things where there are fewer wars where I was I was again. I was just reading, you know, the metaphysical club and Dewey Dewey had a very John Dewey had a very beloved child and that child died of encephalitis. I think it was and and today and in many cases if if born in place like Canada, the United States that child likely would have been saved. That's a good thing. That's a witness to the kingdom. And I think and I think so having conversations with I mean basically in the beginning of the book of Acts Jesus says you're going to go out there and you're going to be my witnesses in, you know, 10,000 different places with people of all sorts of different realms and persuasions and the Holy Spirit is going to have to teach you how to do that. And so that's what we do. And I I agree with you 100 percent. I I don't think we can save ourselves. I don't think we can save this world and people are like, you know, I know there's plenty of there's plenty of climate skeptics on on my channel or my listeners, which is fine. And and I'm not one of them and people are like, well, well, well, don't you think that we're putting humanity at risk? Yeah. Well, we've sort of been doing that right from the start. What type you know, what kind of you know, at what point in humanity haven't we put the species at risk? Well now it's on a global scale. Yeah, probably. But you know, we've all been at risk all the time right from the start from the moment you're conceived you're at risk in this world. It's just the way it is and and what I find in Christianity is not necessarily an escapism, but it's it's really hard to argue that Jesus Christ didn't make the world remarkably better, especially given the fact that as Rene Girard notes almost all the enemies of Christianity in the West try to use you know, basically assume Christianity and argue against the church and it's like we got a civil war because I'm not sad about that situation. So now you're you're you're very much right. And so we we bear witness as best we can wherever we are and that's some of what I I hope to do on my YouTube channel. So it's why I make videos sometimes I'm a bad witness but you know, I just pray that God will you know use use whatever he wills and do good things with it and bless the world. So that's my mission. I got to run because I got someone coming up in a minute. So thank you so much. Thank you. We'll have to talk again. This was fun. So yeah, everybody. So if I have your permission to post this for sure, I'll I'll post it and everybody on the discord server is going to be like you got to get on the discord server. We want to talk to you. So there you go. Thanks for talking. Thank you. Bye bye.