https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4p9JHLQ1Os8

 I had to reboot, so sorry about the wait. Well, how have you been? I've been great, how have you been? I've been fine, I've been fine. This is our second talk, so... Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'll have to find... Well, our second talk in this way, you've been on the Discord and... Yeah, of course. You've chatted that way. Well, what's on your mind for today? I mean, I have a... Of course, as usual, I have a whole bunch of questions and concerns. Okay. Yeah. So, I have some more pragmatic questions as well as some of the usual theoretical questions that I would like to ask you if you have thoughts on. Okay, well, let's jump right in. Yeah. So, what I've been thinking about lately has been the relationship between dialectic and this inexhaustible monas, or this otherness of God, and the dialectic that... So, this is going on the theoretical side of it. The reality seems to present itself to us in this way where, again, we have always, no matter what we're trying to break down, no matter what we're trying to comprehend and understand, there's this thesis, anti-thesis, and then this part that we do. And reality just presents itself to us in a way where, no matter what we do, it seems that they're mutually contradictory truths, which seem to be true in and of themselves. And within this, there's the confusion of... Suppose if you're looking at it from the Christian angle, within it, we're trying to... We're always trying to figure out, are these... Which parts of reality are... And from my perspective, again, from my Christian denomination, which parts are part of God's design, and which parts are due to the fall or whatever, the human original sins. Which parts are because of... Yeah, so let's start with that. What do you have to say from there? Big. Well, your first statement, I mean, inexhaustible moreness and otherness are related, but they're not exactly the same thing. So my God number one, God number two, Holy, Holy, Holy is God number two. That's inexhaustible otherness. Inexhaustible moreness is found in God one and God two. So, I mean, the point that you raised, I mean, the second point that you made, no matter what we do, we find contradictory truths presenting themselves. Which part of the reality are part of God's design and which parts are corruption? And right there, we're sort of non-dualist Bob, who grew up the son of a Christian reform minister who stalks me on Twitter and YouTube comment sections, lovingly. I mean, the whole point about monism or non-duality is that that distinction that you just laid out, which is deep within Christianity, that distinction is illusory. And so obviously in certain ancient religious and metaphysical systems, their assertion is that the distinction is illusory, which then of course leads to the duality of seeing it and not seeing it. And so that's the point I keep making with Bob. He keeps pushing non-duality. I'll say you've got non-duality and you have duality, so now you've got another one. And you know, you're exactly right. These things just keep arising. And theologically, who was I talking to the other day? Oh, I was talking to, I've had this conversation with a few people. There's a Sikh who comes to my meetup sometimes, and he was, you know, Sacramento was just like the United Nations in terms of people. And my neighborhood in particular is very United Nations-ish with varying samplings from all over the place. So he's a Sikh and he's got his graduate degree now, and he's looking for work right now, which I really feel bad for. He's looking for, he's hoping to teach, you know, comparative religion or something in a secular college, like a community college, his mother teaches in a community college. And so he was in the neighborhood dropping someone off, and so he knocked on my door and he says, I can never get a slot, I'm a lot easier to get to in person than I am on the internet. Which is a good thing because there's a lot more people on the internet. But I was talking to him about the fact that Christianity, and my tradition in particular, is always dealing with, you know, so this one guiding light of my little sub-Christian tradition of Christianity, Abram Kuyper. Abram Kuyper was just an interesting polymath. You know, he founded a university, he founded a newspaper, he was Prime Minister of the Netherlands, he founded a split-off denomination that merged with another, I mean the guy in a, how on earth in one lifetime did he do so much? Well, the Netherlands is a small country, cut down on travel time. But, so he was a guy who emphasizes both the antithesis, which is exactly the aspect you pointed out, but also common grace. And so once we have this duality, then of course, I was talking to someone the other day who's been listening to a lot of Eric Weinstein. You know, Eric Weinstein calls them superpositions. And it's sort of Hegelian. So you have thesis, antithesis, synthesis. And so, you know, the dualities very quickly become triune. And these things, you know, they're, we human beings are not going to resolve them. Now, why is that? So I was listening this morning because I'm thinking about doing a video on Game B, which suddenly when I saw the Rebel Wisdom, the story of Game B, it was like, oh, now I understand why Brett Weinstein makes the kind of noises he does. He's been having these conversations over here. Now it all sort of fits together. So when you're thinking sort of in that secularish space that has a bias against theism, especially Christian theisms, and you see these patterns emerge all over the place, it kind of makes you want to watch more Jonathan Peugeot. Because Peugeot, of course, one of the things that I've been thinking about a lot with Peugeot is that part of the power of symbolism, the weakness of symbolism and the power of symbolism, as is often true, are sort of the same thing. You can map it all over the place. So, I mean, pointing out this aspect of the Christian story, well, why do we bump into this all the time? Now, the simulationists will say, well, that's the coding of the simulation that we're in. Theists will say, you know, this is the project of God. And that you can find ideas like that in the Church Fathers. And there was recently a row at Calvin College over some couple of professors that were sort of dabbling in this in a little too much of a public way to indulge in some superlapsarian thinking and got shown the door. So, you know, yeah. What do you think? I don't have an answer for you. I was just thinking, maybe I could ask some questions which you could maybe answer. Maybe you were not even going to release this conversation in a way, maybe even just keeping in your mind that you're not going to release the conversation. Because for me, a lot of it is not... So, with the topic I was just... I don't bring it up just out of pure idle curiosity. The thing is, I focus on this one question. What is it? What development could happen in the world? What thing could be revealed in reality? Or what could I find out about the past? But in a way which is convincing enough, which could actually cause me to all but lose my faith. Like what... I mean, I feel that if I were to make an honest reading of the Bible, an honest take on the Christian faith, I do feel that there are certain things which if revealed in the spirit of honesty, I would not be able to uphold my faith in the light of those things. There would be no way for me to reconcile. And the thing that frightens me is that there are people who I respect and thought leaders who I feel would... And maybe this is just my own projection of them, but I do feel that they would try to reconcile even these things which I feel are irreconcilable, should they present themselves in reality. An example of that would be... Like I was talking when I had the conversation with, I think, Karen from the meeting, I was saying that... With who? Is it Karen from the meeting code or is it somebody... Oh, Karen, yeah, Karen from the meeting code. And I said that it was a simple and almost silly example. If I were to discover that there were aliens, if I were to discover that there was any like... That would be very hard for me to reconcile with the metaphysics which drives me to accept Christianity. So that's just one example. But just as a side note, but the broader point that I'm trying to make is that when dealing with this dialectic nature of reality and trying to figure out which parts are part of the original design, I mean, that is the great hope of Christianity is that there is this, like, as you said, this dualism, that there is this... Which would point ultimately to God's goodness. But if reality were... If there wasn't this dualism, it would be very hard, again, for me to accept the goodness of God and the whole stato cause would start to fall down. So that's my question to you. What do you think? What could present itself in reality that would cause you to be... It would be irreconcilable. What scientific development? What could you discover? That's a really good question. And the... Obviously, the question for each of us is answered individually because there are many people for whom, and, you know, we've been paying some... I've been paying some attention to it on my channel. There are many people for whom something happens and they give up their faith. For C.S. Lewis, you know, so Lewis was in many ways a forerunner for so many of the conversations we've been having because he's... Same conversation I had with Raj yesterday here in my office. You know, he was born to a lovely woman and a rather cold, withholding father, and she dies at age six. And father doesn't quite know what to do with him, and so they try English boarding schools and they're a disaster. And so finally hooks him up with the father's old tutor, who makes Sam Harris look like a lightweight. And, you know, that's where Lewis really gets his education from this, you know, from this guy who has completely deconstructed and debunked Christianity angrily and means it personally. And then, of course, Lewis takes that and fully embraces that and goes off to the First World War and, you know, has the right kind of wound that sets him out for the rest of the war, but the buddy with whom he has a pact dies in the war. And, you know, he winds up having a sexual relationship, a long-term sexual relationship with the guy's mother and, and, and, and, and he's a nerd and, you know, somewhere along the way he bumps into... At Oxford he bumps into Tolkien and eventually becomes a theist and then becomes a Christian. Lewis, you know, had in many ways was able to square all of the suffering that he had endured. What would I look at when I listen carefully to people who, who I deeply respect for their honesty, their sincerity, their, the rigor, and I think the rigor and authenticity, I hate to use that word, but it's probably the best one, with which they pursue these questions and say, I just can't believe that there is a, a good consciousness which, which set this whole thing in order and will at the end of it take responsibility for it. I, you know, I respect, I respect, I respect them after they say it. And, you know, I, you know, when, when I heard Eric Weinstein say, the problem with a god is that once you have one, you have to worry about what's on his mind. Yeah, that he put it into words, I think what's, sits at the heart of this, that, you know, I, it sounds close, so cliche, and of course it's obviously something that couldn't be scientifically verified or, or, or debunked. It would, it would in some ways be the bones of Jesus Christ. Because for me, I can, I can do the math from a postmodern, point of view where I can say, I have all these reasons, and many of them are personal. You know, why should I go off and try and be a Buddhist in North America? That just sounds dumb. Because all of the resources available to me, the, the, you know, all of the diversity of the Christian ecosystem, I'm living in the middle of it. I was raised in the middle of it. I'm 50 years old. Why start on something new? It just doesn't make much sense. So that's a very pragmatic argument. And, and so I can, I can, at least for myself, easily make the argument that my sunk costs in the Christian faith are so significant that why start down another road at this time? But that doesn't yet push me over the edge. I keep coming back to the resurrection of Jesus Christ. And maybe I'm too much of a modernist and not sufficiently postmodern on that score. Because I can, I can make a pragmatic argument that yes, I am happier. I have a more meaningful life swimming within the Christian pond. But the real excitement, it gets so much deeper when I contemplate the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Because that suggests to me that what Jesus said was trustworthy. And if what Jesus says is trustworthy, then, well, the Hebrew scriptures, and you can't understand at least the witness of the followers of Jesus Christ without understanding their relationship with the Hebrew scriptures, both the, you know, we have now we have Jacob in the Discord channel who is, you know, I love our heretics. They're, they keep me honest, you know, and when, when Jacob says, well, I'm really interested in that Jesus, because I think he was this, I think he was, I haven't posted that video yet. I should probably post that one. He was this Messiah figure, but Paul, I can't stand. And just this morning I was thinking about how Paul, who is this Hellenistic Jew, you know, just, I hear this through Tom Wright and NT, Tom Wright and Tom Holland, just, just remaps. So I'm listening to these Plan B guys and I'm thinking, you're all putzes compared to the Apostle Paul. The Apostle Paul and these letters that he wrote, you know, on the back of Jesus re-terraforms history. Now the group, the Plan B people are like, wow, that's spent. And the rebel wisdom. So, you know, I love, I love David and Ollie, but the, the, the real under, the real undercurrent that David always gives is, even though he was raised a Methodist, Christianity, it's spent. And I just keep thinking, yeah, but this is the religion of a dude who dies and comes back to life and Chesterton at a point. So to me, really, if, if, if somehow the resurrection were, and I knew that the resurrection was not historically plausible. And I think that's, I think that's, that's where, in terms of a scientific framework, where we're left. The resurrection is plausible. But if that is plausible, as C.S. Lewis made the point in miracles, that's sort of the missing thing in the middle of the chapter that makes the whole story make sense. So for me, that would be tough. It's not so much suffering because again of Jesus. So that's why I'm a Christian. I totally respect that answer because I am sure there are so many people who would not have that one thing if it were exposed, if it came to light, that they would not be able to, because that just speaks to your honesty because if there is no such thing, and Christianity is just this malleable thing which is just an overlay that we model the narrative. The moral terrorism that we press that we put on top of reality at the end of it, which does not make any specific claims about ontology, then I mean, I, I come from pragmatically spiritually from any perspective, it would be very hard for me to speak to. And I would be that that too, of course, that the same thing. And again, when I say it's not the suffering itself that would shake my faith, but it's more the fact that if it were to, because for me, I think I mentioned once in your comment section, the fact that there is a God, that just has to be one of the possibilities on the table because of all those things. Is it what consciousness all the way up consciousness, not downwards, but all the way up to this point and then not beyond that, that it just stands to reason that it's got to be on the table as one of the possibilities, but the goodness of God or the goodness or the nature of this consciousness is the question which would be like, I have no doubt about consciousness. You know, because nature itself has its own people might say just intelligence or God, but I would say it has its own form of consciousness because it does in many of the ways that I've been talking about in the context, it does. Then it has a way of, you can't, as you said, you can't, you can't treat it as something that's, you have to treat it with the spirit of geometry. And further, I believe that on logically, it has personhood. It's not just that you are. There is some. I don't I don't know what form that is because again, principalities, powers, those are beyond my grasp, but I don't know what form they take. But again, there, sometimes I want to even back away from this hedging that I'm doing there because I think I don't know because I think there's a there's a hedging there that again because I think because of the scientific bias on a lot of these issues, we try to hedge in our, as I said, hedge in the frontier of knowledge because we don't know. But I think I think I think we also should, I mean, especially as me as a Christian, if I truly want to operate with Christianity as my paradigm, with the with the option that at some point, like there are these things which could be slow. But if I want and not just operate with science as my part, I mean, scientism or whatever, our science being, I know what what worldview we could run that with but and instead of just operating with that as my base paradigm and then using the Christianity on top of it. So, yeah, and it's, you know, the I mean, we have to we have to at some point, self knowledge requires that we, as we mature, gain a capacity to look with greater and greater third person this at ourselves, I don't want to say objectivity, because again I think that I think that bends a need to this that we idolatrously grasp at, but at least a third person, a third person position, or third person observer on ourselves and we have access to that because we're in a world with 8 billion other third persons who with very little with very little coaxing will usually feel more than free to offer up a commentary on any of us and what we're thinking you're doing at the moment. So, it's this. We have to we have to understand that a human being can be no other way than shaped and formed and shaped and formed by the, the world of the whole show that led to their instantiation. And so it's the, the whatever Jewishness from my father's side and the freesian stubbornness from my mother's side and the third generation of Christian ministerism and the now the Jordan Peterson conversations I mean all of that has come into me and and so in a Sam Harris sort of way I could say well I'm no more than the sum of all of this show. Oh, okay. But this consciousness business you know I was just again I was listening to game be and and Jim Rutt was making the point that, you know, his his game be conversations one of the lines they split across was the, you know, caught basically consciousness and and part of the tribe said, Hey, you gotta, you can't set aside consciousness and and Rutt's like that's bullshit, you know, unless you can show it to me and again to me it's like it's like Sauron saying Tolkien is bullshit, you know, unless you can show me JRR Tolkien. I'm not going to buy that he has anything to do with what's going on here with Saruman and Gandalf and yes, you know, it's like, okay, but you know it's we deny the we deny the the most obvious tool we live in we work in every day and you just have to at some point say that just seems crazy. Yeah, no, I don't agree with you again which goes back to the point is like the fact of the any material metaphysical reality is just the very people who seem to deny it's existence seem to utilize it. I can't think it's unconsciously I really I can't believe that it's unconsciously because especially with someone like Eric Weinstein who I like you have been listening to a lot. Again, okay, I'll. Okay, we're back in business even though I'm using this crappy integrated camera. So, I'll have to, I'll have to fix this later. But you were on a roll and I was a good roll and I got it recorded so it isn't lost so that's a good thing. Again, like I said, I'd rather not have this even to least but just rather get like the full force of your honesty. Without having to worry about anything. I'm not that I'm saying that you do tone down what you're saying or, but I'm sure that there is some. But the honesty is an important point and again I mean you're, you're the victim of the fact that I'm thinking about making another video. But, you know, one of the things Brett Weinstein makes a point about with his concerns about his plan be aspirations is that you know we're, we're, the world is insanely complex and and part of the bottom line we all have to navigate is in fact the continuation of our, of me and and part of what happens when you get older, you know, and now, you know, my, my last child is in college. And so I've gotten four through, you know, to have stable employment. Okay, one is to now two girls are in the are in the job market and it's so funny because, you know, my my woke daughters you know, women in STEM, and it's like well why don't you go why didn't you go into STEM, I didn't want to. Gosh, how could why, why on earth might that be because maybe you're a woman. And maybe you love people, and that's all a good thing but you know so so I'm getting to the, I'm getting to the age now where, you know, I don't have. I don't have many career aspirations left. The, the demand on me of, you know, giving my young, a good start in the world is declining. And in many ways my honesty is a function of my dramatic failures in my life, which again sounds crazy, but in Christianity makes perfect sense because the more you get into, as Christians would say, the grip of the world. The less honest you can be. The more you have to be a non player character. I think old people can be so delightful because they tell you what they think. This is like, I gotta die in a decade or less so, you know, here's what I think. What are you going to do lock me up. How many, how much more years do I have. So that's, you know, that's part of the, the freedom. The older I get the more I understand that line. And what you were just talking about, it kind of is another parallel to the same, the same, what I'd say is what the modern culture seems to have come to be borrowed from. I'd say this, I'd say the defunct version of Christianity, which has been in at play for the, for the, maybe defunct is too strong word, but I'd say, I don't know what word is decadent Christianity that's been at play for the past. I don't know how many ever years, but just the sort of impotent symbolism that we see, like I've just seen being exemplified, including by myself in my church, but it's all about just the symbolism and the fact that again adds meaning to my life, which is literally I don't know if it's really moral therapy, but with the theological substrate, but the fact that we, this sort of impotent symbolism has now been transferred directly onto this, into the secular world. And that's why you can have, not to pinpoint your daughters, but have people who are, who profess, have the propositional beliefs, which are not in concert with the performed or the way that enacted beliefs. So, and that brings me to the more pragmatic aspect of the questions I want to ask you. When, I don't want to phrase it, how will the church survive, but what does the church add when we are just exemplifying in our own way, this sort of a complete rift between propositional belief or articulated belief and then enacted belief? How could we have a bridge this gap? Because if I were to try and go and, if I'm going to try and convince or whatever, if I'm trying to go and sway somebody within the secular realm who's taken on board all the bankrupt ideologies or secondhand, secondary versions of Christian theology in the secular scheme, what will... They're going to, an astute member of that clan is going to point at me and say, but you have the exact same problem. So what, how would you address that? I think it's helpful. So it's a trope that someone outside, and it's not even, it's not just a trope by brainiacs on Twitter and the internet, in the intellectual dark web. Any, any, you know, any mope walking down the street, if you mentioned the church, I can't go to a church because it's full of hypocrites. And part of me says, oh yeah, like, unlike everything else I see. But another part of me recognizes, yeah. And the, the salient hypocrisy of the church is a function of its astounding aspirations and claims. And, and, and that's part of the reason why I think when a lot of Christians deconstruct, they just feel relief. Because it's like, you know what? All right, I can smoke weed and do porn and I can stop playing the religious games that everyone else is, I can be less duplicitous. And yeah, because part of what a church, what a part of what a church community does is our hold people accountable to this standard. But the person who points out the hypocrisy of the church will, in the next moment, find a soapbox and stand on it and declare that humanity must be preserved. Politics must do better. Our institutions are failing us. Look at George Floyd. Here's a dramatic instance of the failure of the police. So, and then, you know, someone, some young activists will say, let's abolish the police and anybody who actually, anybody, it's, it's like, you know, it's like a, it's like a 21 year old saying, abolish Social Security and all the 65 years old. And all the 65 year old say, uh huh. Yeah, it's easy to say when you're about, it's easy to say when what's salient to you are all of the failures of that system. But just go to another place in the world on a vacation and see what a defunded police force looks like. I'll give them, I'll show them the corner to stand on. And it's like, so, so Christianity has this claim of everything. And, and then the church says, come into our midst and taste and see that the Lord is good and get a sense of the new community that will go forever. And you walk in the place and the music's crappy and, and, you know, the preacher's dull and everyone else has all of the garden variety difficulties that you'll find in any PTA meeting. And you say, this is, this is the vision of the new way. And so then higher achievers like Bill Hybels will, you know, be a control freak and make sure the music is excellent and make sure the preaching is excellent and, and fine tune all the sociology so, so it can be a safe space to hear a dangerous message and all of that. But, you know, Bill's, Bill's got trouble in his own marriage and, you know, is tempted to sleep with the, sleep with the hotties and the, you know, that, that with the beautiful voices that he's put on stage and, you know, this is us. This is us. And here's the crazy thing. That You would think if, you know, if Jesus were to, if the, if you, if a modernist would go about Jesus ministry, they would look a lot like the game B people. Well, we're going to get really smart people and we're going to curate these conversations that we're going to politics. Well, no, not quite. They figured that out. You know, and it's like, yeah, but then read the Bible and look how Jesus did it. It's insane. And you would think it's insane if it didn't really happen. Well, what happened? Well, that's even hard to say. So yeah, you know, the church is a mess. Fair enough. But why is it still here? Well, Some things, it's got something that we can't put our hand on. And it's some inexhaustible otherness that's at work that no matter how hard we try to distill it and wield it. We always fail at wielding it, but it keeps coming back. Well, at some point you begin to say, well, is there another agent at work? Is that agent conscious? Does that agent have a plan? The truly disturbing notion that comes across our minds when we get to that point is Well, then I'm sort of a node in the network. Well, Sam, isn't that what you said we were? You know why suddenly in a theist realm you're losing your stuff, but in an atheist realm you feel comfortable with it. It's because you realize that in the theist realm, your aid, your lack of agency is not only exposed, but potentially exploited. And that wounds your pride. So to me again, this is what's at the heart of the Western experiment to keep Christianity, but tell God, thank you very much. We'll take it from here. And it's so funny. And of course, I agree with you on virtually every point you made there, except the point that I do focus on is again, if the church again, this is completely a practical question that maybe of little interest to those of more secular mind. But if the church, if Christians are supposed to be the salt of the earth, is it enough for us to then point out that well, yeah, we're hit and run, but then so is everyone else. Yeah, we're hit and run, but so is everyone else. And that's just the human condition or in the decisions that we make within the manifest image as the church, the decisions that, and I remember there was this, I don't know, I never read the book, but there was this book that people kept pushing on me back when I was at Sunday school called Radical. I don't know if you've heard of it. What is it called? Radical. Radical? I haven't read it. I never read it myself, but I basically just a bit, and I would just point to that because there was this sudden push for to do away with, I mean, and that's been reflected broadly during that time, the push to move away from just the religiosity to the more radical side of Jesus. And of course, I know all the, there are lots of theological problems with just diving into that and we see that with the modern social justice phenomenon where people just want, in fact, they don't just want the radicalness of Jesus divorced of the theology, but they want the radicalness of Jesus divorced of Jesus. So you have that situation here, but at the same time, sometimes we can kind of punt and point to that, we point to all these flaws with following these notes in order to like forget that simple message, which I do think is part of the Protestant, the Protestant, we did get right. I mean, we are going into all these again, I'm getting a growing appreciation for all the things which I just as a good Protestant wrote off from the beginning, the rituals and the symbolism and the liturgy, all this stuff, I am gaining a huge amount of respect for that. But still that one grain that was present in Protestantism, which was the radicalism, which was the universalism, all those things which seem, which again have taken such, gained such resonance across the world in the secular realm, but we're losing sight, especially of this radicalism and this call to be the salt of the earth, which in turn, if this were to, if this from the manifest image were to now manifest in reality, the amount of goodness that we were able to portray would manifest and not just the in the simple, facetious ways that were taught to me when I was in the school, like just the goody two shoes type of stuff, but the true radicalness, like which mimics Jesus, of course, never attains, but mimics his way of being, the truly self-sacrificial and not just self-sacrificial as in, you know, I did a few good things for a few people sometimes, like, but truly like to the point where life is absolutely perfect. This could happen within the manifest image of the church and that could then be out there ontologically speaking, where people could point to it and it would be a very difficult thing if this true mission of the church were to manifest in reality and we were not just to focus on the fact that we're all stuck in the muck. That could be out there as an ontological proof which could, which people could point to because it's in this zone which is both ontological and the manifest image. I agree 100%. I stopped reading books like that about 15 years ago because I'd read dozens of them and they all began to sound the same and you nicely articulated it. You know, the church right now faces a wonderfully comfortable but terribly lethal situation of its own affluence and success and I think this is part of Chesterton's cycles about the seven deaths of the faith. And, you know, John Wesley pointed this out and the truth about us as human beings is that we often don't get radical again until we get to the point of having nothing left to lose. And, you know, you see this, again, a go to illustration that I got from Tim Keller in this is, is Eric, Eric Little, the sprinter who, you know, was a deeply pious Christian man and a world class sprinter. And, you know, went off to become a missionary in China. Unfortunately, in the 30s when the Japanese were eating, trying to eat China, realizing that China, they had bigger eyes than their stomach as my mother used to say, and their eyes were bigger than their stomach. And, and so Eric Little was in a Chinese internment camp, along with a bunch of other missionaries and expats and business people and diplomats and all of that. And, you know, a completely secular book written by a man who did not convert to Christianity in this book reflects on this one guy and because he wrote a book reflecting on his time in the internment camp and wrote this book reflecting on this one guy, all the other missionaries out there. You know, they were just, when you put them in an intern camp, they were just kind of, they devolved to be like everyone else. But this one guy, you know, he just, and the quality, the quality of his character shown in all the predictable ways that anybody going to Sunday school, or even just about anybody else in post-Christendom can recognize is the self-sacrificial purity of his, of his offering. And he dies. And so, and you see this throughout the history of the church, you know, St. Francis, another one. But, you know, when St. Francis is doing his thing, how many people see it? You know, at least the, at least the thing about Tank Man is there is a photographer. But then we think that, well, if we just show people that icon, because in a sense, you know, the picture of Tank Man is an icon of something. If we just show people that icon, then that will do it. And it's like, well, then I get back to my Calvinist roots and say, I don't think there's a formula we wield here, boys and girls. And so then we punt up to say, what finally changes people? Well, it's the Holy Spirit. Well, what do you mean by that? Well, what do you mean by God? So, it's again, we're, we're agents, we're real agents. Our agency is vital and we're held responsible for our agency. But we are awfully small agents in a very big world and we're, we're, we're barely even in control of ourselves. So, no, I love your points and, and the beauty, you know, so my first, so I worked with, you know, pastors and what they called preachers in the Dominican Republic my first seven years. And then I came to Sacramento and then for my first 10, 12 years here, I worked with church planters and I love the spirit of church planting because in many ways it expresses exactly what you have, or you say, you know what, I'm dissatisfied with the church because when I read this book and when I see the church, there's a difference, there's a delta between them. And you know what, I'm going to have the boldness and audacity to, to do it right. And when someone walks up to me and says that, I say, you go to it and I will pray for you and I want to see you succeed and but I've been through this cycle enough that a few years they'll come back to me and be like, you know, gosh, you know, I, I'm, I've becoming all of these B level failed church planters like everyone else. I see, why can't I be like Elevation Church and I look at them and say, I'm really glad you're not. Not that I don't thank God for successes when they happen, but more often than not, there's, you thought the success was going to indicate the lack of corruption? It never, stuff scales in this world. So when it gets bigger, the corruption grows, it gets smaller, the corruption shrinks, but it's still there. And so you're really talking about what's the, what, what percentage of corrupt is your church? Maybe that's the, maybe that's the goal you should offer. But the problem is, if you do something really dramatic and really amazing in the way that we count success, well, corruption will flood in, baby. But, but, but, and see, this is, this is the crazy thing about Jesus is that he's an absolute failure and he almost embraces his failure in some respects. I mean, he's a success in the Galilee. And then he says, you know, unless you eat my flesh and drink my blood, you can have no part of me. And all the consultants said, now, wait a minute, Jesus, you've been doing things pretty well for now, contrary to our conventional wisdom. But that statement there, you're going to lose a big audience because of that. Does Jesus seem to care? You might say he's playing the long game. Well, how long? Well, all the way to the end of the world. That long. Well, how can he play such a long game? Well, because he's not dead. It's nuts, but it's glorious. Which brings us full circle. Oh crap, we're out of time. Oh, we, I, I came in late. I'm going to have lots of justifications for us to talk again. And here I talk too much in your time too. So I'm sorry about that. But shoot me an email. We'll set another time to talk because we got to talk more. Yeah, for sure. Thank you so much. All right. We'll talk to you later.