https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=llceLad3Xbk

 I just wanted to drop a little note as Jordan Peterson's doing his European trip and as his book is coming out, it's getting a lot more visibility. And again, as I've been saying again and again in reference to this book, the video world and the book world are two different worlds and there's connections, but they, in many ways the social media has different silos. And one of the things I think we're going to be seeing as Jordan Peterson writes and as he has a book out and as he's got this tour going and as his visibility rises, more and more people who have expertise in things like lobsters and science are going to be taking a look at his work and judging it and saying, you know, I don't know, because, you know, the academic world is really a world of yeah, but and nuance and did you get this exactly right? And so, you know, I saw, I usually throw these links up on my blog. You know, I saw this, I saw this come up today. Psychologist Jordan Peterson says, lobsters help to explain human hierarchies exist, do they? Dum dum dum. Clickbait. And lobsters versus humans. And it's very interesting because I know nothing about this. And so I'm not doubting, you know, that Jordan Peterson's is right. But what I do know as a preacher is that one of the difference between, let's say, a scholar and a preacher is preachers are often, how can I say this, our preaching is less high resolution than, let's say, all the little details in a book where a preacher might take a leap in order to communicate something and have something connect and to achieve an end. Scholars will be concerned quite a bit more with accuracy. And so there'll be some slippage in there. So I'm not, I think it's actually a good sign that we're starting to see more conversation. And what it means is that people are taking Peterson seriously. And so just reading this article, and again, I'm not a scientist. I have no frame of reference, but I like to read this stuff. If nervous systems were computer games, anthropods like lobsters would be snake. On a first generation mobile phone vertebrates would be like augmented reality. There are 50 molecules that function as neurotransmitters in the nervous system, including dopamine, adrenaline, adrenaline, serotonin, and oxytocin. These molecules, however, exist all over nature. Plants of serotonin. I didn't know that. And animals, including humans, most of the serotonin is produced and used in the intestine to help digestion. I didn't know that either. It's structure, it's the structure where, it's the structure that determines its benefits. And the same neurotransmitters that can have contrasting effects in different organisms. And lower levels, while lower levels of serotonin are associated with decreased levels of aggression in vertebrates like the lobster, the opposite is true in humans. Well, that's interesting. This happens because low levels of serotonin in the brain make communication between the amygdala and the frontal lobes weaker, making it more difficult to control emotional responses to anger. So anyway, he's working on those Jordan Peterson things. And this is the process by which we learn. And this is in many ways the scientific process. It's about debate. It's about paradigms changing. And so, and part of the difficulty we have in this modern world is that none of us are experts in enough of these things. And so, I don't know, this is what makes this fun. This is what makes it challenging. So I just thought I'd note this because I think, again, this is part of the process. So there's a little vlog for now.