https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=e8BRdwRIjQw

 So, so Tim, why don't you, why don't you tell us a little bit about yourself? Okay. Well, let me just first say that I'm really excited to talk to you and I love what you're doing. I listened to your podcast. I don't watch the videos, but you know, as we were just talking about before you started recording, I have this, I don't know what it is and I'd like to know if you have a name for it. Is this something that sometimes I feel compelled to do things sometimes? And like, I didn't know exactly why I emailed you the story that I emailed you, but it just felt like it was the right thing to do. And I did it. And I feel like that's kind of what you're doing with the videos and, you know, not trying to be presumptuous, but I, I feel like that's what it is. And I have a lot of respect for that. And you seem like a really authentic guy and I appreciate that. And your videos are, well, your podcasts for me are very helpful, especially the ones where you're talking to other recovering atheists, so to speak. And I really liked I have notes over here if you see me looking to the side, because I'm a lawyer and I write everything down. I really like the one about Western philosophy and religion and your the recommendation to read City of God. I'm just kind of starting that. But I love that. I had no idea. It's a crazy book. It's unbelievable. And the audible on that is very helpful. Yeah. And then your recent discussion about Alex Jones. Sometimes I listen to Verbeke. I listen to Jonathan Peugeot. I've heard, you know, almost everything Jordan Peterson's done. But sometimes even when I feel like I understand those things, I'll then listen to you talk about it and something new will come out of it. Or you'll say it in a way that helps me understand even better. And so just so you know that it's great. Oh, thank you. So I about me, I'm a husband to a wonderful woman. I have two daughters who are 12 and 10. I'm 43 years old and I am a bankruptcy lawyer. I wanted to talk to you, I guess, primarily about an experience. I actually happened to me. I actually I started the email that I sent you before this particular experience that has been the most remarkable one for me. I just wanted to talk about what Jordan Peterson did and how that experience went, because I know you're trying to put your finger on what it is that Jordan Peterson is helping people with. And so I that was kind of the reason I felt like, well, you know, I have a story, so let me just send this to Paul and see if this doesn't. So. Anyway, I guess maybe I'll just get started with it. I've always been atheist as long as I can remember. I think my parents took me to church maybe one time. I don't remember the one time I have a grandmother who's still alive, 100 years old. And she apparently took me to Sunday school a few times. She went to Baptist Church. And this just goes to how I feel about my atheism being like forever. I have a memory for some reason of being in Sunday school and I must have been like four or five years old. And I have a feeling attached to the memory. And it's a feeling of like just uncomfortableness and even disgust. And I mean, maybe lots of people feel that way in Bible school. But some reason that ties into just like my whole identity of being a. And when I was I went to school in a very small town, like 2500 people, and it was a Czechoslovakian immigrant town. And so as far as I knew, everybody there went to church and almost all of them were Catholic. And in middle school, I was the kid who never went to church. He was definitely going to hell. Wow. I mean, they weren't they weren't cruel like that. But that was that was me. So I've always been atheist. And I married a woman who's atheist. And I've always had anxiety. Up until very recently. And. For some reason, I thought for a while now that the two are actually related. But the anxiety like I played lots of sports in school, but for example, I would have to go vomit before basketball. It was a it was a type of insecurity to where I could excel in basketball practice, because I love basketball. But you get in the game and you know how people are right there upon you. Sure. About that, I could never perform under that type of situation as well as I wanted to. And it would cause me to avoid things lots of times, procrastinate. And if you ask people who knew me from back then, I think they would say that I was the guy who did who was laid back and easygoing and didn't that wasn't serious. I think what I was doing was compensating for that. I think it was it was really just a way to try to make up and deal with the anxiety that I felt about it. And so this so this guy who didn't care that much about stuff and never studied in school, couldn't focus and concentrate very well. When I was 16 years old, I discovered through some other means my parents, my family is not musical. But I heard about this violinist composer named Paganini that I didn't know anything about. But I went and I got a cassette of Paganini from a music store that couldn't you know, you had to go to music stores. And I listened to it. And the first time I listened to it was like being struck by lightning. Wow. Immediately, I told my parents, you have to get me a violin and I have to start taking lessons. And I had been playing the guitar. So it wasn't totally crazy, but it was pretty crazy. But they did that. And I progressed very quickly at first. After four months, I was playing in the Waco Youth Symphony and I completely fell in love with it. So I cared about something and I cared deep, really deeply about it. And I know, actually, I probably cared about other things too. But, you know, because I was pretending not to. This was something that I actually didn't pretend not to care about. And after about a year of lessons, my teacher told my parents that something like I had more talent than anybody should ever taught and I should I could major in it in college. So that was all I wanted to do. And then so I went and did that. But because I didn't know how to work hard in anything, because I never took anything seriously before. And because I was, you know, people who major in violin in college, they start when they're like five around me. I was about a decade behind. Yeah. And after two years, I just didn't make it. I had auditioned in order to continue on and I didn't pass the audition. And about the same time, the only serious girlfriend I ever had broke up with me and my parents, who I actually thought that they had a good, like, exemplary marriage. They didn't. But I thought they did. Yeah. Yeah. They were getting separated and ultimately got divorced. Wow. And so it was like, you know, going from not caring or pretending to not care to like putting all of my eggs in these baskets. And really, I was I was a romantic type feeling person about music and about this girl and everything. And then it all just poof went away like that. I was really depressed. And my reaction was to just get really practical and I guess pragmatic. And I decided, OK, I'm going to change majors. I'm going to go to law school because I had actually already borrowed some money to go to school. And so I was already dealing with student loan debt. And I was going to give up the violin, but I actually didn't. I harbored the secret wish that I could figure out how to still make up the distance between me and what a professional or even just a teacher of the violin could do. And so I carried that with me. But I moved in. I got to tell you this story about how I met my wife. I met my wife, though I I moved to College Station and very out of character for me. I picked a store at the mall because I felt like I needed to get a job because of financial issues and walked into it was J.C. Penney and said, I need a job. I need to see the manager. I didn't know if they were hiring. I didn't fill an application. Nothing like that. Totally out of character for me. And I think the guy was so impressed. He just gave me a job right. And the first day of the job, I met my wife. Wow. He worked at J.C. Penney also. Wow. You know what I think about that? I think what look what I did. I slayed the dragon and got the girl. I can't help but think about it that way. That's right. And so anyway, because of the everything that had happened to me, I actually was not really prepared for that. For her, it was like love at first sight. For me, I was uneasy about the whole thing. But we worked it out and we ended up we moved in together. And another quick story I'll tell you about this is that she went to school in a town about an hour away. And so we lived in a small, really small town in between the two out in the country. And we lived in a trailer like a mobile home. And the great thing about it was that there was nothing but farmland as far as you could see. All around us. And there's trailer had a porch. And so you could go on the porch and just stare off into infinity, basically. And it was gorgeous and so quiet. Anyway, I asked her to marry me in that trailer. And then we got married at the Justice of the Peace in Huntsville, Texas. And after we got married, we went back to the trailer and I had some champagne and cake and flowers and that. And so we celebrated a little bit and it rained. And then we go outside on the porch and there's a full double rainbow right there. Right outside the porch. I mean, right from end to end, you could see the whole thing. I'd never seen anything like that. I've never seen one like that since except for on online. And my atheist wife says to me something like that means we were that means we were meant to be, you know, even affected her like that. I said I said something like, yeah, well, I don't believe that stuff. So anyway, I'm married. I actually I get a job because I wanted to get it. I found a job that I thought was good to determine whether I wanted to go to law school or not, because I was actually managing litigation, which meant I was sort of managing lawyers. And so we buy a house. All this stuff is going great. But I'm getting up early in the morning to practice violin. I'm leaving work early to go home and practice the violin. I'm practicing like two to four hours on the weekend. Wow. And my wife hates it. Right. Everything else is great, but she can't stand that. And I don't blame her. And I didn't really know why I was doing it. And but anyway, I learned that I did not want to go to law school. But because of financial pressures, again, because of student loans and back at this time, they didn't have the different things that you can do with student loans. You can do them now. Now, they couldn't you couldn't even extend the repayment plan. It was 10 years, whether you get a boarded or not. And so I thought, well, of course, I'm going to take on more loans, go to law school, but then at least I'll be able to pay them back. And so I did that. And I managed to actually not play the violin for three years while I was in law school. But my my anxiety just got really bad. I developed GERD, which is gastroestrophageal reflux disease or disorder. I'm not sure which D word it is, but I wasn't overweight or anything. It was just stress. I got I already had subarachnoid dermatitis. I got eczema. When I was studying for the bar, I got prostatitis, which I would not recommend. Doesn't sound good. No. So it was all of the responsibility. I mean, here again, it was like a guy who still doesn't care that much about stuff, you know, not serious about things. And then when you're the lawyer, you got to be the adult in the room all the time and you can't make mistakes and you got to look out for danger down the road. And so you have to be vigilant all the time. And that was so anathema to me as I my identity for anything except the violin. I took that seriously. But this other stuff was totally different and it was really hard for me to deal with. And then and my dog died while studying for the bar, but I passed the bar and I got a job. And then shortly thereafter, my wife got pregnant. So now I'm about to be a dad. I'm a lawyer. My dog, who I associated still with childhood a little bit, died. And all of this pressure and everything, I thought, I can't die not having accomplished what I want to accomplish with the violin. And I mean, I still can't tell you exactly why I had thoughts like that, but there were things that I wanted to do. And it was it was like that was where I got meaning from, I guess, or the place that it was most. That was the thing that was most salient to me. And so I went back to practicing and I would wait to everybody went to bed at night, practice till like midnight and then go be a lawyer. And those are long hours. And I just kept doing that regardless of how difficult it was and how much my wife still hated it. And we would fight about it sometimes. And this went on for a long time. And I was kind of stuck because I couldn't figure out. I never got good enough to actually do the violin thing. I did make progress. The other thing about it was I wanted to apply the focus that I learned in law school because I had to learn finally learn how to study. And it really helped. It really worked. I got much, much better. And I was having a great time when I was when I was playing. It was wonderful. But when I wasn't playing, I was anxious all the time. But the violin, that was that thing that made me lose time. You know, that Jordan Peterson talked about. So anyway, I couldn't figure out what to do. I played around with even quitting being a lawyer for a while. And I was listening to podcasts to try to help. And I was I was very glad. The best way. Only thing I could do was I became more and more detached. So I became more and more known to like everything. And then for whatever reason, I heard his first podcast with Joe Rogan. I listened to Joe Rogan, but I had no idea who he was or anything. And I'm listening to his podcast. And it's like I got hit in the head with a hammer. I burst into tears. And it was he talked about on that podcast. He talked about he said something like that thing that you when you do it, you lose time. I don't know why everybody doesn't just do that. He said something like that. And when I heard that, I was like, yeah, what? Why? Why did I give up on that thing? You know, why? What made me because I felt like the world was telling me, OK, you tried and it didn't work. You have to be practical now. And so I felt like I kind of betrayed myself in a way. And then I heard him saying, well, you shouldn't have done that. That's what I heard. And suddenly, I realized to me, I realized all these mistakes I made. But at the same time, I heard him saying, yeah, well, that thing that captures your interest, it will take you down into the underworld. I heard that clearly. And I felt so I again, I felt like I just didn't work hard enough. No, the whole I was came. It was my fault. And. There was something, but there was at the same time that. He just totally devastated me and it was like all these things lined up in my mind like never before. And I didn't I didn't totally understand it. It was like it was in the periphery, you know, some I could kind of get a glimpse of this understanding now. And what I knew, though, was that I had to know what how in the hell this guy knew this stuff. Where was this coming from? And I had to I felt like listening to him was one thing, but I had to really know it. And so I needed to read his book and I need to read the books that he read. And so and I didn't know how that was going to help, but I just started doing that. I read maps of meaning and took me nine months to read it. And part of the reason was because I read crime and punishment at the same time. But another part of another reason was that I would read a page of that book and then I'd have to go think about it for like three days. Because it makes sense in one way. And then I think about it and I think about it. It keeps making sense on all these other levels. And it's just only my mind. Yeah. And there were so many times when just reading the book, it would it would bring me to tears. And the same thing happened with the Brothers Karamazov. I read that same thing, especially the Grand Inquisitor. It was like all these things that were tightly wound up with the way that I thought about the world getting destroyed. And I swear I could feel it happening. Yeah. Yeah. And I had these emotional physical responses when it would happen. And then I read another book. I mean, I read the first two volumes of the Gulag Archipelago. I read Man Search for Meaning. I read some Jung. I read a bunch of stuff. But one book in particular called More Than Allegory by Bernardo Castro. And Bernardo Castro got a PhD in computer engineering. He's a former materialist atheist. And his story basically that I know of it is that he had a religious experience. And then gave up materialism. And he has been spending his life for as far as I can tell for many years now writing books to help to flesh out all of his thoughts on why materialism is wrong, why the world is fundamentally consciousness, and to help other people get to get there. And More Than Allegory is one of these books where it really tries to help other people get to where he is to get to idealism. And it's a fantastic book. The first part of it really is a lot like Maps of Meaning because it goes through myth and religion and stuff like that. The last part of the book, he sets up his own myth, which is centered on psychedelics. He creates this story where he becomes a part of a scientific experiment with psychedelics to prolong the psychedelic experience and then somehow to create, you know, it's just fantasy, of course. But a serum to help you remember the things that you learn when you're in the experience. There's this thing about, you know, you have these profound experiences, but then you have trouble remembering exactly what happened. So you can bring that back. And when I finished that book, and again, when I was reading it, I could tell that my mind was changing. When I finished that book, I completely and totally believed in God, number one. Wow. That's what that book did to me because it did for me because it gave us, I just needed some kind of scientific tie in to consciousness and being fundamental. And he gave that to me. And then, so then when I, when I believed that, then all of the ramifications of that start working in my mind. And I all of a sudden, I can understand what fear of God means, right? I never, I never got that before. And I understand what God having a plan means. And I start to think, well, yeah, I mean, I believe that and I want to participate in the plan in the right way. I don't want to be on the on the opposite side of infinite consciousness, right? Right. It's an important thing when you recognize that it's like, oh, yeah. When you start to really believe in God, it's a scary, it can be a scary thing. Yes, it is. And so I thought, well, plus I was having all these experiences and it was, I was all on this path. So this whole time I'm following this, whatever this is, and if you have a name for it, I'd like for you to tell me what it is where you just kind of like something tells you that you need to do this. Whatever it is and you do it and you're trying to stay true to that path. I guess it's the way maybe you're trying to stay true to the path. And something told me, but it's the call, the call. Okay. Something told me you need to go to church because maybe I'd have an experience like I had reading Dostoevsky in church, or maybe I'd figure out why it is that I feel like I need to go there. Right. Yeah. Yeah. And because of Peugeot and Dostoevsky and just the whole idea of, I had a feeling that a lot of the services, the Orthodox churches were trying to invoke a state of consciousness. It would help you connect with the consciousness with God. And so, um, and then what do you know? There's a Orthodox priest 20 miles from where I live who has a Jordan Peterson meetup. There's that fate again, right? It was like fate. So, of course, I have to go to it. And I went there and it was a great experience. And he's not up. He's around my age, which, you know, you want to always get when you go to church. And so it was easy for me to kind of relate to him. And he showed me around the church a little bit. I think he was surprised that I even asked. He showed me around and it was, I really wanted to go. And so I, and I'd been telling, I've been trying to prepare my atheist wife for me wanting to go to church. It was hard. She was like, why? You know, or why can't we just go to the Unitarian Church? Yeah. At least if you go to that church, you don't have to believe anything. Right. Yeah. See, by the way, you're laughing. I tell you, you know what I mean. So I was like, no, I have to go to this one. And so we went to, I went to the one that I thought was going to be the least difficult, which was Vespers on Saturday. And, you know, there's not that many people there. And it was, it was a really nice service. And my wife said that she liked it and my kids hated it. But we did that. And then the next weekend I wanted to go again and we went again. Everybody was, except for my kids were not very tolerant, but my wife was. And then, so, you know, I was like, well, I really need to go. The main thing is the Divine Liturgy on Sundays. I think I got to go to that. She said, okay, well, I don't want to go. And the kids didn't want to go. So I went and, you know, at the Orthodox Church, it's like half the day. Um, cause I went for the Matins, which is the early one. And then the Divine Liturgy is like two hours. So that's three. And then I stayed for the Bible study. They have Bible study for converts afterwards. And I stayed for that because I wanted to. And then after four hours of being gone, I come home and I thought it was a wonderful experience. It was great. Everybody was really welcoming. Uh, I kissed the cross after the service, which is, you know, again, all of this is totally beyond who I am, right? Not keeping it with my character at all. And I get home and I feel great about it. And my wife was mad. She was like, she's not happy. I'm gone for four hours on a weekend day. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, she works hard. She's a teacher. She works really a lot of hours. And that's the, that's one of the days that we take care of, cause we have to like cook for the whole week. Yeah. A lot of times. And so that, yeah, it really screwed things up. I didn't, it wasn't that I didn't understand, but not only that, um, you know, the thing is I had not played when I did that, when I first went to church, I had not played the violin like a month. That was the first time that I stepped, that I set it aside and then didn't have dark thoughts and depression. Cause every other time I try to set aside, I'll get really bad anxiety or depression and I'll go back to it and it would get better, but then it happened. Uh, I was doing okay. And so I was trying to convey to her, yeah, I understand that you think that this is just another thing that I'm trying to, you know, that I'm going to, it's going to put, I'm going to put between you and me, but it's not, it's not the same. Something's different now. I tried to convey that to her and you know, I don't blame her for not getting it, but she didn't really get it. And she went to bed and she was kind of upset. And then I went to bed and I think it was like three o'clock in the morning. I felt her foot touch my foot in the bed. And so I knew that she was awake and that she didn't hate me. And, and I've got to tell you, I've never said anything like this in my life. I'm laying in the bed and in my mind, I said, please God help me make her understand. And I don't know what I was asking. I don't even know. It just came out and I certainly didn't expect anything to happen right then, but it did. So, you know, that feeling Paul, when like, if you hug somebody that you really love and they hug you back, like, like especially your children and you can, it's like a feeling of warmth and it can be so strong that you start to come to tears if you really end that moment. It was like that, but it was like 10,000 times. Okay. It was, if you took all the times I ever felt that feeling and put them in the bathtub, it might fill up the bathtub. But this was like a seed of this love and joy. That's the way I thought of it as just a sea of joy. And it felt, it was, it was weird because I could feel it really strongly on me. But at the same time, it was like I was in the presence of joy itself because it felt, you know how when you're, the way I thought about it afterwards, cause I tried to think of some way that I can convey what this is like, but you know how like if you're floating in a really large body of water, like the ocean or like a lake where you can't see the end, you can, you feel the water on your body. And then you can kind of feel more of the water because of the waves. And then you can look out and it looks infinite. It was like, I had a sensation of infinity, infinity. And so I'm lying in it this time when it happened three times, but this time when it happened, it did kind of well up right after, right after I said that to myself. And I start crying because it's so overwhelming. And my wife said, why are you crying? And then I just explode onto her with all of this love. And I'm saying things to her that I never could say before. Um, I got, you know, I told you, it was like, I was numb before it was, there were feelings that I couldn't access. I couldn't be, I couldn't find a way to be romantic and it always bothered her. And I always knew it was there. I tried to deny it or I tried to, and I didn't understand what was going on, but I felt it and then it was like the damn burst open. Wow. Just flooded all over her. Wow. And it went, and it get, we went on and on and it lasted. I remember I was really thinking, I really felt like something is working through me. Something is happening right now. Something's going on. And then it got to the point where I couldn't take it anymore. And, um, I remember I said out loud, I feel like I'm drowning in my tears because I put my fingers to my eyes and I wasn't sobbing or anything like that. And I wasn't sad. I mean, I was as happy as I've ever been like times a hundred and the water is just pouring out of my eyes. The tears are just pouring out of my eyes. And I said, I don't know what's happening. I said, I don't know what I did to deserve this because. It was just so incredible. And I really felt at the same time, I felt wonderful. I really felt sorry. I really felt like I don't deserve this. Like, it was like, Oh my God. You know, I mean, like really. And it was later helping with your videos again, helped me frame things that I fully, fully believe that I had an encounter with God number two, and that was God number two. And, and so I, we, you know, uh, we get up and start the day and still really early in the morning and we're having a great time just hanging out together before everybody has to get, you know, really start the day. But I keep thinking, why did that happen to me? Um, what did I do to deserve that? And why did it happen? Because one of the reasons why I kept asking is because I was so happy that reasons, all I kept asking is because I already believed in God. And so, and when, but when that happened, it was like, you know, there's a difference between believing and then there's knowing it was like, why did I get that confirmation? Cause it was complete confirmation for me. Why did that happen? And I kept asking myself, and then I had to get dressed and I went to work and I was driving to work and I kept asking that in my mind, why did that happen to me? And all of a sudden I had a thought. And right after I had the thought, the same thing happened, the same feeling, but instead of willing up, it was like a blast. And it was like, I crumpled. I mean, it was like a flower wilting in too much sunlight and I burst in the tears again and I was driving to work. And so I thought, I can't go to work like this. So I actually said out loud, okay, okay, I get it. I get it. Uh, the thought that I had was it was for her. And I'm not sure that I understood what that meant. I mean, I knew what it meant. That was for my wife. I knew that, but I didn't understand, you know, all of the ramifications of that and everything. So I said, okay, okay, I get it. And then I don't know how much longer it was after that. I was still driving in my car and then I had a vision. And then again, the same thing, the same a blast. And it was even stronger than the time before. And I, I swear it felt like if it had been stronger, that it could have killed me. It was so, so incredibly intense that I was like shrinking, shrinking down in my seat when I was driving. And I also, I swear that it was, it was an overcast day and so there was no sun, but for a second it looked, it was as if I was in a rainbow. I could see the colors blue and red, just faintly. And, um, I know this sounds crazy. Okay. The vision I had was pure. It was like pure white, but there was a silhouette and the silhouette was me proposing to my wife. Wow. And, um, and then I started. And so again, I said, okay, okay, now I get it. I, that wasn't all I got it now. I said that out loud and then it subsided and I could stop crying. And then I start thinking, I, then it occurs to me, oh yeah, this is my 20th wedding anniversary this year. Hmm. Well, that's probably a good idea. Cause I felt like this is something I have to do. I felt like God just told me that I have to re, I have to propose to my wife, um, to like renew our marriage. And then I remembered, well, she doesn't even wear her wedding dress. And then I remembered, well, she doesn't even wear her engagement ring. She lost it for awhile and then she doesn't wear it. We never had real wedding bands. We got married at the justice of the peace and then we had a service at the Unitarian church. And so all of this story starts to fill up my mind about how we can. Renew our marriage in a way that's recognized by the church and, um, that I'm a different person now because I can, cause I'm really feeling all of this romanticism towards her. And I start in my mind, I start seeing how the whole story of my life starts to change as I look back over it. It was as if all of that time that I spent suffering over not being able to play the violin and, and regretful of everything that I did wrong now, all of a sudden it's like, that's okay. Because you know what? It actually did make me a better person. Um, because I had to cope with that and then I had to deal with not being able to do it and I had to live with that and I had to work on myself and that all of that is the reason that Jordan Pearson had such an effect on me and the reason that I read all the books that I read and the reason that I went to church, all of that was because I was suffering with that issue. And so like the story changed, you know, um, and then I remember something else that just blew my mind because the previous day when I was in church, I went to the Bible study at the Bible study that the issue that they talked about was were Mary and Joseph married when she had Jesus and the guy doing the Bible study said that there's an ancient Jewish tradition where you get legally married, but you're not really married and you can call the whole thing off and then you establish a home together and you have like a year or so to do that and then you're really married. And so you have people that are legally married and then Jesus comes into their life and then they're really married and though that framework just like fit with exactly what was, it was like it was being revealed to me that this is the story now and I felt like I have to do this. So I bought rings and I thought, um, you know, the first time I did this, it wasn't very romantic. It has to be romantic. I tell you the whole week after this happened, I was like Scrooge on Christmas morning. I was so all the time. I had to stop myself from doing things that I probably should have done, but they seemed like they were crazy. Like I was just going to tell coworkers how awesome, how much I love them. And I said so many romantic things to my wife. I would text her and, and, and just gushing all over her that, I mean, she loved it. Thankfully she loved it. It wasn't too much, but, um, it was just crazy. Um, and then, so I thought I had ultimately decided on going to take her to New York and doing a proposal in, um, central park. And so I go there and I do that and I kind of messed it up cause I said too much God stuff and I did. And even though we had a great time and she really appreciated everything I did. And she really appreciated how different I was. And I was trying to convey to her that this is a new me and that magic is real. And we're going to have a magical marriage and fairy tales are real. I'm like exploding all this stuff on her. And, um, she is, you know, so confused. And if, if it would be back two or so years ago, then I totally understand. But, um, the only, the other thing I wanted to tell you was that, and I told you this in the email though, but we were there. And after I did all of that and we're lying in bed in the hotel room and it dawned on me that we're in New York and my last name is York and I'm telling my wife how I'm a new person and then we're going to have a new marriage. Our, our last name is York. Right. And it's just things like that just kept happening. And it was, you know, when you had that, when you had that discussion you had with, I don't know how long we're going. I really want to hear what you have. If you keep going, keep going. The person after you canceled. So, okay. Well, you had the discussion when I think his name was Darren, who's an astrophysicist and he talked about Psalm five, three. And I heard that I thought, Oh, it'd be nice to have some synchronicity. That would be great. And then that was when I realized, Oh yeah, well, there is a, a priest to him, Jordan Peterson meetup. And that's kind of synchronicities. And then all this other stuff happened. I'm like, wow. You know, it's just the whole thing. It still blows my mind. And, um, I cannot explain to you how different I feel. Um, I started to see my wife. The only way I know how to say it is I started to see her through God's eyes. I felt like, I felt like God was trying to get to her through me. And that was part of the reason that I was so much easier to love her. Um, so more romantic, but also there's something about. I keep, I kept thinking that something happened whenever, cause it feels like the hierarchy got set straight. You, cause I had violin at the top and then it got replaced by God. And then when God replaced it, now all of a sudden, my wife is the most important thing that I can, you know, it's like my family, but particularly my wife is so vital that we have the best relationship we can have. Cause I start thinking about, you know, infinity with, with her and us and that whole, all of the cosmic meaning behind that. And, um, and that's the way it's, that's the way it's been ever since. Um, I, I, I do the prayers as many times as I can every day. I, I have this feeling that I just want to get out of my own way and do whatever God wants me to do. That's the way I honestly feel about it. And that's what I was mean when I was trying to, when I was saying before there's something that, you know, tells you, you should do things sometimes. And I mean that you can get, that can be wrong if you're not set up right. I try to be careful. Yeah. Um, but I feel like I, I'm, I'm certainly set up better than I ever was. Yeah. Yeah. Um, so I'm dealing with that. So, I mean, like one of the things I wanted to ask you about is, you know, what is a religious experience? And then when you have one, uh, cause I think I, well, no, okay. You just explained, you just described it. Okay. Okay. So then if we establish that, then my next question is now what? Yeah. Yeah. Because commonly you're in the honeymoon. Yeah. You know what a honeymoon is. Yeah. And, and everything's great right now. Everything's great right now. And that probably won't last. No, it certainly won't, you know, and, and God, you know, there are books full of conversion stories and if you would read some of those books, you would, you would read your story because what you've just talked about is it's, it's, see part of the difficulty is if we share this publicly, a lot of people are going to hear this and they're going to say, I want what that guy got. Yeah. I'm not going to get it. Well, because they might. Yeah. But everyone is different. It's hard for me to even, it's still hard for me to say what it is. If you took me, whatever that was 30 minutes. Yeah. Well, everyone is different. Everyone's story is different. And what you received has been grace. It's pure grace. It was, it was God's gift to you. And here's the thing about God and his gifts. God gives gifts, whatever gift he gives to whomever he chooses to give it. So people are going to hear your story and they're going to say, I wanted his story, but you don't get, you got your story. Other people get their story. You're my, my story is different from yours. And so, um, and then, and then people are, well, we're American. So we're like, well, we want God to be fair. And well, that's hard because chances are good. So, so for example, oh, let's think about the apostle Paul. The apostle Paul is zealous. I really enjoy NT Wright's biography of the apostle Paul that he's that. Yeah, I started reading it. It's, it's great so far. And, and so here you have the apostle Paul and he's zealous for the Lord. And that means hunting down these heretics that were following this Jesus of Nazareth. And then of course, Jesus appears to him on the road to Damascus and then he's blind, he's blinded. And then, you know, Ananias is told, go see Paul and pray for him. And Ananias is like, whoa, you know, and the Lord says, first of all, God says, you know, you're, you're asking about what, what this voice is. Well, sometimes it's God. Right. Sometimes it is. Sometimes it's God. And, and Ananias says to him, you know, first of all, when I call, you don't, yeah, but me because anyone who has any brains at all doesn't, if you play chicken with God, if you decide you're going to challenge God, God can go to extraordinary lengths to get his way. So it's off going along with him. But so, and God says to Ananias, you know, basically, you know, I'll, I'll show him how much he will suffer for me. And so it's always, it's, it's suffering is always part of the package of the Christian life. Right. And, and some people get it at the front end. Some people get it at the back end. Some people get more than others. And, and again, it's, it's what God gives, but there's always the sense that when God, we, you know, the question is, so, so, so, you know, people know me as a Calvinist, which I am. And then the question with Calvinism is always this question about divine election and God's will for our lives. And one of the, one of the big things is that Israel is elect, you know, chosen by God and chosen by God to suffer. And Jesus is elect. That's what Christ means. Anointed one chosen by God, chosen by God to suffer. And so people like, well, why does he get elected? Not them. Yeah. Be careful about the election you ask for, because you read Dostoevsky. So, you know, I think I, I love your story and I'm, I, it'll be amazing to see what God does with it, because this is how God works and why people will listen to you. People will listen to you. People will listen to you. And I think this is part of our industrial age. We get so used to, you know, every phone coming out, looking the same that we think, oh, the world is supposed to work that way. Yeah. People aren't that way at all. And our lives aren't that way at all. So, no, God is clearly working on you and working through you. And God has, is working his story through you and your story through him. And it's just beginning. Well, that, you know, and what I love about your story is that the way you tell your story nicely shows how in Christianity, we have this question about, well, when God, when Jesus comes again, when God kind of brings this chapter called human history to its conclusion, well, what about all the bad things? Well, stories actually have the power to work backwards. Yeah. And we see that all the time in good movies, good movies, you'll, you know, oh, it's terrible. And then you get to the end and then suddenly all of the tragedy that happened before, all of the loss and failure now suddenly gets shifted. And you was it hard? Yeah. Was it was it was it terrible? Yeah. But in the end, somehow it gets turned to glory. So God does these things. I'm still uncomfortable. Yeah. Well, yeah, because we're Americans. And what's the what's the creed of being an American? I'm in charge of my life. No one writes a story but me. That's the American creed. And it's a stupid one. Yeah. It's first of all, it isn't true to begin with because your parents had you and all these other factors had in your life. And so, no, we're part of God's story. And he's telling stuff through us. And a part of us really doesn't like it. And that goes all the way back to Genesis three. So yours is a wonderful story. It's a beautiful story. And it's all grace. It's just God's gift to you. Right. I'm not going to understand it. Nope. Nope. Here's and the you know, and so one of the things I think about and OK, I'm a pastor, so I'm supposed to talk this way. But when I think about your love for the violin and I think about your love for the violin, and I started playing the violin when I was six. I haven't done anything with it. I don't have the love. I don't have a love. I don't have the same love for a violin that you do. I had the opportunity to start playing when I was six. Some of the people that I learned violin with when I was in first grade went on to be professional violinists. They are. They are doing that now. You have sounds like a gift and you certainly have a desire. But by virtue of your life story, you know, will you ever be a concert violinist? Probably not. But probably not here and now. What about the next chapters? I don't know. But again, it seems to me when when suddenly we imagine that the universe is, you know, the world is, you know, consciousness is primary and all of this stuff in the world gets shaped and moved and managed and colonized by consciousness and story. Well, this is only the beginning of our stories. Yeah. And that then really makes us uncomfortable because then we really have to confess we don't know a lot and we don't. But so what is God doing? I don't know, but sure is interesting. At least it's not. Well, and God is good. I mean, it's your story is so beautiful. And, you know, it really is beautiful, especially the part about me and my wife. It's yeah, it's really even though I still feel like she's I feel like she's supposed to come on board with me on this stuff. Maybe she will. Maybe she won't. Right. Maybe she will. And I know I can't force it. I know if I have any chance at all, it's just by continuing to love her the way I have been. That's right. And maybe she'll feel like there's something else that she needs to be involved in, something that she needs to learn. I don't know. I don't know. But your your job is to love her. That's your job. Right. And it's not that that's your job. It may it makes so much sense that if God wanted to get to her, it would go through me, though, doesn't it? Yeah, yeah. But God, God is an amazing novel writer. And like all good novelists, there are twists and turns and ironies and sometimes tragedies, the likes that we don't know how to manage. And life is full of those things. So I don't want to I don't want to rain on your parade. But, you know, it's OK. There's a you know, you're talking to your reminds me of Sheldon Van Auken's novel, not novel, his story, A Severe Mercy. It's as Sheldon Van Auken was he was a friend of personal friend of C.S. Lewis. And he his life started out. Well, he he he and his wife had the kind of relationship that. Very, very few people have. I mean, just intense, loving. I mean, you read the story of his relationship with his wife and it just it sounds mean the people who write romance novels, they can't write this well. I mean, it's just amazing. But you know, but then don't you know what's coming? Right. You know, she, you know, they're separated by death. I won't give away any spoilers. But so so then you have the question, why would God give such an amazing gift? And then let death take it. So now Sheldon Van Auken, now he has to deal with that. Right. And, you know, C.S. Lewis obviously had a similar thing in terms of eventually, you know, lifelong bachelor. Finally, he enjoyed David, men, you know, strange relationship, strange woman, strange man, fall in love. True bliss, you know, a miraculous feeling. And then the cancer comes back and she's taken from him. And this man that helped so many people come to Christ now doubts the whole business. You know, only God can write stories like that, but it's because it's true. That's why we say truth is stranger than fiction, because novelists wouldn't dare write the kinds of and your stories like that. You know, it's just amazing. It's it's beautiful. Yeah. I don't know. I feel like I feel like the answer to all those things you're saying is that this isn't that's not the end of the story, though. Right. That's right. That's right. That's exactly. And and but again, if you if you go back and you look at your atheist self a number of years ago, yeah, yeah, no, that's you hear that and you'd say, you know, it's not the end of the story. This is the beginning of the story. Right. And and well, then see, and right then you you're stuck with the dilemma of trust, because even if you had an amazing experience like yours and it's like, I want I want, you know, now I have a sense of the power of what God can do. Well, then it's like, OK, God, why don't you zap her or him or them? And see, that's the problem with that's the problem with this this idea about this crazy gift of grace that God gives. Why here and now and not there and them? Right. Well, it's complicated. Yeah. Well, again, with the Apostle Paul, Paul is standing there holding the cloaks of the people stoning Stephen. And you might say, well, you know, Lord, if you had kind of showed up to him and if you can show up to him on the road of Damascus a few years later, couldn't you just move the timeline up a little bit? And that's the way that I used to think stuff like that. Yeah. Yeah. Why didn't he just pick up all the Jews in his infinite way and then move them out of Egypt? Little cloud with all this drama. That's right. Yeah. But yeah, so I don't know. Maybe I'm not being helpful at all because no, no. Yeah. I mean, it. I it's there's not very many people I can tell a story to. And so I just really appreciate being able to tell it to you. I've I've told it to I've told the father, David, because I felt like I really needed to tell him. And I feel like he was in his church was a part of it. And he gave me some great advice, which was you have to honor that. He said a couple of times the way he says it was deep voice that you were told your wife comes first. And. And then, you know, he was really glad that I told him and he gave me a hug. And. You know, and I told him when we started, I've never had a meal with a priest before. This is outrageous. I told I told a woman at work a little bit about the experiences that I had, who's an atheist. And she suggested I might need to get an MRI or a CAT scan. And there's a part of me. That is still so connected with that way of thinking that I can actually think that about myself in a way, even after all of that. People say those kinds of things to me and I just laugh because my my churches, I'm on a daily basis dealing with homeless people, schizophrenics, people with bipolar. I see crazy all day long. Yeah. You're kind of crazy. People would pay money for. I mean, yes. Thank you. I mean, I certainly agree because it you know, I can't I don't know that I can totally. Ascribe it to what happened to me, but I don't have eggs eggs enough right now. I don't have subarachid dermatitis. This I never would grow this out because I would get it here and here and it would flake and it should be red. I've had this for this. I actually trimmed it once, but I haven't shaved it in a month and I don't have that. I do have this this cream that I've been using, but it's I mean, nothing has ever worked. So I don't think the cream is really what's there. I mean, you know, it could be cream, but it's kind of funny how I feel so much better in many, many ways, even in that way. Yeah. And, you know, I read one time that anxiety is the feeling you get when you stare into the abyss. And I never understood what that meant. But now that I feel like the hole in my soul, which I think that really was what that was, is closed up. I feel like it's closed up and I it's like the anxiety is gone. I mean, even the things that gave me the most anxiety don't give me anxiety. And I cannot express how amazing that is. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, and part of the problem we have in the West is we have adopted a we have adopted a, in my opinion, a rather arbitrary position that things like this don't happen. And that position is maintained contrary to fact. So Craig Keener, someone just pointed me to some lectures that Craig Keener was given in Biola. Craig Keener is a New Testament scholar who married a woman from Africa. And he's done two volumes on miracles. And he's just going story after story after story after story. I just, in fact, a conversation that I will I will share because I've got a whole bunch of them stacked out for the second part of this month when I'm not going to be posting a lot. But someone will tell a story about how, you know, he this this guy had diabetes and this this he was praying and praying and praying. He he wasn't on any drugs at the moment. And, you know, a being of light shows up, touches him in the head. And for the next few months, he has no diabetes. Now, you know, here's something about diabetes. You know, it isn't none of, you know, type one diabetes is not psychosomatic. No, it's it's it's medically diagnosable. You can do a blood test. I mean, if you if you're pricking your finger and you're not taking insulin and your sugar levels are OK. Well. You know, all your your pancreas kicked in, you know, it's that matter. But, you know, so what you just described happens and it happens all over the world and it's happened all through human history. And so. This this American idea that this stuff doesn't happen, that's a story that has been propagated on on certain populations in the world that most people in the world look at and laugh at. It's definitely, yeah, it's definitely just another story. It's another story. Yeah, like, like I could say that the things that happened to me was some kind of psychological experience that suddenly my ego opened up and emotions that I couldn't capture before. All of a sudden, I could I could get to them in some way. You know, there's there's like a psychotherapeutic terminology around that. But that doesn't explain the feeling of infinite joy at all to me. And it doesn't explain the fact that when it happened, it was like, I'm sure what that was. And you said this is where language, you know, a lot of the stuff that I'm working on, people want to then use the word supernatural. And I would say, well, there's another story, you know, the natural supernatural. It's not supernatural if there is infinite consciousness. If that is the natural world, then it's not supernatural. Exactly. And and the fact that did you have a psychological experience? Absolutely. That was a psychological experience. We have all these stories of causality that we use to account for things. But then the second turn we take is that we can control these stories of causality. And and the really hilarious thing is we believe that. And it's so farcical because people aren't in control of themselves at all. If we really were in control of this world, then all of the ways that we say we want the world to be, the world would be like that. And it isn't. So then you have to say, well, what's really going on? Well, now we're into areas that we are motivated to not want to believe for very real reasons. I do not want to believe that I am not in control of myself. I do not want to believe that someone else is writing a script for my life. And we somehow imagine that it will feel better if we'll call it random. What does random mean? Random means too complicated for us to understand. Well, that's more true than nobody's in charge. Well, if nobody's in charge, then we should probably live in total terror. That's part of the reason why I've never. You know, if I get if my doubts get going far enough, I get to the point of thinking that whole doubting business, it just doesn't take me anywhere. I might as well believe I might as well keep believing. Yeah. So. But I love your story. I love your story. So we do have we still do have some time if you want. If you have any questions on your on your sheet or anything else you wanted to talk about or if you basically wanted to share your story or what your goal was, I don't know. But I love I did read your email. And I remember part of the difference is I get an email and I actually bought that book right when I got your email because like, oh, I got to read that. Oh, really? Well, oh, yeah. You told your story and then Father David sent me an email said, oh, I just met Tim and he gushed on you for a while. OK, well, I cannot recommend that book highly enough. And you should look up Bernardo Castro. Strangely enough, this is another thing I got from Joe Rogan. He just tweeted out a an article that this guy wrote one day and then my investigated who he was. I found his books and he has actually gotten another Ph.D. now. He's doing his dissertation in idealism. And he's about to come out with another book that's full of his peer reviewed articles on idealism. And he's got. Particle physics and psychedelic research, neuroscience research to back his theories up. And that's like his goal to establish a peer review, scientifically sustainable, idealist. Perspective or theory, whatever the proper terminology is, to try to break through the materialist worldview in science. I mean, what a goal, right? Yeah, it's amazing goal. He's a brilliant, brilliant guy. So I think especially since I know that you have been reading that Michael Pollan book, there's a lot about psychedelics in his books, particularly that one. I mean, the other thing that we kind of talked about is this whole thing about what is a calling and where does your interest come from? Because, you know, for the longest time, I thought that I was crazy and doing the wrong thing by not being able to stop playing the violin. And I felt guilty about it because of what it was doing with my marriage. And it's not like those feelings have necessarily gone away totally, but I do feel differently about it now. I. I have this thing, I think about things a lot and I have this kind of thing that sometimes I feel like when I maybe I've gotten to the answer because sometimes when I have a realization, I'll just start balling. And one of these one of those times when I was ruminating on why did I do that for so long? I came to the conclusion that, well, it was I was being honest. I mean, it was honestly what I loved. And it was and I kept asking, why can't I stop doing that and just focus on being the best lawyer I can be? I see other people doing that. Why can't I do that? And then I would think, well, look at those. Some of those other people, they're divorced. They're their kids are in a bad way. They're not healthy themselves. Maybe they don't have it right. Maybe even though this doesn't seem to be right in some ways, it feels like I'm supposed to do this. It just feels like that. Sometimes I think that. I was just supposed to do it, you know, and when I start thinking this way and I start thinking how now that I can make up for all of that with my wife, which seems to be happening. Maybe it was OK. Maybe I was supposed to do that. Maybe I was. Maybe I was even doing the right thing by at least being honest and at least. You know, I mean, I don't that's just what I thought. And when I thought that it was like it felt like it felt like the truth. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway, I don't know. A lot of people that wish they had something as an obsession, as glorious as violin playing. Well, violin music is glorious. I don't know about my playing, but. Well, I know. I know what it means to squeak on a violin. I think I just I don't know. It's we our lives are our lives are deeply mysterious. And. How all this, you know, this whole this obsession we have with answers. So this morning, you know, I was working on I was working on a. I'm working on a video that maybe I'll have time to record today. My schedule is just nuts lately, but on, you know, back to Peterson talking about Piaget and his equilibrated state. And so I've been I re listened to some of Peterson's lectures on Piaget and, you know, basically. Basically. All is at rest is is in some ways kind of like dead and, you know, I'll add to my I got to tell you something else in a minute. Sorry. Go ahead. So so, you know, God, God disturbs us and God disturbs us because, you know, C.S. Lewis, one of his more famous quotes that people absolutely hate, you know, pain, pain is God's megaphone for a deaf world. You know, I remember one person hearing that, you know, thinking. What does that really make God? And so these are these are hard, hard questions, but your your violin, the role that your desire to play the violin has played throughout your life. It's it's very interesting. And I do I do believe that there will be satisfaction and I there will be satisfaction and glory from it someday. But that's that's just one of these things that God enjoys writing. Well, now I'm now I'm OK with it. I'm actually I put it away and I can't I can't say I won't ever come back, but I'm OK with it now. It's like like I wasn't before. And I do have my daughter who plays piano and I love practicing with her and she has the same kind of things about not focusing sometimes. Yeah, I know what that is. And I now I know how to deal with it. And so having you know, I never had somebody like me there to be patient with her and walk her through what you do in doing that. And and I learned these things from what I went through. Right. Yeah. Yeah. So even though I never have gotten to be a real, you know, like a professional violin teacher, I'm like an amateur piano teacher with my daughter. And it is extremely meaningful. I mean, it's like one of my favorite things to do. It's wonderful. It's just wonderful. It's such a great story. There is one other thing I want to tell you. OK, it's just it's just another part of this whole thing that happened the Friday before we went to New York. I had a dream and because of all the young that I read, I try to, you know, write up dreams mean anything. But I had this dream and I was in my grandmother's house and this was the grandmother who was a Baptist. And I just had this feeling like everything was just right. And everything it was hazy. It's not like I could really see things in my grandmother's house, but I knew I was in my grandmother's house and I knew that everything was just right and there was a lot of light. And then I heard the garage door open and I went to open the door to the garage and I see the garage door opening up and I see my wife getting out of the car and she's got the two dogs with her that we had before we had kids. And I just get this feeling like, you know, here she is. Right. She's coming. And then I wake when I wake up, that's it. That was it. I wake up. I was the most peaceful that I ever felt. Wow. I mean, just completely, completely at peace. You know, I can't explain it other than to say that it was just so incredibly peaceful. And I don't know what it meant. I mean, I have a guess. Yeah. This was after all this stuff happened. And I felt like, you know, I was in the place of my ancestors, so to speak. And that my wife is on her way. That's what I felt about. But anyway, I just wanted to tell you that. I love your story. I love your story. It's good. It's good. It's really good. I don't know about posting this. I can understand. I can understand because, you know, you're a lawyer. You've got, you know, yeah. Yeah. And trust you. I mean, my wife will have to be okay with it. No, absolutely. So what I will do is I will send you the copy. You share it with your wife and you think about it. And if you decide you want to share it, let me know. I'd be happy to share it. Okay. Well, I want to know what you think, too. I mean, do you think you gave me a little bit of a warning, which I am going to think about? Well, you I think it's I think it's a story. That would encourage and inspire people. Other people would listen to it and feel, why didn't God give me that story? Yeah, that's something they're going to have to deal with with God. Your God's story for you is his gift to you. And if you would share it, I know that people would I know that others would be really encouraged by it. But it's I think it's important that you and your wife, you and your wife think about it and decide. And only when you're comfortable would we share something like this. Okay. I appreciate that. No, because it's important because this is the thing. You say YouTube is for people that don't have nothing to lose and I don't feel that way. Right. No, no. And you're right. It's I wish people would be I think we would all probably be a little bit better generally sharing a little bit more with each other. I do, too. And I I want to get there, but I have to be careful about it. And I did. But I definitely have to have my wife. Yes, you do. And it's because, again, your job, you know, we're we're the most clear thing Jesus says to us. So so we had we had a meet up in Southern California and Job was there. I've done three videos with Job and Job was there. And Job was just sharing with us because he's been reading the Bible. And he said he was reading the Gospel of John. And he said it's a really strange thing that Jesus before he leaves, he says to his disciples, here's here's the one thing I want you to know. And and the most important thing I'm going to tell you is that you need to love each other. And Job was like. It's there's something kind of strange to that, isn't it? That that, you know, this is the one thing. This is the one thing. And so, you know, in terms of of everything you need to do, you need to love your wife. And so that's whether or not whether or not she follows you in this path. Yeah, that's it. See, so here's the joy every great joy has on the other side of it, a burden. Yes. And so you love her. You you love her whatever the path. And that's that's well, that's the cross because the cross carrying the cross is that's the journey of love. And that's Americans don't think that way about it, but that's what it is. So no, I will. I'm going to. So I close this and then the video gets rendered. And then I'm going to I'm going to I'm going to ship it to you. And and you watch it with your wife and and you two decide. And if you decide that you both are we're comfortable sharing it and you'd like to let me know and I'll post it. Otherwise, it will just stay between us. Well, thank you for everything you do, Paul. Seriously. Oh, it's really appreciate it. You know, this is this is so much fun. This is well, so much fun. It's not easy either all the time. I'm sure. Yeah. Well, but that's that's that's what love requires, right? Yeah. Well, God bless you. God bless you. Thank you for sharing your story with me. All right. Take care. OK. Bye bye.