https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xzqhjmGdULc

 Alright. Well, well Carl, why don't you begin? Most people on my channel know me. So why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? Yeah, so my name is Carl Killo. I became interested in Dr. Peterson Specifically, oh probably a little over a year ago. I was watching a lot of him on Stefan Molyneux As I was starting to wonder why all my atheist friends were Were so far progressive And I couldn't quite couldn't quite get that one around my head and so I kind of went from there and when when dr. Peterson's Book 12 rules for life came about I I think I had gone through the biblical lecture series and That opened my mind up enough to help me go from extreme radical militant atheism all the way to Now I believe in everything that the Bible says just really verbatim. Yeah, when did this happen? So The final leap into God's arms as I like to put it it was was probably really just about about a month ago and But slowly getting closer and closer to the point where I could make that Final step which I believe very wholeheartedly has to be done by yourself That took quite a bit and I like like you lobster back there behind your head Like you lobster back there behind your head His name is buck. Oh, that's what the mascot for our meetup. Very nice Yeah, so I guess I I got up to the dr. Peterson got me to the point where I could go. Okay. Well, there's something for me here So let me start reading the Bible. Let me start going to church and then I was like, okay Well, the more I did that and the more I started especially living by rule 8 which was tell the truth or at least don't lie Then I really got to the point where I could start to see how my actions would come back to me directly it and in a very fair and Almost trustworthy manner and what do I mean by that? I mean that instead of being scared of speaking the truth because I had been for a very long time with the number of people because I wanted to Tell them what they wanted to hear other than what I actually believed And so I would always go around life Like it was full of minefields and I had to be careful what I said there and I had to be Cautious of that thing and oh wait, did I say that to this person? And how are they gonna react and so I let all of that go And I just started speaking what seemed to be true to me or at least Or I wouldn't get involved in the conversation at all Wow and and when I started doing that I Started getting these massive Red pill moments and by that I mean expecting Morpheus to call you on the phone kind of things That didn't just happen and I think it has something to do with being very plugged into The things that your unconscious wants you to know about The things that your unconscious wants you to know about and the list All this is a simplistic way to think about it but the less time that you spend wasting brain cycles on what I'm supposed to say and saying just what is The more likely you are to say something that's true And I think there's something really healing about that In a way that I never really understood before until I actually started doing it Well, we'll talk to me about how this has changed your life in ways that Someone say someone who couldn't let's say a deaf person couldn't hear what you have to say, but watch what you do Right, right. Yeah. Okay. So what did I do? well the one of the big catalysts was when I was teaching I Had been really Excited about the last job that I took and I was hoping that this was going to be the the pinnacle of great stuff What kind of stuff did you teach? So I was teaching I taught Biology and anatomy two years ago and this last year I was breaking into a school that I was hoping to be teaching at and I was teaching Why high school college? Yeah, so the years ago was junior high or sorry high school and and last year was junior high, okay, so And so that was that was a fun awakening for me because it was well Well, let me go try something new and wow I really like this something new and so I went walking into the The forest where it seemed most dark because teaching in front of a bunch of people seemed like a very scary thing at the beginning But when I actually went and did it I got a lot of reward out of it So Yeah, what did I what did I actually end up doing? Well, the big catalyst was that I got this job with high expectations Thinking that okay. Well if I just throw my all into this Into this career that will define me that will make me Make it so that I'm doing the best job that I possibly can in order to help the most people and I and I had really convinced myself of that and Then I get feedback from The place where I'm working and selling telling me well, no, you're obviously not doing that well enough because we we don't want you To come back next year Wow So, what do you do with that? Yeah. Yeah and and the realization had to come to my mind that Well, obviously something I'm not doing something that's that's right because well the meeting went down something like this I'm expecting to go in and have a really great conversation about what I'm gonna do next year the things that I'm excited about and The conversation goes well, guess what? You're not coming back. And so I asked them why what's the deal with that and they say Well, because you were asked to step up and you didn't I say, well, could you clarify that a bit? Yeah, and they couldn't So what does that mean? And you know, so there's there's a whole big pile of chaos to deal with right there. Yeah Yeah so, how did I deal with it well, I I took a really close look at myself because Either an entire institution was wrong or I was and it was a lot easier to look at myself than Then to look at the school. Let me just pause you there. Sorry. I didn't rambo. No, no, I want to commend you because what you did right there is is is is takes courage and It takes honesty that is unusual because the the reaction from most people is They're idiots. They're fools. They're you know blame My first reaction was to definitely do that because yeah, this is wrong and yeah, and and I was quite upset Yeah, and and definitely I think a Perfectly normal and natural response to heaven and I think so many of us go there and then just stay there Yeah, yeah but what you did was that's I Want to commend you for that because that's exactly what you should do because you can't control what they're going to do, right? But you can look at yourself. So I just want to commend you for that. That's that's thank you because that it turned out to be completely transformative and one of the times that I You know, it's funny. I went through my life thinking that I was always fighting for myself and What I realized was that I was just fighting against myself in order to be right all the damn time and sort of looking Instead of looking inside and going okay. Well there was something wrong What is it? Yeah. Yeah, surely there's something I can figure out. Yeah Wow, so it went something like that. So you looked at yourself and what did you find? well, so I took a big took a big look and Well, one of the first realization was that either I was doing my had no desire or or did not wish to do my job or Was incapable of doing my job to an extent where it would be easily recognizable by those who employed me To to go. Okay. Yeah, that's our guy And so there was obviously something holding me back and what were those things that I was ignoring? And the things that I was ignoring was that well one I had made this institution By pie in the sky and it wasn't and when I found that out rather than confronting that directly I decided that I was going to Well just kind of crawl forward rather than actually examining all of my True possibilities because when you have a job your possibilities are always constrained by okay How am I gonna get the money to do the things that I have to do not the things that I want to do And so there's there's all of that going Going on in my mind, but and then I Guess I'm gonna pat myself on the back a little bit here, but in the first meeting the That I had when I got the harsh news my reaction was well, you know, I feel like And I did it in kind of a bitter resentful way, which I don't like but I was angry at the time so I'll forgive myself I Really took it as well look you're you're you're releasing me and now let me show you guys what I'm capable of doing And so there was a little bit of that revenge and all that in there But but it was but it was true in a way because it was true in a way that I could okay Well now I really hadn't I'd been Blinded by the confines of having this job and that the job was a needed and necessary thing and whereas there was there's there was an opening that came from Them releasing me from my shackles that I never knew that they had placed around my ankle Which was the mental shackle of oh I need this for money or I need this for other people to see me is doing something Worthwhile or things that I can be proud of and to display before others that will judge me thereby and and I started I Guess what happened was I started to look inside and go I don't care about any of all that I know what I'm good at. I know what's so Right and and and proper for me and I know God wants that for me So hey you had taken this turn towards God before Losing this job. Okay. So no, I hadn't really done that yet, but I was more open. I had Released the militant part of my atheism. Okay, but I was still pretty atheistic Okay, so I wasn't quite able to articulate it that way. Yeah, okay Okay, but it was a okay. Well something's wrong How are we gonna find out what's wrong, okay, and so I I started reading and I started There was this split in my mind it was between am I going to be the person that that goes down the path of What's available out there for me to fulfill or am I going to be a person that is going to hold down the weeds and create A new path And I think it was really scared of doing the second choice Okay, okay I think it was really scared of that because you're not supposed to do that. You're not supposed to be entrepreneurial You're supposed to provide safety My background is I'm an only child of an only child and you could almost think of it as single mom to single mom So I've got a lot of that Desire for control and safety. I think building a new path Desire for control and safety I think built into me and I've really had to Pull back the curtain of my own ego to see what's been playing in the back of my mind To to to get to the point to realize that yeah a lot of what I had believed in was very Risk adverse and By being risk adverse I would actually set myself up for traps to where I wouldn't take the appropriate amount of risk To where that would allow me to succeed I would only take the appropriate amount of risk to where I could guarantee failure Okay Okay, that's that's that's a pretty strange way to put it But I think it's I think it's right because you can you can be out there kind of fishing around Doing things half-assed That'll guarantee that you don't ever do anything in innovative or you can really Well take the step off the cliff edge and and hope that the invisible bridge is there and and And and really go for it and do fully commit to the things that you know are right rather than Leaving yourself a toehold in the safety. That's that's behind you. Okay. So what have you done? Are you go back to teaching? Are you? Doing your own thing or what? So this is it. Yeah, my big choice is Well, I've got enough money saved up that I can Fully commit to making some changes that I think are very vital and And they're gonna start with me Because I'd always been providing very much for what I Was told was supposed to be right rather than what I actually believed was right and until I was able to get To the point where I felt like I was really listening to God For what was correct and right and moral and good to build on the To make my life to be something that I was would speak would be seen as worthy when I die then How am I going to live my life? And so I think the way to do that is to it's had been there in front of me all the time and we've got Thousands of years worth of records in the Bible that I've been ignoring And so one of the things that I did was actually go to the Bible And so one of the things that I did was actually go instead of oh one of those things I'm going to get around to one of these days is read the Bible is hey, I'm going to read the Bible Imagine that actually read it right Yeah, okay Well, it says this weird stuff right and who would believe that ha ha And then you can ignore it this is for as long as you want and then you actually start reading it This is what happened to me uh I would read it and You would get very personal Like you could almost imagine especially if I was reading a gospel that the a parable or something was specifically about about my life and And the gospels are written in such an amazing way that they seem to really They well this is the effect they had on me it was almost like Being able to Communicate across across a vast distance of time because these were written thousands of years ago But they were written the stories were written in such a way that they can connect to any just about any human experience that is that we know of so far and That when I was fine, I finally let go of all the I really want this to be wrong So let me read the Bible for to find out why it's silly and stupid and started to read it for okay It's thousands of years old What have I been missing Am I greater than the ancestors of thousands of years old ago that Bothered to collect all this material that at least got me to the point of of reading it right? Can you give me an example? So Of it being personal for me. Yeah Let's see So I was having A read through and I think I read You And it's funny how you'll you'll come back to a particular parable over over and over again, so I I was thinking of the parable of the talents in Matthew and how What the the the three servants or slaves depending on which translation you're using are all Receiving money from their master and the one that is the most able receives the most money The one that is of medium ability receives a medium amount of money and the one that has the least amount of money Is the least amount of money? and But it's all fair. It's here. Here's what you've done so far What what can you do next? And isn't that how you should live your life? And and what have you been proven worthy of so far? Yeah Yeah, and and the master isn't just some random master. He's You know god patting us on our heads saying look You didn't you good. You did a good job with all this that I gave you great. Here's some more. Yeah Yeah, but and only to the last guy that he says well look here. I gave you something You did nothing you did nothing Yeah Anybody can do nothing I picked you So who are you in that story So for most most of my life I was I was the the third servant Yeah, um definitely the third servant expected of The things that I was born into and I include in that not only a Being born in the west And being born into uh a wealthy a wealthy family, but also to um Because I had resources in the beginning never really having any respect for them what it took to earn them because I I inherited a lot of money early on and I Ended up mismanaging it out of my own arrogance and pride that oh, well only an idiot would would mismanage it and Well, I guess i'm an idiot And you can find that out the hard way or not And so yeah, well and so you can be all resentful for that but then what are you gonna do with that knowledge? Yeah, because there's a reason why God led you down that path and he didn't just say here's everything that you could ever possibly imagine and want Live in luxury and peace. Goodbye. Yeah Because that wasn't the message I got from god. Hey, hang on one second Hey, yeah, i'm working i'm working on something right now, okay, i'll be done maybe one inch Okay, i'll be here. Yeah, i'll be here between i'll be here often Sorry about that when people see my car I don't have a secretary or anything so they just knock on my door and Yeah, that's all you or nobody right? Yeah, it's me, baby So, yeah, I mean well so the message I got was all right. Well, here's the harsh reality. What are you gonna do with it? Obviously you weren't prepared in a way to handle all that money. Well, was it about you that made you ill prepared? and I ignored that through my next journey, I suppose which was to take a teaching And And I think the serenity prayer comes comes to mind a whole lot and and the The wisdom to know what you can change rather than raging against that which you cannot Um, and and always look inwardly First and then what can I change around me smallest that's I can test out make sure i'm not hurting anybody by Transmitting my beliefs and then what what's the step? forward from there And so yeah, take it slow easy steps and then see What grows from it? If you start getting fruit then grow more of that. Yeah, you know it takes people don't often Realize how much strength it takes to be self-critical In the health in a healthy way But if you can do that there's so much I mean that's Because we can't change other people we we can we can only work on ourselves. And so You know, i'm i'm not at all surprised to hear what you're saying But I do want to commend you because that's it. This is how we grow. This is how we learn and it's and it's interesting So how have you seen that play out in terms of your turn from atheism to faith? Yeah, let's see so well the big thing was really Tell the truth or at least don't lie And I really tried to do that as much as I could and to And that as I started to do that, it was It became very apparent to me that well that I needed to stop Acting in way that would act these acting in ways that would force me to lie Because there were a lot of things that I didn't want other people to know about And then when I started reading And a good friend of mine who's been a christian all of his life recommended that I read the gospel of john And when I read that I thought dear god, that's so right all the stuff that I didn't want anybody to know about How much energy was I spending on that when I could have just let the line the light shine on everything that I do And I could have an immense amount of satisfaction satisfaction and peace for that and in fact the more I understand that the more that I can speak truth in the word and I can see it heal people and so the path that that allowed me to take was the new relationship that I've Formed since just towards well, it's only really been a few months now have been completely open and honest and I don't bother with the Well, I really care about I care what you think but I don't bother with the Okay. Well, how do I need to behave in order for you to think a certain way? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah Because that's way too much way way too much for me to deal with. Yeah, here's what I am Here's what I believe Let's just talk to each other because the other thing is way too exhausting. I can't do the other thing. I've done it for you know 44 years and yeah Yeah with that So the more the more I did that the the the easier and the more clear my path became And every time I had to make a choice so I was presented with a choice for my last job and the last and it presented me with a couple of Situations that just made my guts wrench And then it was because I was going to have to act out an untruth and I become so Sensitive to that that I I knew I wasn't going to be able to do that job without Drinking myself to death more than likely. Yeah. Yeah now now I would you know a couple times You've said something like, you know, you're hearing God now imagine you're You know, you remember yourself as an atheist. Oh man, that would have been absolutely insane How you would hear that so try and explain that a little bit to someone because I've got a lot of atheists who do Watch my channel how? How could they understand this change in language that you're making? Well, it was it was slow so this is why you have to you have to love yourself in order to be able to approach God and it's and because if you're Coming about it with a mindset of self-loathing or there's something wrong with me And that makes it harder for God to talk to you Um, and so what did it feel like? and I would Couch my words in the beginning and and I would be feel very restrained about Speaking of it in terms of like I just did with well being able to hear God but it honestly was the the easiest way to put it and the most The most economically feasible as far as the language goes and then when I realized that I'm like, well there's There's got to be a reason for that So there's something very very natural about Wanting to use the word God to describe certain things about the way we behave and the way the world works And so there's nothing wrong with that. So that was one step so I didn't have to be Super scared about the whole mysticism thing and I've actually written a little post Because I went back to some of my old atheistic forums to see how they would treat my journey and And so I got some decent engagement off of it, but the the main point is I was I hadn't quite committed to christianity at this point when I but when I I guess I was at the point of Well, hey, let's go explore these things instead of instantly dismissing them And so I was I was reading something out of well I was starting to read the bible more and my post was just because something is tied in mysticism doesn't mean we get to Automatically dismiss it And so because what are you what are you missing out on? and so having that mindset And being able to go on well, okay, what made this useful? Why was this useful? Why did people just so readily accept the usage of the word God for something that's so? Mysterious and beyond and beyond being the true at the same time um and I and I think the reason for that is just It needs to be a little bit mysterious because God is very personal for most of us um, and if you're going to church or have been to a church service and And and looked around you and thought I don't think and believe like these people. Well, yeah Of course you don't And no, you don't have to be like the lady swinging in the isles God For you to get your thing out of it Because that's a lot in a short time And and so I went uh I explored a lot of the the churches around and a lot of them were these fairly large mega churches that that learn how to put On a on a really good show that attracts people and you know, and I was a little resentful about them for a while, but I realized that That well any path that lets you take that first step to god Is is a good virtuous one and so I don't You get too bad on the on the uh on the big mega churches, although I do kind of Feel like a small close-knit church is is is the one for me Yeah, so I don't know that was a lot of rambling there, but I hope no no it was good helpful. Yeah, that was helpful So I I've got I got conversation stacked up. So I I wish we had more time we can talk again sometime I'd be happy to but um, you know, we got about we got about 20 minutes left So I don't want to my pastor mode is I just keep poking and asking questions and that's what I do So but I don't want to do I don't want to take your whole time doing that What did you want to talk to me about? Well, I want to share I mean, i'm really interested in And what seems to be a phenomenon that is Starting to Bubble back up to the surface which is getting this I think we've been disconnected for a very long time and that we hit the radio and television era and that allowed us to get our new sources from A very streamlined source And to be narrowed down and and I think what i've been discovering in Well, there's a young man that made a jordan peterson meetup group in the area where I am and we were Uh, but we've been able to get together And just have great conversations uh from those kinds of little small localized Uh meetings that are that tend to be face to face and you have like just a few people talking at a time and we're gonna we're gonna Practice and distill that format down but what I from my readings and things that i've done Uh, i'm really i'm a really big i'm a big fan of carl rogers Who is who you've probably heard of from dr peterson a few times and and his I guess call to fame or at least the thing that I that I that really stands out for me is the ability of humans to Really do something magical and special for themselves when they get in a small group together Let all the shields down And talk truth. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yep. Yep, and and it heals in a way that Is like biblical healing like everything that I've that i've ever read in the bible about that being a miracle But sounds like a miracle to me because i've seen some pretty amazing things happening and when the more that happens We don't do that enough. I think if if if we got together in small groups and and talked and Didn't try to worry about pleasing the other person so much as to as so much as to say what you think is true and is relevant and And good to say at the time not just because you're dying to say something but because this it really is something that needs to be said then you get some really amazing conversations that reveal truths in ways that Are very rare these days uh, and so I I think my the next part of my journey is to Um, well, obviously we've been getting the internet for a reason through all of our hard work and all this and and it's And like most things created by man, they can either be it's it's a it's a double-edged sword, right? and so it can either get clamped all the way down or it can be made for the For one of the greatest goods that we've ever known and I think the way to make it the greatest good is to encourage people to get themselves a camera and a microphone and Get on the net and talk to people in small groups In in ways where you can feel like you can you can really share and be open and not worry about the other person judging you Because when we're spending time dancing around all this The pain that comes from not wanting to expose ourselves fully because we know that if we reveal something vulnerable about ourselves then we Will we make ourselves vulnerable and how is that person going to hurt or hurt us back at that and if we Make that first leap and go here. I am. Let me tell you something about me that that Could be spun back on us that in a way that is could be really painful if someone laughed at an experience of yours Of yours for for example And then instead of being your worst fears being confirmed where someone does laugh and make fun of you they go And that reminds me of this situation that I have and it's almost identical to that and they share something back You've just made a friend for life And you don't have to have the whole world be your friend But you do need those people that are going to treat you that way and and I and I think that With seven billion people on the planet We need to start using this technology to bring us to bring us closer together have very intense small conversations small groups That let everybody share And no one has to feel like they're in the shadows hiding Yeah, because I think the shadows are where the dark things in our hearts really do grow and prevent us from because we all have these feelings of you know of darkness and and And pain and and we don't want to deal with them uh So we tend to ignore them But I think what needs to happen is you have to share some of some of the things about yourself that you're the most scared to share So so you've um you and someone else have started a meetup and how many times have you met? so we've got um A local one which is sort of the big fissures net to see who comes in and then online we will do So i'm on my channel and I and I tend to record them because I think I never know where the conversations go, but there's always something interesting that comes out of them. Um But on on monday and tuesday evenings i've been i've been throwing open my channel for just Live long conversations for as long as they need to go and and and Especially young men they're hungry for more. Yeah, they're like a chance where someone's not gonna Well, I don't have to go through this filter of society I can just say what I need to say and if I get wrong feedback from these guys Or feedback that I don't like then they're gonna tell it to me in a way that helps me understand why they believe what what they believe rather than I must bow down to my ideological god and support it and and and in service to Whatever the whim of of the time happens to be um Because that really stifles truth and when we can't speak truth Something inside of us rots away Yeah, it's true. It's true Because I feel fed like i've never felt fed before in my entire life when I had these conversations with especially with other other young men I mean like really like what i'm doing matters big time matters. Yeah. Yeah so so have you resolved the um I know you're you're living off some savings. Have you I went to your blog a little bit and poked around you're doing some web stuff or what's so all over the place. Yeah okay, and and I guess the balancing act is You know, what how much do I spend? On creating the background and how much do I And how much and by spend I mean time more than anything else, right? We can't get back and i'll live in poverty for as long as I need so long as I feel like i'm doing the right thing but uh, I think that if you are doing the right thing then you'll you'll end up being rewarded for that, so You know, I i'm going to try and and host post these online sessions and to My blog stuff out there and and if it gets if it gets noticed then then it gets When it gets noticed and and and i'll continue to do that and if it and if it doesn't then well then my message needs to be refined or The time is not right for my message or my message is wrong. Well, I I think you know as you said I And this comes I mean we're finally You know as a christian we're finally As you said in the parable of the talents We're we're accountable to an audience of one And I think culturally we place a lot of emphasis on size You know mega churches You know jesus you would think you would think If if jesus thought like this he would have tried to present to his audience of thousands up in the gallerly You know some some whiz bang surefire program with eight steps and four rules and and and and everybody to follow this and then we'll remake the world into a glorious kingdom of god He doesn't do that. He's got doesn't happen that way. He's got 12 disciples, which is clearly mirroring the the 12 tribes He's got three in his inner circle And when it comes down to the moment of his greatest trial they all run and only John who probably at that point as a boy is there at the crucifixion with the women with all the big men hiding somewhere so you know god loves small things and I You know You know I I I I love pastoring a small church I It's so often the case that god does his best works without the cameras on In in places where just like you described people are talking together. They're not trying to impress each other They're not lying as peterson says but they're They're not they're not lying and right and so I you know, I I can see in your face the joy that you found in doing what you're doing so I I pray that god gives you the resources to To do it as that would be a wonderful blessing if that if that is what he has in store for me Yeah, you know a very wonderful blessing indeed. Thank you so much You know and it's it's you know, it's not unlike being married. You're married to one person and if you're married a long time You begin to discover I mean tim keller says in his book how you know, everyone marries the wrong person You just don't figure that out to a few years after you're married and then and then the the the test of marriage is to Is to then you know make it make it go with that person That's the reason arranged marriages have worked for a long time or because we change all the time so it's I I really appreciate what you're doing with You know transparent authentic conversations one-on-one or in small groups I mean churches the big churches the irony is that the big churches They have the big show and that's got its own talk the least Yeah, but but then they oh we got to do small groups But big churches always struggle with the small group thing because Big churches realize it's often at that level If you've got a thousand people in a church, not everybody can sit and talk to the pastor. Yeah, it's just too darn busy so What you're doing is what you're doing is What the church has always done it's people often get confused that it's the big show, but the big show has its place But it's it's the relationships it's the face-to-face relationships where people know each other For the good and the bad I think so, too And I it's it's I guess i've tried to think about it in this way I think The diversity of the church is is really important and one of the places where diversity is kind of ignored because we tend to well, like Most people we grow up I think a little bit rebellious against Whatever institution we're born into And if you have another church that's slightly different maybe that gives young people something to fall into instead of instead of because I I've thought about this very seriously in that It doesn't really matter whether We are growing up in a way to understand god or is it that god is slowly revealing himself to us over time? And I think it doesn't really it doesn't really matter or it's a combination of the both And if that's true, then that means that our either our understanding of god or god himself is evolving in some way Well, I think god is continuing to change us the christian story Presupposes that What god does in our lives usually at his own timing? Timing in his own way is he draws us into the likeness of his son? Which is also You know you individually. I mean we're not all duplicates of a first century man born in Bethlehem who grew up in nazareth right god shapes us according to You know the the creation that he's he's making us to be and this is this our Our world our life right here is just the first chapter in this far larger story Right, right. Yeah, absolutely and which is I think why the bible is so brilliant now that i've been having actually taken the time to read to read some of it Oh that that uh, it's Such an unbelievable document that it can it can be so personal even though it's so So ancient and so that that speaks to the things within us that are ancient and do not change as well as to the things that Have to grow in order for us to reach the kingdom of heaven It's an astounding thing because I can pull I can pull books off my shelf that are 100 years only 100 years old And i'll look at them and already It's archaic it's past but to think about this book and not only to think about it in terms of time But in terms of cultures, you know, I tell the story often missionaries go into a jungle somewhere and they learn the language of a tribe and they They try then to render they people they never written language So they develop a written language and they teach the people their own written language and they translate the bible and they give it Right and sometimes the missionaries leave and these people well, they'll do things that to us kind of look crazy, but they They get the book and they're interested in the book that that is a People don't realize what a miraculous thing just that fact just that part. Yeah, and and so here Write something like that. That's unbelievable. That's a miracle of itself right? It is it really is. Yeah Yeah, so we've got about five minutes. So if there's anything you want to say, oh, I wanted to talk to paul about this. So Let's see. Um well how much work because I think a lot of what i'm going to do is going to I'm going to focus my attention on undoing the work that stephen j gould did Which is to talk about non-ever non non overlapping magisterium, which is how we put science in religion Yeah, and I and I think that's a big problem Yeah, and it's a big problem because Our creative talents are unleashed in in in in a particular direction when we Keep god in mind and they are very destructive and we do not and the 20th century has been Constant stark reminders of how well we can do We can do that when we don't take care to what for what we create And we already have multiple ways of destroying the world over and we've had ridiculous wars and famines as i'm sure you know about so I guess I to me it's really important to find a way that lets people feel okay again with being oriented towards god and not having to feel like they need to defend themselves for some ancient mystical belief That only fools would believe in Because that was definitely the problem that I had for a long time and because it's not that at all in fact, it's something that I think is is absolutely Necessary and key for the survival of mankind So I know what am I going to do with that? Yeah Yeah, so the plan then is to try and merge the bible back with science a little bit more because right now it seems like we've got two we've got two camps, yeah, and Either one of them is doomed to die on its own. So you're so you've got some training in in the sciences I'm a biologist and uh, and i've read a lot of dockings richard dockings work, yeah, and And because I went through militant atheism I went through I know a lot of the science and the background for it So have you started working on this because this is an area that that you know a number of christians are working in and in Various ways. Yeah. So who are you reading and Have any initial thoughts? so One book on my plate is uh, I keep forgetting his name I really really I should really know it the gentleman that that headed the uh, the human genome project project Oh, yeah, philip francis collins francis francis collins the Language of god the language of god. Yeah. Yes. Have you read that? Yeah. Yeah, i've read i've i've i've i didn't finish the book I've read part of the book Okay Yeah, he's a very interesting guy I think that's right up my alley and and the way i've been able to as i've been reading through the bible i'm like Well god, I don't think This has been reconciled with what we now know and what god has slowly revealed to us Have you have you found the biologos.org website Biologos no, I haven't seen that yet. Okay biologos francis collins helped found biologos And um has some from the christian reform church has some calvin college and ex-calvin college people Uh the harm smuz the husband and wife. He's a physicist. She's I don't know what her she she used to teach at common college Now she's leading the biologos Um, so there's there might be some interesting materials there that you'd be interested in There's a there's an outfit out of england. Uh, justin briarley. He has a What's been a radio program for years called unbelievable? Oh, yeah, I I listened to peterson on on his yeah So if you go back in the archives of that he He works on that kind of stuff a lot and you'll find a lot of A lot of scientists who come on his show and talk about points with that and and you know that people often think that You know christians are all young earth creationists are but really there's a huge diversity among christians on any of these Questions that was my original push away from christianity was oh Well, you guys think you have it all figured figured out already, which is absolutely not the truth Um, and and and that was what led me to atheism was the false belief the christians believed they knew everything Yeah, and and another another resource is the veritas forum Okay, that they do a lot of those conversations, too. They'll have say a Scientist who is a believer and a scientist who's a skeptic and yeah, they'll have you know, a lot of people think well It's all these long-form Civil productive meaningful conversation started with peterson actually there have been a number of places in the christian world Where we've been doing this for a long time you'd bio logos and bio logos veritas and unbelievable all three have been Having these things online. It's just that It's it's not all the gotcha moments, which right it's the fuel hit bait Mm-hmm. So there there are a lot of good resources out there. So you'll have uh, you'll have plenty of good company I think I think so, too I'm gonna take a look and so that's where i'll go from this That's that's pretty much why I wanted to have the conversation I knew there would be something great that would come out of it in some direction that I would get so i'm going to go that Way good. Well, what i'll what i'll do is I will um I'm gonna i'm gonna let i'm gonna let zoom render this thing And i'll post it on my channel and i'll send you a copy in case you want to post it, too That would be amazing. Thank you and we'll we'll take it from there So I really appreciate your time paul. It's been very valuable for me. Well, thank you carl and I I wish you god's blessings is I mean you're just you're just getting started baby It's and I'm drinking from the fire hose as fast as I can I just I pray that god use you and and do wonderful things through you. So thanks a lot. I appreciate it