https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=RKYrZB4BYUU

 One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10. Well, I think we're live. I don't know for sure. Rick and I always wind up. Okay, well Rick and I always wind up talking before these things. And I just have to, I just have to, we have to be really kind to Rick today because Rick has been waiting for a new stove and it was scheduled to be delivered this morning and he pushed it till Tuesday just so he could be here at church to run this podcast. So big special thanks to Rick for doing everything that he does here. Before the live stream, oh now I see him. Before the live stream, Rick and I were talking about branding and so we have, you know, when I first made my YouTube video, I made my first YouTube video, I emphasized I'm from Sacramento and Rick heard that and that's what brought Rick here. So Rick's like, we had to do a little bit better branding. So I've got mixed feelings about that, but here we are. So good morning everyone. I've got some backup questions, backed up questions from last week. Maybe I'll try to, oh we got lots of questions. All right, so for those of you, you know, Rick just gave me a lecture on branding. So for those of you who are just tuning in if we're gonna use some archaic speech, those of you who clicked on the YouTube and for some reason found me and you haven't clicked away yet, one of the things that you learn when you look at YouTube analytics is that an amazing number of people click away in less than 30 seconds before seeing the video. Now, I've got a lot of other thoughts about that, but for those of you who are staying, that's who we're here for. So Shosh Jules from last week said, good day Paul, what are your thoughts about Harvard University's new head of chaplaincy? I'm sure you are aware Mr. Epstein is a Jewish atheist. As a Jewish follower of Jesus and a certified chaplain, I have had conversations with our son about this very thing over a year ago. Our son is a wishy washy atheist and asked me if he could train to be a chaplain because he admires the mission. I responded, how do we give people hope in a seemingly hopeless situation apart from faith? I told my son that being an atheist is a deal breaker for chaplaincy. Well, I was wrong. Al Mohler does an informative short piece on Epstein and Harvard on his September 1 on his daily podcast, The Briefing. See, I wanna give short answers, but I just did a three hour and 12 minute video this week about something that many of you would say one way or another, yes or no. If you go back and you look at one of Glenn Scrivner's conversations with Tom Holland, a big part of Tom Holland's thesis is that secularity is really Christianity light and I think he's right. In fact, this morning I usually map out, if I write a script, not really a script, a PowerPoint for a video, I usually do it in the very early morning and I did one this morning that I'll probably record today along with my rough draft and then post it on Monday. I've still got an awesome conversation, a randos conversation that I recorded a couple of weeks ago that I haven't published yet and I'm going to. I usually just sort of fill those into slots when I don't have other content because they are a little bit more standalone. I have already wandered too far from the point. For all of Christendom and much of human history, the function of a chaplain is to relate the individual to the ultimate, to everything, to everything else. Obviously the video that got the most splash through the whole thing was a very, very long video that got the most splash this week is my video on marriage equality means death to Protestant churches. And that title is, all the words in that title are chosen for reasons and I know in the comment section, oh, you shouldn't say marriage equality. Now that's exactly what I wanted to say. And Protestant was a very important word in that title. If you read George Marsden's book about the history of the American university, especially with respect to the transformation from them being confessional, mostly Protestant seminaries, training institutions for clergy into what they have become today, it is all about in some ways a loss of confidence in the Christian religion as to how well it can reliably deliver the kinds of things that religion is supposed to deliver to us. Chaplains are intended to be religious people who deliver comfort and meaning to suffer dying, hurting people. Militaries have chaplains, hospitals have chaplains, universities have chaplains. So on one hand, Shosh, you're exactly right. On the other hand, there's, so in the video that I'm gonna make this afternoon, in some ways, and I know this is gonna, people are gonna have to think about this. Secularism is stealth Christianity, light. That's what it is. And one of the amazing things that I realized a year or so ago or a couple of years ago in looking at Tom Holland's work is secularity conquered the world. Now religion is in some ways, overt religion is in some ways clawing its way back. And you see that in India, you see that in resurgent Islamism. These are extremely subtle things. So what is, it's especially interesting talking about this on this channel. Because in some ways, because in some ways, what Jordan Peterson did, and to a degree what John Vervecky has done, is take meaning as such and put it more directly at the center of the conversation. Okay, for us in our culture, meaning doesn't sound like a religious word. But almost all of us recognize that one of the main things religion delivers to people, religion in the secular sense, not the worldview sense, religion-ess, is deliver meaning to people. C.S. Lewis in his book, The Discarded Image, towards the end of the book, noted that meaning of the discarded image, which is this vision of the cosmos, which was sort of an amalgamation in medieval scholasticism of summing up the classical world, adding in Aristotle, filtering it through Aquinas in the West, delivering to regular normal people to the degree that these were the lenses they saw the world through, that that discarded image was an enormous meaning producer. So I have a swimming pool at my house, shock of shocks, maybe I lost status in the minds of some of you because a pastor should be eating breadcrumbs and wearing tatters if he's to be a holy man. Well, there's some filters in there too. So I have a swimming pool at my house and we put the swimming pool in when my kids were younger. And when we put the pool in, one of the things that was going on with these pool companies was, we're gonna put in a salt system. And I thought, what's that? What's a salt system? Well, a salt system, you have this little chlorinator and you put a little bit of salt in the pool. It's actually a lot of salt. It's like 11, it's like 500 pounds of salt actually in the swimming pool my size, but about 500 pounds of salt in that pool. And that salinates the water to just a degree less than ocean water. And when the salt, which is NaCl, gets processed through the chlorinator, it uses electricity to break up, and I'm no chemist, so I'm gonna get this wrong, so someone's gonna correct me. Basically, it makes chlorine out of salt, which you can do because of the chemical composition for salt. We sort of like that because it sort of feels icky to always be dumping chlorine in your pool. And so it's like, well, this pool doesn't have chlorine, this has salt. Well, actually the pool does have chlorine. It's just you're not noticing it. And in some ways, that's exactly what's happening with this chaplain. Oh no, no religion here. This is chlorine-free. We're just putting meaning like salt in the pool. But inside of each of us, there's this little chlorinator that is doing the translation between meaning and religion. And now again, if you take the new atheist definition or the secular definition of what religion is, well, that has to do with God, and that has to do with God. Okay. But if you've never heard the name God or the word God, does that mean you haven't had one way or another built into you some conceptualization that actually functions in your heart like God does? So what do these chaplains do? Basically what these chaplains do is play the secular game. And what is the secular game? It's fundamentally a language adjustment game. In my last video and on Twitter, I've been working up a meme that basically says buzzwords or holy words. And it was very interesting that I really annoyed some people with Danica Patrick. That was fascinating. That some people are super annoyed by her. But I'm not super annoyed by her. I'm fascinated by the translation of religion to secularity by certain verbal circumlocutions. What's a circumlocution? Circum, that's circle, locution, spoken. You're working around words. And so basically what this chaplain will do is either avoid the word God or use the word God with sufficient inspecificity and avoiding inclusion as much, or exclusivity as much as possible, but yet in order to deliver the impact. In other words, like my swimming pool, to keep chlorine in the water even when the secular chaplain is standing outside the pool and say, you didn't see me put any chlorine in that water. I put salt in. All right, but you're punching the same buttons in people. And so I'm working on this sermon. I did a rough draft. I did my PowerPoint of it yesterday. I'm still not sure I like it. But where I was looking at operant and classical conditioning, and classical conditioning is, and Pavlov's dog is the great example. So you've got a dog, and if you put a stake in front of a dog, that dog will salivate. And that's basically natural, that's just a natural response by the dog to a stake. Now, if right before you introduce the stake to the dog, you ring a bell, very quickly that dog will be conditioned to associate bell ringing, which is a totally neutral thing with stakes. And so the amazing thing that Pavlov is known for is he demonstrated that you can train a dog so that if you ring the bell, the dog will salinate with or without a stake. This is the basis for a lot of animal training. And people get trained just like this too. Operant conditioning is a little bit different, but let's look at classical conditioning. In some ways, what has happened in our culture, someone's got an open mic. So what has happened in our culture is that we've had classical conditioning done to us in all these religious registers. So what does the chaplain do? Well, the chaplain might wear some kind of clothing and the chaplain has taken on a name, chaplain, which is a religious name, but you're trying to scrub all of the naughty buzzwords out like God and Jesus or Hashem or whatever context you're in, but you've got a lot of classical conditioning going on. So the pastor or the chaplain adopts a certain posture, adopts a certain tone of voice. And all of this has come to be known as pastoral. And as I noted in my big video this week, this sort of gets disconnected from the stake. It becomes classical conditioning. And so basically what this chaplain does is do classical conditioning, whereas a thousand years ago, the religious stake would have been put in front of the dog and the dog would salivate. And what secularism says is, well, we don't need God. We don't need all of this stuff that we have labeled in the enlightenment as religion. We can ring the bell and everybody will say, ah, I feel better. My life has meaning. I can now see, now, here's part of the problem with, let's say my salinator in my pool or my chlorinator. My chlorinator only works certain times of the year because it requires the water to be a certain temperature for the chemistry actually to work to turn salt into chlorine. So in the summer, my chlorinator works just fine. And those are the high use months. And so you need most chlorine then. In the winter, the chlorinator doesn't work because the water's too cold. So you know what I do? I put in chlorine. I take these little tabs, I put them in the little thing, and I put them in the water, and I put those chlorine tabs in all winter long because that water is too cold for that chlorinator to work. Now, so here's a question. Why does AA turn people religious? Well, because if things are sort of going okay enough, like it's not too cold outside, all of that bell ringing and classical conditioning sort of works good enough. And so the chaplain can, I mean, talk about cultural appropriation, it's religious appropriation. The chaplain can sort of appropriate all of the little cues that for centuries we have associated with religion and make everybody feel okay. But there's a Mark Maron podcast. Mark Maron is one of these really old school podcasters, got into podcast really early and played the game well. He was a professional comedian, is a professional comedian who had a lot of drug and alcohol problems, like many performers and many comedians. There's a whole bunch to say about that. But I remember some of his early podcasts, and on one of them he was talking about the fact that a lot of people can sort of make it through life, but when things get really hard, the people that are having a really hard time in life turn to religion. It's sort of like, all right, the bell doesn't make the dog salivate anymore, you need the steak. And I suspect that as, see, secularity is part of the package of the enlightenment and modernity, and it's all going away. And I read an article that I posted on my blog, leadingchurch.com. See, Rick, I'm trying to brand. Rick gave me a thumbs up. About this whole discussion about Hinduism. Tom Holland makes the point that until the British colonized India, Hinduism wasn't a word. They just were doing it. Same thing, he made the same observation about Judaism. Now you can find the word Judaism in the Bible, but as NT Wright points out, it means something completely different from how we understand it today. So, having Harvard have, plus if you're around chaplaincies enough, in hospitals or the military or secular universities, this surprised me not one bit, because they've been all sorts of chaplaincies in jails and hospitals and the military for a long time. And so to have a secular one, but what it does, what the hand that gets tipped is that secularity is a religion too. And the problem is that once you say that, secularity at its core is a denial of religion. And so, then you're just stuck with this. Oh, Grim sent me a really interesting video about kind of this false cynicism. And it's the best meme of it is Casablanca. Gambling? Gambling? I'm appalled. Sir, here's your winnings, thank you. It's like, there's no religion here, I'm an atheist. Oh, okay. And you know what? My dog salivates when I ring a bell. But that doesn't mean it's disconnected from the stake. So, there's my answer to that. And it's kind of, so when Americans, so then I see people in the media that are just, I'm outraged at this. And it's like, why? We've been playing this game for at least 50, 70 years. It's just sort of risen to the point where they're doing it. I mean, look at Tony Campolo's son, Bart Campolo. I mean, he was a secular chaplain at, was it MIT? Some place in Boston. So, this is old stuff. But the best way to think about it is sort of the classical conditioning with the dog and the bell and the stake and salivation and my pool chlorinator. But what's going to happen and what is happening is summer is going away, winter is coming, and people are going to get a lot more religious again. So, it's the 20th anniversary of 9-11 tomorrow. And so, of course, in the attention economy, you can't find a news outlet that isn't going to do a 9-11 retrospective. In fact, and in the video that I make this afternoon, hopefully, I'll talk a little bit about Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrooks, the rest is history. 9-11 retrospective. When those towers came down, before those towers came down, Tim Keller was a PCA minister, kind of a wonky one, more talented than usual. He had taught at Westminster East. He was a church planter in New York City. And he had had, in evangelical terms, a fair amount of success. He had a couple of hundred people that were meeting at Redeemer Presbyterian in Manhattan, and Tim was sort of working his shtick. And then those towers came down. And very quickly, Tim Keller had thousands of people going to Redeemer Presbyterian in New York City. Now, Tim Keller planting a PCUSA church in New York City was a bold, audacious move, and there were other partners. And if you can find old recordings on the internet of Tim talking about the early days of Redeemer Press, you'll hear some of the stories. But Tim is honest about the fact that it was 9-11 that put Redeemer and Tim Keller on the map. Well, what about 9-11? Well, the temperature dropped, and the chlorinator didn't work. And so people were done talking about meaning, and all of these words that are scrubbed of religious artifacts, so that we can play this little game. Nope, no religion here. And they needed the real thing. If you go into the hospital and you have a lot of pain, they don't send a nurse out to hit the dealer on the corner to say, hey, we need some heroin. No, no. In the hospital, they got the real stuff. And the stuff has been through the lab, and it's purified, and there are chemical engineers who know exactly how to make it. And there are chemists, and there are doctors, and there are scientists who have a really good idea of exactly what that drug does. And so in some ways, to continue to muddle this metaphor, the atheist Jewish Harvard chaplain is sort of a street dealer, and he's dealing meth, and heroin, and pot. But this stuff has been cooked up in someone's RV or someone's kitchen. If you wanna go and get the real stuff, you need to go to a real religious institution, because what you have in real religious institutions are people who have been actually paying attention to these high-potency drugs for thousands of years. So yeah, you can grow your own mushrooms and figure out the chemical in ayahuasca and do all that stuff in your backyard, but all the high-status spiritual seekers will go down to South America and find some shaman and do it there. Just like if you go into a doctor and say, I need some really powerful painkillers because someone has just ripped off my arm, that doctor in a modern Western hospital says, I got drugs, and he does. So yeah, this Harvard secular chaplain, it's kind of a street dealer, and it's sort of because the culture looked around and said, oh, wouldn't it be nice if we had a secular chaplain? Lovely. But if your life gets really bad, you're gonna want the potency of a real thing, and that's why people start with AA with a higher power, and what percentage of them graduate to a real religion. So that's my answer. Any comments on that from the live chat room here? Hey, Paul? Yeah. This is Shoshana. Hi, Shoshana. It was your question. Hey, thanks for answering. Yeah, thanks for answering my question. It's interesting because I love the very end of what you said, and it's interesting to me because as I meet with Jewish people, they often tell me that on their way to investigating the claims of Jesus being the Messiah, they go back to synagogue. They talk to the rabbi, and in some ways, when you said this atheist chaplain is like a street dealer, that's kind of the metaphor that they say without those words. So it's interesting. So I think that genuine faith, it's just life-giving, and it's metaphysical, and so you can't, it's hard to explain. It's hard to articulate unless you're in the Holy Spirit moment of ministering in that. But anyways, yeah, thanks for answering my question. So, yeah, go ahead. Hey, Paul, this is Chad, the alcoholic here. I just, I do have a comment. Yeah, don't give me authority. Somebody tried to make me poke yesterday. Anyways, the thing about the AA I wanna clear up though is that my understanding of alcoholic synonymous is I hope I never graduate. That's a place where I get to, that's a nice fishing barrel, I guess. So, and that's also what helps keep me sober. But yeah, I think the approach that they have works perfectly. I mean, they're gonna reach out to somebody like me who is never gonna darken the door of a church. So, yeah, that's the only thing I wanna clear up about that. Just to, if you're in AA, don't leave just because you're in church unless you think that'll help. But I've not seen that going all the time. No, that's exactly right. And you said it, you said it, you said it exactly right. But of course, AA got started, and the Oxford groups, I mean, there's religious fingerprints all over it in its origin story. Yep, and we couldn't have done it without Christianity, that's for sure. And the other thing is, what I did find is the God of my understanding ran out. It didn't work like I thought it would. And then the gift of desperation steps in and you move forward. Okay, I'll get off your air, bye. If you haven't watched Brad's Bridges of Meaning, what does he call it? Bridges of Meaning channel on YouTube. He changed the name, because Joey said, hey, don't stop on our brand. So he does a little show. So yeah, thank you, Chad, thank you, Chad. No, and Shash, that's right. And so maybe to work the metaphor a little bit, AA is sort of like the neighborhood clinic that's really specialized. Because what Chad said is exactly right. A lot of alcoholics in church, it's sort of like going into the hospital, but being in the wrong department. And so people are trying to pray away their habit or their addiction and it doesn't work. And well, AA is specialized and it's like targeted. And it's sort of like, you know, you need to see the radiologist if you're really gonna deal with that cancer or the oncologist. So anyway, to butcher the metaphor even more. All right, I've spent half hour on the first question again, which I of course said I wouldn't do, but I went ahead and did it. So, Phil Nickerson, one of the fun things about Philip is that he went through and watched all the Rando's conversations, especially the ones that are in lists and he'd leave comments because YouTube always dishes up comments according to not the video that the comments are made on, but when the comment is made. So it was really fun listening to all of his retrospective on the Rando's conversation. So thank you, Phil, that was a lot of fun. What do you know about the Alpha course in churches? Nicky Gumbel, the Alpha course, what is your take on it? How is it different than estuary? The Alpha course was specifically designed, you know, Alpha course is sort of another, when the doctors leave the hospital to do a, you know, a neighborhood clinic or to go out into the world to find the sick, that's what the Alpha course is. And it's been extremely effective in many places at growing the church. I don't know that estuary would be that direct. I suspect and am comfortable with the idea that people will participate in estuary groups, maybe for a long time and not darken the door of a church. I suspect that will happen. Now, as a Christian minister, do I want them to? Absolutely. Is this part of my motivation for participating in this, you know, this development of this thing that I called estuary? Absolutely. But Alpha is targeted. Alpha is designed to help secular people start to become Christian in a lot of ways. Now they have a combination of answers to questions and program, but they also, in some ways, some of the practices of Alpha are designed to kick down secular barriers to, what secularity calls overt religious behavior, thoughts and assumptions. And the Alpha course has had a variety of variants that have gone out too. And again, this is one thing that a lot of people who are not familiar with the church don't understand about the church. In a lot of ways, churches are like hospitals in that churches pay a lot of attention and they study things closely. And, you know, some of you people are paranoid out there like that church wants my soul. Well, yeah, they do. They do, they really do. And maybe that should scare you. Maybe it shouldn't. So Alpha is a very well thought through, put together course in terms of Christian evangelism. And it's been very effective in some places. It's also been adapted to different denominational assumptions. And sometimes those adaptations water it down. That being said, I've seen a number of churches, Christian reform churches, because I know that best, implement the Alpha course and with varying degrees of success. So it's just like just about every other program because programs themselves aren't without their cultural filters. And even the idea of a program is embedded in secularism. So generally speaking, I like the Alpha course. Certainly you put almost anything in front of me and I'd probably like a stupid theologian Hemin Haw and say, well, I wouldn't do it that way. And it may very well be that my attempts to adapt it would make it less effective. So yeah, if people are listening to this and they are curious about Christianity and they want to stop looking at it from the outside and get into it and look at it from the inside to do their evaluation, find a church doing an Alpha course because it's jumping in the river. And they're gonna hit you with a lot of the, they're gonna hit you with a lot of the hard drugs of Christianity pretty directly and pretty fast and see how it takes to your system. So other people are gonna look at that course and say, because especially the Pentecostal churches, one of the things that's hard for people to understand is the relationship between the charismatic movements and Pentecostalism as such. Secularist churches sort of take a stealthy, subtle, quiet, patient, slow approach to secularity and take their wins when they can. There are strengths to that process and weaknesses to that process. A lot of other religious things are confrontative, antithetical to modernity. And that's what Pentecostalism and the charismatic movements are because secularism says, I can't talk to God. And Pentecostalism says, oh, we'll not only talk to God, I'll show you miracles. And God will talk through you by speaking in tongues. And it's just, you know, this chaplains are playing a much quieter, slower game within secularism. Pentecostals, you know, like John Wimber called it, power encounters, power evangelism. You think God is dead, I'll show you God. And bang, there you go. Now, does that bring people into the church? Yeah, Pentecostal churches are the most rapid growing independent churches in the world today. Go into the third world and they're awash in Pentecostalism. And part of that is the cultural antibodies of these countries resisting secular imperialism. And that's why, you know, the church is going like crazy in places like Africa and Asia, because especially Africa, secularity never really took very hard there. And that's why when people say, oh, I don't believe in a Western religion, a lot of Africans will say, our Christianity isn't a Western religion. Our Christianity is our Christianity. And the amazing thing about Christianity is, it is in some ways, I mean, we're all sort of thinking in metaphors about viral adaptations. Christianity adapts really fast to different cultures and infiltrates and takes over and hijacks. And you might say, oh, pastor, those are such colonial ugly metaphors to be talking about this. Well, look at what Jesus says. Look at what Jesus says about God. God reaps where he did not sow. God claims where people think he's an intruder. And of course, that gets us back into the is Christianity revolutionary? And from the Peugeotian perspective, you'd say, no, he's just reclaiming what he has always owned. That's the kind of claim that a creator God has, because people say, I don't belong to you. And God says, I made you. Think what you want about me, but I know you better than you know yourself because I made you. So that's some of the craziness of this stuff. All right, Justice Bjork, is Tom Holland's thesis that the morality of the West is indebted to Christianity at odds with the moral argument put forth by C.S. Lewis and others? Which posits a universal moral law of which all humans possess an innate knowledge. St. Paul seems to affirm the latter in Romans two, four through 16. I don't think the arguments are at odds. I think the tension between the two arguments is a matter of resolution. And when I say resolution, I'm riffing on Jordan Peterson's high resolution and low resolution. And again, this also boils down to this whole question of is Christianity revolutionary? The Christian story says humanity and the spirit world, I'm gonna talk a lot more about spirits in the video that comes out Monday, the spirit world rebelled against God. What does that mean? Well, okay, I'll think about another metaphor. Let's think about the system of your body. Imagine your body in perfect health. Now, there is no single human being right now in perfect health because perfect is an idea. Now, what that ideal does is sort of set up a hierarchy that you can be closer or further from the ideal. Now, the complexity of the world means that we have, let's say you break down the body into five or 10 vital systems. I read a book on dying recently where the doctor was talking about dying and he made the point that, you know how most people die because they're not in perfect health? He made the point that, you know how most people die is they lose a vital system. So my father was generally quite healthy and he had a heart attack. The thing is a human body can't work without the cardiovascular system working well. So his cardiovascular system failed in his heart attack and he died. The human being can't work without and someone here who is a doctor could name a variety of other systems that these are mission critical systems. Now, someone who is ideally healthy has all of those systems working ideally. And again, there is no human being on the planet that would maximize everything. That's just not how, there might be a number one out there, but someone could always compare the actuality to the theoretical or the potential. So if the world, and one of the things, gosh, I'm gonna get myself into trouble at some point with all this talking. One of the things that, if you look at the conceptualization of something like reformed Christianity, and this is generally true of all of the major traditions within Christianity, you start with a good world, a fall, and then, so creation, rebellion, redemption, restoration. Those are sort of my, Calvinists kind of use those four in different ways, but they're a good four. There's a lot of tension right now about creation and fall or creation and rebellion because the fall, which is a part of the package of at least traditional Western Christianity, I don't know the Orthodox well enough to comment on it. Part of the tension that goes on between evolution and theology is, is that fall historical? If so, what does it mean? And if so, what was perfection? And how does that line up with plant death, dinosaur death, the evolutionary story of the physical universe, yada, yada, yada, yada? These are tensions that are by no means worked out and in a lot of ways avoided by Christian theologians and pastors because they're difficult and they're complex, all right? Part of the reason theology works that way is because the creator God has claims on this world that are unique and theoretically incontestable. If your theology is set up that way, and this is part of the tension that's actually built into this tension that I talk about a lot between paganism with a meta divine realm and little gods within it, and the Hebraic conception of the creator God, God number one and God number two, was all powerful and almighty. That conceptualization sets up the problem of evil because if an all good, all powerful God is also the creator God, why is there evil in the world? And that problem scales all the way down to all sorts of things, including today, deconstruction from Christianity. And this is part of the reason that the gay issue is such a potent issue because if God made me, why did he make me in such a way that doesn't seem right? So then we play this whole big game about am I perfect the way I am? Does God love me just as I am? And you'll find this language all over the place. Tom Holland's, C.S. Lewis's argument is that the creator God's code, and this is basically in C.S. Lewis's line, Witch in the Wardrobe, with the deeper magic on the table that Aslan is killed by the white witch upon. Why is Aslan raised from the dead? Because there's a deeper magic. So all of these ideas, and these things come up in my channel often, so some of you know Carl, who used to be my biggest fan and now is a big critic of me because I won't give up on this religious stuff and just acknowledge that all there is is natural law. And then there's others like the Bionic Man, and then there's others like the Bionic Mosquito, who is a religious believer and gets frustrated with me that I don't use this terminology natural law enough. And I keep saying, Dutch Calvinism sort of has something like natural law called created order. And there are some reasons why the Dutch reform get a little nervous around the language of natural law, even though we know full well that created order and natural law don't have a lot of difference between them, but there are subtle differences and if religious communities do anything, it's nitpick about the differences between us because we're, again, we're sort of like doctors in the hospital and you get two doctors together and say, what painkiller would you prescribe in this instance? And one doctor will say, oh, I think definitely an opioid. And the other doctor would say, I don't think we should go with an opioid because opioids are addictive and the first doctor will say, yeah, but this person's life depends on it. And if we don't give them an opioid, the pain isn't gonna be managed sufficiently and the other doctor is gonna say, but if we do give them an opioid and the treatment is successful, they might just become addicted to opioids and on and on and on and on. And that's what religious people do over terms like natural law or created order. All right, C.S. Lewis basically is working a natural law slash created order argument and say that structurally, the universe is such a place that you can look at the structure of it and derive true knowledge, not only about the world, but its maker. Part of the reason natural law, both religious and secular natural law fans that are both secular like Carl and religious like Bionic Mosquito were attracted to Jordan Peterson is fundamentally that's the argument that Jordan Peterson keeps making. He keeps making those kinds of arguments. He keeps as a Darwinian, he looks around and says, even by virtue of my embrace of what I've learned from the Darwinians and the pragmatists and all of the philosophy and psychology that I've studied, I think we can know some things about, and this is where he sort of draws a line because in modernity to speak, to say things like, I love Jesus is sort of a faux pas. And if you really wanna maintain your secular credentials in the secular academy, you're gonna be like the Harvard chaplain and not say Jesus or Hachem or on and on and on and on and on or break open an Iron Age book. So that's the game that they're playing. And Jordan Peterson is just always right on the border of that game. And what's interesting about Jordan is that even though he'll make all these disclaimers in his biblical series, I'm speaking psychologically, that's really important and it's powerful and it's effective, but then he'll go on and talk to Jonathan Pichot and start breaking down and admit the truth about, and that's fine. And I love it, I love it. And we all love it. And because we all know that if I'm speaking as a Christian minister, there are some things I won't say because of my obligations to my community. If I'm speaking not as a Christian minister, which is really hard because Christian ministers are have a really broad thing and not the narrow thing like in modernity, I may say some other things that sound to be intention with what I said at a Christian minister. I think we all can understand the complexities of context and language. So C.S. Lewis, Jordan Peterson, natural law are all making an argument about innate knowledge, stuff built into the structure of reality so that if you are studying, even through the lens of science, there are telltale signs that God's fingerprints go all the way down to the bottom. That is the argument that Paul is making in Romans one, two, and three as well. And in Romans one, when Paul says, those who are against God suppress the truth. Paul is recognizing a point that I made in my long video this week and a point I'm gonna make again in my video Monday, that religion is about desire and we are much more desiring creatures than reasonable creatures. Peter Boghossian sent an open letter of resignation to his university and it was posted on Barry Weiss's sub stack where he talked about the fact that he tried to reason with people. Oh, he's not an Augustinian because an Augustinian would say, yeah, go ahead, try to reason with people. Reason is powerful. We listen to reason sometimes, but we're not fundamentally rational. And this is also what Verbecky gets right. Verbecky sort of tries to redefine rationality to get it closer to the bottom. That's what John is doing with that. That's a fair move. But the rationality that Boghossian, this is why Verbecky deconstructs the rationality of the new atheists, the rationality that Boghossian found hollow in trying to reason with his colleagues and with his university who he, and he says, maybe I was naive. An Augustinian would say, yeah, that is naive because what the woke revolution is recognizing is that Augustin is right and Paul is right. We don't walk around and do rational things. Woody Allen is right, the heart wants what it wants. And sometimes it wants things it shouldn't have for us and for others. So now Tom Holland makes the point that it's up a few levels and he's really addressing a lot of these, we're all working out stuff that we learned early on and have found wanting. And so we're trying to push back against it. Everyone who deconstructs does, that's what Tom Holland is doing. Tom Holland, of course, he tells his origin story. His Sunday school teacher didn't know as much about dinosaurs as Tom Holland did or Tom Holland thought he knew. So Tom Holland's Sunday school teacher and the church in general lost credibility. And so then Tom Holland became a thorough going secularist, agnostic and thought, history, reason, literature, that's all the good stuff. And he bought enlightenment ideas that the enlightenment basically, it's the same new atheist line, we're throwing out all of this superstition of religion and we're gonna live in pure reason. And again, Tom Holland story, he wrote an origin narrative about Islam, which really ticked a lot of people off because there's some real fundamental issues in the foundation of Islam that don't match with the authoritative origin story within the various factions of the religion and how that sort of worked in their parts of the world. So when he wrote the Shadow of the Sword, some people said, you jerk, you're poking me in my axioms. Go do it to your own religion. He's like, I don't have a religion. Well, so he's a good historian. So he starts doing the work and he discovers, oh my goodness, I said that the swimming pool, I said that no chlorine went in that pool, but you put in salt and there's a chlorinator and that's why your pool stays clear. So Tom Holland discovered that when he talked to the guys on the corner that were doing the street drugs, which is sort of like the new atheists, hey buddy, you don't need the stuff in the hospital. I can't tell you how many addicts have told me, but one in particular said it most eloquently, I don't abuse, I use. Oh, you're using alcohol to treat your bipolar condition? Yeah. When you're manic, alcohol will bring you down and when you're depressed, alcohol will numb the pain. Alcohol is a powerful drug, but as this guy gets older, I keep running him to the hospital, they put real drugs in him. Those doctors, they understand alcohol and they understand the kind of stuff, well sort of, a lot of experimentation with psych drugs, but that's what's going on. And so these two ideas aren't really contradictory, they're just sort of working at different levels because Tom Holland is addressing the secular West and saying, you're really religious. Tom Holland, and part of the reason I got so excited about what Tom Holland's work was, he'd basically been making the point that reformed theologians had been making for a very long time that all of life is religious and we just get at it in different ways. And so you'll hear some ventilian presuppositionalism in there and there's a lot going on there. So they're working at different levels, they're not really working against each other. But the deeper level, if you're gonna conceptualize it that way, is Lewis and Peterson and, this is the creator God. You're not going to drive your car from Sacramento, see Rick, I'm putting it in Sacramento, I'm here in Sacramento right now, that's why I'm using this thing. Had two thumbs up from Rick. You're not gonna power your car from Sacramento to San Francisco with an iPhone. And you might say, well, if it's an electric car, I can hook up wires. Yeah, that little itty bitty battery in that iPhone isn't gonna put out enough juice to get you from Sacramento to San Francisco in your electric car. It's just not gonna work that way. And so the deeper argument is that reality has a structure. You can learn something about the maker of that structure from the reality. Now, part of where there's tension between religious people and natural law people, a lot of these ideas about natural law arose because there was conflict within the holy books. And natural law is in some ways sort of a secularism version of revelation. And again, this isn't coded in theology, you have general revelation. And special revelation. That's, many Christians will tell you that. So natural law is sometimes seen as an alternative to special revelation. Now, if you're a good Roman Catholic, you'll say, you know, natural law and revelation fit together. And if you're a young earth creationist, you'll say, I'm trying to make my natural law fit into my revelation. And for any of us, we need a coherent picture. So we're always working on those kinds of ideas. But that's sort of the structure of it. And so some people who are very up on religious texts and reveal dogma will sometimes be at odds with the natural law tribe because there are tensions, just like the one I mentioned earlier about is there physical evidence of the, of what, I'll just pick on my own tradition, of what reformed theology calls the fall. Now, a reformed theologian would look and say, I see evidence of the fall everywhere I look. It's called total depravity. But let's say, let's say someone who's studying the fossil record will say, but where does death come in? Did death come in when the man and the woman ate from the tree? And then right there, you're in the midst of all of these Bible versus science debates. So all this stuff is always with us and we're working on it. But that's some of the reason why you'll get religious people like myself say natural law, Paul, why don't you really get down with natural law? Natural law also has some other interesting associations with other arguments, which make other people uncomfortable. So a lot of that is theological intramurals. Most of you don't need to worry about it, but those are the issues. That's the map. It was a great question. All right, John the Plunger. Oh, wow. I just finished reading Rubicon by Tom Holland. Have you read it yourself? I haven't read the whole thing and I listened to a lot of it. That was like his breakout book. And so every now and then I'll pick up a Tom Holland book and read another 50, 80 pages. If yes, what were your thoughts on it? I don't have enough thoughts because I haven't really read it. So what if no? I found the historical character of Cicero fascinating. Oh, now you're getting me. See, that's how you, I'm a light touch with respect to some of these things. The problem is right now there are so many people touching me. I know that sounds really bad, but that's, so now I wanna go out and open up my copy of Rubicon and check out what he has to say about Cicero. Now, part of the fun about reading and studying an author, and I'm not gonna imagine myself to be an expert on Tom Holland. I've listened very carefully to Tom Holland in certain ways and at a certain point. But you can tell just by listening to Tom Holland talk about his own life, that he has been on his own journey. And remember he, in his conversation with me, he got started writing vampire books, which I think is totally hilarious. But all these questions of why do vampires capture our imagination? And why did vampires become really popular in our culture at a certain point? And then they were sort of replaced by zombies. And I mean, those are just fascinating questions from a total Jordan Peterson way of thinking about it. So now I'm really curious, you know, who knows what, and if you would, you know, get a chance to talk to Tom Holland, he's not hard to find, he's really accessible on Twitter. Twitter might not be the best place for him to give the answer, but a question would be, well, did you have a Cicero phase, Tom? Did you have a, you know, stoicism is really popular again. And I think Peugeot is right that stoicism is another sort of, especially if you think in terms of hierarchies like Peugeot, stoicism is kind of a hobbled Christianity. There's a fair amount of overlap between them. You know, if he had a Venn diagram, but there's also some things that aren't alike. And Christianity in many ways ate stoicism's lunch. And stoicism mostly went away because Christianity did better at most of what people were looking at stoicism to do than stoicism did. It's sort of like when I was growing up, bare aspirin was sort of the household pain reliever, and Tylenol came around and Tylenol, you know, basically supplanted aspirin as the over-the-counter household pain reliever. Now, stoicism is making a resurgence partly because of things people don't like about Christianity, probably. And so they're rediscovering some of the wisdom that was in stoicism. But Marcus Aurelius is not Jesus Christ. And in the end, Jesus won. And part of the reality of these structures that, you know, Peugeot was so good at pointing out, every time Marcus Aurelius and Jesus go toe to toe, some fans out there will look at Marcus Aurelius and say, well, I kind of like Marcus, but Jesus just keeps winning. And Jesus is gonna keep winning. And again, to get back to the earlier question, that's because there are some structural things that Jesus gets more right than Marcus Aurelius. And now, of course, Sam Harris will say, well, but Marcus Aurelius doesn't have Iron Age, blah, blah, blah. Yeah, but Sam, Jesus keeps winning. And that's kind of the two badness about existence. There is existence out there, and it doesn't conform to my will, no matter how much I want it to. So, all right. So now I'm gonna have to pick up Rubicon and search for Cicero and check that out. So, sorry, I couldn't answer your question better. Bican Nuzzi. Great day to you, Paul. Great day to you. Sorry, I'm reading this late. Yesterday, one of the topics that came up in the Genesis One Voice channel was the variety in biblical translations and their uses. Oh yeah, that's a great, that's a fun thing to talk about. I brought up the Hawaiian Pigeon English Bible, and we had a good laugh because it's hilarious and rhetorically quite convincing. But Chad pointed out how such storytelling might be more effective than more known translations in getting the point of the text also clearly. That's true, and language is funny that way. And that's sort of what makes the whole universe of biblical translation really fascinating. When I was in college, Eugene Peterson had released the message, and Eugene Peterson's, and he was right up front, he said, this is a paraphrase. This is me reading the Bible and writing it in my own words. And that's at least more up front than the New Living translation. Because the New Living translation is a paraphrase, but it says, no, we're a translation. No, you're really a paraphrase. And then someone will say, yeah, but what really is a translation but a paraphrase? This gets into this really complex murky world, but I love your point here, and it's exactly right. There are times when even a bad translation can make a point better than a good one because of the nature of language. I love that point. On the other hand, and that's where this goes, this kind of translation might run the danger of cutting off too many words and losing the necessary nuance that we expect from the Bible. And that word necessary is your important word there in that question. And now the pragmatism rushes forward. It's necessary for what? For a proper understanding? Because part of the reason in my tradition, when I went to seminary, and this is weakening, sort of as modernity weakens, because this goes all the way back to the Renaissance and Erasmus, that Christian foreign ministers need to be taught Greek and Hebrew. Now, most Christian foreign ministers don't know much more Greek and Hebrew than will get them in trouble sometimes. And I certainly am guilty of that at some points because knowledge of Greek and Hebrew won't resolve all of the kinds of issues that surround a book like the Bible. But it can really be helpful. Yet my knowledge of Greek and Hebrew is limited and someone with greater knowledge of Greek and Hebrew might correct some of what my ignorance about Greek and Hebrew gets wrong. So yeah, what are your thoughts about this? I've given them the whole time. Does its language build up enough in your eyes? An example that we read from Genesis, start 2.7, then God, the one in charge, take dirt from the ground and make one guy. God blow on top his face, for make the guy come alive, as how the guy get life inside him. I love that, that's just fun. There are, you can find a bunch of Bibles out there that are like that. And if you go, there's not Christian bookstores anymore, so you have to go to Amazon or CBD, Christian Book Distributing. You can find, there's also spectrums of this. So there are Bibles like this that work it into the translation. It's a big job because the Bible's not a small book. Then there are study Bibles. And you have like the Quilter study Bible and the Drag Racers study Bible and the Drag Queen study Bible and the guy who wants to brand Paul VanderKlay better study Bible. We're still waiting for that one because only Rick's gonna buy it, but he's gonna look at me. Language is the kind of thing that is so powerful that particularity matters. And with something as crucial as the Bible. So let's say Rick and I wanna communicate. So Rick and I were talking about branding this morning and I'm just hemming and on because part of me doesn't wanna sell out and Rick's like, yeah, but if your channel's bigger and back and forth we go. Communication between two people is really hard. And if you don't believe it, be married for any length of time. And the longer you're married, the more you realize that you've been trying to communicate with this other human being that you have lived with, slept with, had children with, shared finances with, fought with, made love to. You've been doing this for 30 years and doggone it, you still don't understand each other. What hope is there for anyone to understand what I'm saying right now? But yet we do. It's amazing. And when it gets to biblical translation, and that's what I deal with all the time. So I'm writing a sermon, I'm looking at the Greek or the Hebrew and if you're doing New Testament, you're looking at Greek and Hebrew and then you're looking at, well, I don't know so much. So then you listen to, you read commentaries and of course they're not all agreeing. And then you're looking for language. So you're, and even my YouTube channel, so I'm thinking I'm really enjoying this book, High on God, but it's a freaking academic that wrote that book. And I'll tell you, academics just like get pastors, get trapped within their own language worlds. And so when someone leaves a comment on my channel, I don't understand John Verbecky. I understand why you don't understand him. And part of the amazing thing that Jordan Peterson is able to do is he was able to speak far beyond the academy and that's a powerful thing. So, and this is what Tom Holland's observation about. Jesus words and I'll remember, Tom Holland makes the point that what the four gospels have done is probably the most astounding feat of all of literary history. Because you're gonna take a God who becomes a slave and the victim of Roman torture and death, betrayed by his own people, intelligible, likable and worshipful across human language across 2000 years. And Tom Holland is exactly right. And he knows this because he's an author, was always trying to communicate the heart of the classical world, which is very different from ours in a way that we can understand, identify with like. And so Tom Holland, it's no accident that Tom Holland understands the miracle of what the canonical gospels have done in this world. It's just astounding. There's nothing else like it. And if that is an argument for the inspiration of scripture, I don't know what is. Yet, all of these are witnesses of Jesus and you can see that if you compare them and they work and yet it's amazing if you look at something as central as the Sermon on the Mount, Matthew five through seven, and you pull off a decent commentary, some decent scholarship, like I was Craig Bloomberg in one of his things that he wrote. He said 2000 years later, here, and he lists like seven or eight, seven or eight major schools of interpretation on the Sermon on the Mount. We know that the words are transformative in people's lives. And even bald faced skeptics like Sam Harris will say that some things in the Bible are beautiful. Language is amazing. And the Bible is, you know, you hear Tom Holland talk to NT Wright and Justin Briarly and unbelievable. And of course, Tom Holland is like, the Bible is amazing. The Bible is flat out amazing. Now, Tom Holland, he's increasingly not gonna be listened to because more and more people are gonna look at him and say, yeah, but you're a fan. But he says, yeah, but I came at my fandom honestly because I first rejected it because I got dinosaurs wrong in my opinion. And now I read the Bible and I think this is the most amazing book I've ever seen. Well, is it inspired? And then I think Tom Holland would, what do you mean by inspiration? Because Tom Holland's dealing with modern assumptions of historical truth and how to, you know, but it's so cool. And this is why I hope that someday will, this is why I think that in the eschaton, we'll keep getting into this. And instead of, you know, and then you'll get to sit down with Paul of Tarsus and say, no, Paul, first of all, did you really write second Timothy? No, but, or yeah, but I, so and so was my scribe and, you know, my scribe for Ephesians and all that. You know, my scribe for Ephesians and my scribe for Timothy, those guys wrote different, but Galatians, boy, you could really hear me clearly through Galatians. And Romans, yeah, I'm all over that. And Corinthians, yeah, boy, if I had had quotation marks when we had written Corinthians, y'all would have understood that a whole lot different. And that's some of the recent scholarship in the book of, you know, first and second Corinthians. So, and I just think, okay, so obviously when I die, I'll miss my kids. And how I'll miss my kids, I don't know what's gonna be like, but do I wanna sit down with Paul? And am I gonna look around for Socrates? You know, Peter Kreeft says, gives him hope. All right, so am I gonna look around for Socrates and see if somehow the Lord was able to pull him in? I wanna meet Socrates, I wanna meet Paul of Tarsus, I wanna listen to Augustine. Yeah, and a lot of what we're gonna talk about is language. Well, how are we gonna talk about language when, I have no idea, I have no idea. But I'm just a silly little stupid human being, God knows. So, it's great, great, great. Oh, I'm only an hour and 15 minutes into a two hour session and I haven't even gotten to the questions all from last week, Rick's gonna be mad at me. Shorter answers, all right, here we go. Via YouTube comments, this week China called video games spiritual opium and restricted play to three hours a week for kids. I made a trollish comment on YouTube to Christen Dumais because I read David Brooks article about, basically China, they're leaving pure, they've left pure communism a while ago and they're getting much more savvy with respect to religion. And so they're basically piecing together a new religion for the nation, which has Confucius and Mao and, the single party communist government in China, I think is partly doing this because they're realizing that Christianity, Jesus is beating Mao. And they're realizing that Christianity, they're gonna try and stop it with a religion because they realize that this whole atheist thing, it's not how humans work, it's not how humans work. It's like trying to train your dog by giving your dog a dog training manual. Rick, what would your dog do to that dog training manual? He'd chew it, he'd eat it, and he wouldn't learn a darn thing from it. Now it's not quite that bad with atheism, but so the Chinese government's smartening up and just like you can't go into a drug store and say, I'd like some morphine please. United States government controls morphine. China's gonna try and control computer games. Okay, is that gonna work? I don't think so. Because here's the fun thing, and addicts know this well, I've known a lot of addicts. One dear friend of mine finally beat the bottle. He ate himself to death. And when he died, he was such a good guy, his wife was cleaning out his house, he collected cameras, he collected, she found two boxes full of screwdrivers. And this was not a handy guy, he never fixed a darn thing in his life. Why did he start collecting screwdrivers? He was an addict. And somehow he just got obsessed about screwdrivers, he had boxes of them. We're like that, you're gonna, okay China. The scary thing about China is they are shamelessly employing totalitarian tools on a massive scale with more and more smarts and sophistication. I read somewhere that China spends four times as much money trying to maintain internal control as what they spend on national defense. Now they got a lot of money now. But some of this stuff that Peterson talks about and Piaget talks about that, if you have to really work that hard to keep your people down and to fool them, people are really, really surprising. And I suspect it's sort of spy versus spy and all of this stuff is just an attempt to maintain their own dominance and at some point it'll all fall apart. It'll all fall apart. Every tyrannical structure does, including Christian ones. You just can't beat reality and human beings, you can, it's gonna be something to watch, but the more you try to control a human being, it goes back to Dostoevsky, life in the underground. Even if you give them everything they want, they'll smash it out of spite. So yeah, good luck China. I think people are gonna win because you know what? China's made of people. All right, ooh, this week's question, ooh, it's a big one, ooh, we got lots of big ones, oh boy. Okay, hi Paul. My understanding of Christ's ethic is one of selflessness, self-sacrificing altruism. Now, if you read Lewis, Lewis makes a really important point that the ethic isn't really selflessness, the ethic is love. And the point that Lewis makes with that is you've taken a positive, which is love, and turned it into a negative. And the reason we do that is because, because the world is big and complex, it's easier for us to figure out what not to do than what to do. So let's talk about my marriage. It's really helpful for my marriage if I don't sleep with other women. I know that might surprise you. I know some of you imagine that liberation means never having to say no to your libido. But I'll tell you this, if I follow this rule, don't sleep with other women, my marriage goes better. Big surprise, I know, there it is. If I just don't sleep with other women, there are still a thousand other ways I can derail my marriage. In other words, the negative is helpful because it defines precisely, but it isn't actually sufficient. And what that means is these negatives, we need them, that's kind of the relationship between spirit and law and love and law. So I can not sleep with any other women and still have a horrible marriage. What I need to do for a good marriage is love my wife. Well, what does that require? Oh boy, what doesn't that require? So that's an indifference between a negative and a positive and it's really important in getting some precision. The ethic is not deny yourself. Now, part of loving my wife means denying myself the pleasure and misery of sleeping with other women. It's a part of it, but the goal is love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and love your neighbor as yourself. That's a positive. Turning it into a negative might be instrumentally helpful because of how we are, but don't confuse it with the goal. If our ultimate goal as Christians is salvation, oh boy, buzzwords are holy words. What does that word mean? To achieve eternal bliss and avoid eternal torment, how can any good deed of ours be selfish? Exactly, and this is exactly the problem of a negative. If the goal is to love my wife, a negative is don't sleep with other women. That makes sense. If the goal is to not sleep with other women because I want my wife to get along with me and to not, I don't know, think she'd shoot me if I slept with another woman. My wife's a pretty passionate person. Actually, probably wouldn't shoot me. We don't own guns. She wouldn't be happy, I'll tell you that. It's this dynamic that Louis gets at that's here. And a lot of these kinds of questions sort of pivot on that. You are to love your neighbor because your neighbor is an image bearer of God, and because in some ways you love God through your neighbor. Now, one of the things that I did this week was I restricted some water access outside the church because my homeless encampment was getting out of hand. And I feel really bad about that because you need water and it's really hot Sacramento this time of year. And it's really inconvenient and some bunch of the homeless guys don't like this at all because it was really convenient to be able to sit here outside my office and have a water hose and water the concrete and have water running down the street and the neighbors calling me. Don't you know that there's a drought on? It's a mess. How am I gonna love these homeless people? The thing is I gotta love these homeless people and I gotta love the members of my church and I gotta love the other people who are sharing the California reservoirs and I've gotta love God and I've got, I mean, yeah. So don't kill anybody. Well, that's a good rule. But it's insufficient to attain the goal. So the goal of salvation, well, and that's part of the reason Peterson and Peugeot talked about theosis because the goal is God and participation, that's a good word. Protestants feel a little more comfortable with that word. But the goal is God. So, and salvation is a word that is helpful for understanding that. But sort of what's happened by virtue of these negatives, well, the goal is avoiding hell. No, no, no, because I'm avoiding hell right now. I still haven't achieved the goal. The goal is union with Christ. Well, that's why I'm in church because this is towards union with Christ. I'm not trying to claim my, our concern for others is instead concern for ourselves and eternal wellbeing, that's exactly right. If you make loving others instrumental in, let's say, a Christian hedonist goal, there are some issues. But that's again, because you've taken a positive and turned it into a negative, and there's always limitations to the negative that aren't actually full, that aren't actually as present in the positive. And so your goal should be to love God. Now, if the real goal is I want a pleasurable afterlife and not an uncomfortable one, well, then that's your goal, and your goal is in God. And you've taken a lesser goal. And then you have all these kinds of issues that flow out of it, and that kind of runs us around in circles. I'm not trying to claim that my conversion to Christianity involves no self-interest far from it. I want to be happy, of course. And I know there's no true happiness without God, right? That's why it's the main goal. It's when it comes to helping others to becoming, to being righteous, I want to be, I want to be because of love, true love, like Christ's love for us, exactly, selfless and self-sacrificing. Those are two things, like part of loving my wife is not sleeping with other women, but just avoiding sleeping with other women still leaves me far from loving my wife as I should. So, I'll keep going. Benja, hey, hey, Papa Paul. You tackled my question regarding medical segregation and my resentment. It was helpful as it was moving. We must continue to put, we must continue to put love, we must continue to love our enemies. And I'm trying and failing, aren't we all? I work in Ireland teaching theater and drama. Oh, that's interesting. Work has been scant, but I've managed to keep afloat thus far. That's good. The vaccine mandate is coming in and now it looks like I will no longer be allowed to participate in my community as regards working or viewing others' work. I've just lost two big jobs that were going to get us through the winter due to my unclean status. Yeah, that's how power works. And, you know, this is, again, there's always two sides of this because, you know, like conscientious objectors. To be a conscientious objector in World War II was a really costly thing. So what it means to be out of step with your group. I've just lost two big jobs. In a cultural context where diversity, inclusion, equality are allotted as the highest virtue, I received none of these. Again, those are the issues. We're inclusive, but we're going to exclude you if you don't get a vaccine. Wait a minute, power. We're all against power, but gosh, we're going to use power to make you get that vaccine. I know. It's, this is life on planet earth. Welcome. And if you're only bumping into these things now, you've lived a blessed life. You know, I get tired of, I know that for some of you, I have a reputation of being sort of anti-woke, but, you know, often I will look at things and it's really hard for, standpoint epistemology has its point. To be black in America is a lot harder than being white in many respects. And now to have some moral convictions that lead you to not want to let them put that vaccine in your body, it's going to cost you. Am I saying that's right? But these are the kinds of things that life reliably puts out. And so if you understand the patterns and the dynamics, it'll help you figure out what to do. And so if you decide to take a stand of conscience and stick to your guns, count the cost. But diversity, inclusion and equity are lauded at the highest values. I received none of them from my artsy community, nothing but a deep cutting sneer and contempt. Yeah, isn't it grand? Perhaps it's deserved. I wouldn't go that far. Because their sneer and contempt is, that's from them too. Racism is real. Racism gets into structures. Racism, just like any other sin is pervasive, but your friends who are sneering at you, what are they expressing? Pride, inclusion. That's, these are human games of social control. But I cannot ignore the throne in my consciousness that speaks, do not yield for this contempt. If I were to get the medical procedure, it would be for the relief from being shunned and freedom to work and teach children again. Not for medical reasons. I desperately want, now we're getting into some issues of purity too. Because did you get the MMR vaccine? Did you get the polio vaccine? What about this vaccine? And again, these things sort of scale up. So I have a lot of respect for people who have a situation of conscience and can stick to it. Even if I disagree with what it is that they're sticking to, I'm impressed by vegans. I like eating meat. So vegans, wow, you're able to pull that off? I'm impressed. It's like Jordan Peterson being impressed by the two-year-old who could hold his breath till he passed out. Peterson's like, bring him here, I wanna see him. So I'm not gonna tell you to abandon your claim because actually, the world was changed by Jesus Christ because he decided to go to the cross. And it's this weird drama of Jesus didn't commit suicide, but it's abundantly clear from the gospel readings that Jesus could have avoided his execution. And everybody knew it. When Jesus is like, we're going to Jerusalem, his disciples are like, that's a bad idea. Up here in Galilee, we can just keep doing this healing thing and this miracle thing and the popularity thing. We'll just keep doing this show here. Let's do this for 10 or 15 years and I don't know, maybe Rome will collapse. Jesus is like, nope, we're going to Galilee or we're going to Judea, we're going to Jerusalem and I'm gonna die there. This is your plan? I desperately want my life back, but the cost would be to disregard what seems to me to the voice of my conscience. Stick to your conscience. When I predicted that this would manifest as it has, people around me kept discounting what I was saying as manic episodes or conspiracy. I feel gaslit, abandoned, cast out and betrayed and yet somehow closer to God than ever. Yeah, that'll definitely happen. I'm just terrified. I have no idea where I'm going to go, how I'm going to make a living, how I'm going to give my family in the near future what they need. Wow, yeah. And this again is why, so in my video about marriage equality and Protestant churches, you're laying out an example of why people form communities because in some ways what you need is the support of an anti-vaxx community who can encourage each other, tell you you're not crazy, support each other financially and someone will hear this and say, Paul, what are you doing telling, you're giving advice to this dude how to not get the vaccination. Yeah, I guess I am. But again, this is one instance right now which for you is really tough and this gets played out in all sorts of ways. Think about right now, gay Christians who believe in traditional Christian sexuality, they're living this now. And probably in a year or two after natural immunity and herd immunity has taken off and this whole vax thing is done, the fact that you didn't get a COVID vaccination will be just kind of a little blip and you'll be able to, the vaccine passports will be gone, all of that. But to me, I think it's a very important thing but to be celibate and for virtue of conscience, to be gay, same sex attraction and by virtue of conscience, decide to say celibate, oh, you need a church to do that. You need people around you, you need friends, you need all those things and doing that. So Henry Nowen, he was Dutch, Roman Catholic, priest, became a giant of a bookseller. Lecture at Harvard, he was a celebrity Roman Catholic in his day, wrote some amazing stuff. After of course he died, words from his friends came out, same sex attracted, decided to be celibate. All of that energy, think about Mary making this point about masculine energy, all of that energy went into wrestling with God for his conscience. Now again, just because you're fighting this fight doesn't make it right or good. But I mean, I'm not a pacifist but I respect conscientious objectors. And in fact, we as a culture have respected them. Now it tends to be after the heat of the moment that we respect them. So hey, could it be that these vaccines are gonna have unintended side effects that we find out 10, 15, 20 years from now and you'll be vindicated? Could happen. But you need a community around you to fight this fight. And it's those kinds of dynamics that actually create strong communities and that these kinds of dynamics that actually make saints. If you're pursuing the right goals. How can I better put faith in God's plan with me and actually do not be afraid? You're gonna need a community around you. And they're probably gonna have to be a Christian community because you're all gonna need God to pull this off. Just like pacifists in World War II, they had churches. And this again is why all the church is gonna go away. Church is not going to go away. These patterns are too deep. These patterns are too deep. The needs are too common. I have a deep sense I need to answer the call I feel to become a priest. Now you're gonna have, you're gonna be bound even more. And it's in those bindings that you'll find new strength. But Catholics haven't moved on married priest issues. Well, but you can, married men can become priests. And again, someone can answer that question. Maybe there'll be limitations in terms of, because they're not gonna ask you to put away your wife. They're Catholic. And if you're married in the church, the Catholic church recognizes your marriage. And so the church will find some way for you to serve. You know, maybe, I don't know, maybe you'll sit down with your wife and say, honey, we're gonna be celibate for the rest of our marriage. I'm asking that seriously. Maybe that's not right. Maybe it is right. And again, in our context, people hear this stuff and it just sounds like crazy talk. It is not crazy talk. People do it all the time. It's just we are so, our calibrations are so tuned by mass media, now social media, that people think these things are crazy. These are not crazy. They're common. They're more common, surprisingly common than people know. And you might know it if you turn off the screens and go out and start talking to large numbers of people. Be surprised at what people are living with and doing over matters of conscience. And my girlfriend says she's unsure Oh, I thought you were married. My girlfriend says she's unsure giving her family background from Northern Ireland whether she would stay with me if I became a Protestant minister. Boy, you do have a bunch of, oh Ben, I'm sorry I'm laughing. I don't want you to interpret my laughter as taking anything that you're writing here lightly because it's deeply, deeply serious. And now the more I know your story, the more I can understand your opposition to vaccines. I know Brett Sockold wrote a piece saying that the Catholic hierarchy has said it's, in terms of questions of abortion, it's ethical to take the vaccine. Maybe you don't buy that. And that might be the ground of your, that might be the ground of your conscientious objection to the vaccine. And if that is the case, stick to your guns. I encourage you, even if I disagree with you, I took the vaccine, but stick to your guns. And because it's these kinds of issues that you are taking seriously, and the seriousness with which you take them, that will be the fertile ground by which God will do big things through you. Now it might be that 10, 20 years from now, you look back on your decisions now and have a different perspective on them. That's okay. Don't abandon your convictions for that motivation because I suspect God is working through all of these things in you to make you to be the kind of Christian and the kind of saint he wants you to be. And it sounds like you're doing legitimate work. Now others might, other Roman Catholics might wade in and say, this is why the church has made its statement and you'll have to weigh all that. Just like the question of celibacy in your girlfriend. That's a biggie. And maybe you'll decide to be a deacon, to get involved at the deacons program. And there's such a shortage of priests that deacons are allowed to do great ministry now. Or maybe you'll decide to not marry your girlfriend and be a priest. And if that's the case, yeah, I don't know what God's gonna do with you and through you in your life, but he's clearly got his hand on you in one way or another. But yeah, you need people around you. You can't shoulder these heavy loads. So I was watching this Hitman Heart documentary this morning and Bret Hart is in the gym and he's working on the weights and he's got a spotter. Why does he have a spotter? It's big muscle bound guy who obviously has spent hours and hours and hours and hours and hours in the gym. He's got a spotter. Why does he have a spotter? Because he's not an idiot and he spent hours in the gym and he knows all the bad things that can happen. So you know what? With all of these heavy weights that you're lifting, you need to be surrounded by spotters. You need to be surrounded by people whose spiritual maturity, whose understanding, whose knowledge is above your own and you need to be in serious community with them so that you can wrestle through these things with them. That is what the church is for. And it's these needs that energize and give the church strength and vitality and witness and power in the world. The church isn't going away and even though often the church is weak, is not going to be abandoned because these issues continue to come around us. And it's the same with the abortion issue. It's the same with how many other issues. We look at these issues and say, oh, I wish these issues would go away. Yeah, we should wish that they'd be resolved, but the conflicts from the issues themselves are part of what God uses to build spiritual muscles in us. So yeah, so don't sell out, do your work. Surround yourself with wise Christian Catholic saints. Talk to them, let them speak into your life. Marcus, have you ever thought about selling merch? So, just part of the Brandon conversation, Rick. So my daughter made some merch and Max of Meaning put a link to it right there. And people around me are like, you know, you should put, so you can do like merch on your YouTube channel and you can, and I look at this stuff and sometimes it's like, yeah, I should do it. Make a little extra money, could use that, even though I've got a swimming pool. I feel guilty about my pool. See, you gotta understand, and this goes back to Ben's question. So when my wife and I married, that was during the day of the styrofoam McDonald's food containers. And I very much was a be poor for Jesus young man. And you know, I didn't wanna get a car and I didn't wanna, at one point I was gonna quit school and me and a friend of mine were just gonna go out and be itinerant preachers. And my father, I had a great talk with my father about that because my mother was freaking the heck out. She's like, you're gonna what? You just went through, you just went through, you just got a college degree in seminary and you're gonna walk away from it all and you and your crazy friend are just gonna go out and become itinerant preachers. My father's like, okay, I guess you could do that if God calls you to it, but how much do you really know? Well, I didn't wanna hear that question. I stayed in seminary. So then when my wife and I got married, I'm worried about the environment. This was before wokeism, but I was there already in some ways. And so, we, gosh, my wife paid, $100 for her wedding dress, maybe a dollar for her hat. We weren't gonna have any flowers. My mother-in-law found some old flower-like thing in the attic and plopped it up in front of the church. We weren't gonna have any wedding cake. My mother-in-law just couldn't deal with that. So she bought one anyway. And then one of the rules we gave, so my mother, my wife's aunt and her family members catered the wedding, a classic cheap Dutch Calvinist wedding, had sandwiches. And my mother-in-law till her dying day kicked herself for not getting a, what are you putting up, Rick? Oh, there's the merch, okay. I thought you were gonna put up a wedding picture or something that you might've found. So, we told my wife's aunts, so we told my wife's aunts, you may not use styrofoam plates. And they're like, oh crap, now we're gonna find paper plates. And we put these poor people all through the wringer just because, just so my wife wouldn't, me and just so our wedding wouldn't add to the non-biodegradable mass in the landfills. Now I don't think a darn thing if I use a styrofoam plate. Have I sold out? So, stick to your guns, Ben, do your work. And so then when it comes to merch, it's like, do I wanna have merch? I don't know if I wanna have merch. So, that merch that my daughter made, she gets all the money, which my daughter loves. And I think she's made maybe $5. But I really love the little art that she made. And so, I'm tempted sometimes just to make merch. But then people are like, Paul, you really do have to take care of your financial future. And I'm not poor, I've got a pension, I've got my needs met. Oh, then I've got debt, and I shouldn't have debt. And I just, it's a mess, it's a mess. But anyway, so, yeah, there's merch. We might be able to finish. All right, Prophet Zacharias. I don't know if it's uniquely American problem, but I think the megachurch phenomenon comes out of the fast food model, corporate model, which themselves come from the Judeo-Christian feedback loop. Oh, that's interesting. I've always thought that this was a genius insight in the movie, There Will Be Blood, and confirmed by me by the Ray Kroc McDonald's movie, The Founder. I never thought of putting those movies together. See, I'm a light touch. I'm gonna watch those movies again now. Just like I have to read Rubicon, just like I have to read the book that arrived in the mail. It's that Plato book that Vervecki mentioned. Vervecki mentioned this. This is the best book of Plato I've ever read. Dog on it, I ordered the sucker on Amazon immediately. Now I gotta read it along with Rubicon and watch these two movies. Okay, here we go. I also listened to the audiobook version of Oneida. Yeah, that was a good book. God, I already read that. Now I wanna read it again, which you recommended. And this pattern always plays, also plays out well. Out there. I think more than anything else, I could be wrong. Obviously, the megachurch phenomenon is the last bastion of Boomer X shopping mall, shopping center, fast food culture. No, it's not going away, it's growing. With the side of double inversion, as these also act like a town hall and some incorporating liturgical aspects of it, I think you're very much into it. So part of all of my far too many projects that I start and can't finish, of course, is The Rise and Fall of Marcel, which bleeds into this book on megachurches. A lot of it has to do with scale. So Mark Driscoll and, I got in trouble on voices about Nadia Bolzweber. Mark Driscoll and Nadia Bolzweber start out in the same place. Mark Driscoll winds up being exactly the kind of thing that the young emergence pushing against the megachurch despised. Rick Moran became his mentor. Sellout. Nadia Bolzweber becomes part of the Lutheran hierarchy. Cussing and tats and ethically speaking, cussing and tats and ethically sourced porn and all. This is where we get to these structural issues. And to maybe tie this whole question and answer together, part of what Peterson noted, which I think he was very right about, is that all of the circumlocution and secularity to avoid religious language, Peterson's right. You get to a certain level and your language is going to become religious. And even if you're using words that at the moment are not identified as being religious, you're going to use those words in a religious way. You are not going to get out of these structures. They are there. And so a lot of what McDonald's, Oneida, a lot of what these books that you've mentioned recognize is that scale, if you're going to be dealing with human beings at scale, patterns will emerge. You see this in the Roman Catholic Church. The Roman Catholic Church has done scale like no other organization in world history. I mean, think about that organization. The Roman Catholic Church is different from when we say the Orthodox Church, what's included in that is a very different organism than this Roman Catholic hierarchy. I mean, just the Roman Catholic Church is an astounding thing to think about. It's endurance. I know some of you are like, Hank is out there, VanderKlay is going to be Roman Catholic soon enough. I'll keep the seat open for him. Well, first of all, Hank, I'm not in Chicago and go ahead and hold your breath. I want to see if you can hold it enough to pass out. No, you're onto something. These things are, we don't get around these things. And some of these things are, this is the stuff that Rick and I are talking about with branding. And when Rick's like, we got to brand better. Yeah, you're right. Branding means compromise. This is the same stuff that Chris Williamson and David Fuller were talking about in that podcast that I did a little bit of commentary on earlier in the week. The same issues. And this is part of the power of the tools that Peugeot brings to this, is that the symbolism tools scale really well. And these hierarchical understandings fit things very well. The power of equality is simplicity. The power, ironically, the power of hierarchy is inclusion. Reality has a structure. And you can learn about the creator of the structure by looking at the structure of reality. And that is knowledge. And the best language for that is knowledge of God. Oh, but that's, yeah, that's the best language. Peterson's right. All right, Chad the alcoholic. Oh, I better write end of questions. End of control. One of these days when I announce that, it's gonna try and get it in before me. As I know, some of you have trollish spirits within you. All right, Chad the alcoholic, greetings. This isn't the doom and gloom set of questions. Oh, good, I like doom and gloom sets of questions. How tight should I cling to my health? Should I cling to my health, to my comforts, to my allegiance to country, to my affluence? Is it necessary for the church as we know it to collapse so that it might flourish? I very much understand the place in you that these questions come from. And I've touched on them throughout this question and answer session today. And I can't answer those questions for you. But what I will say, I hope will be helpful because it has helped me. Whether or not the church collapses is not on you. You don't have that power. And because you don't have that power, you don't have that responsibility. It's Christ's church. It's Christ's bride. Someone who tries to get their hands too much all over Christ's bride, just look at that metaphor. Christ is gonna slap that hand and say, hey, she's my bride. Respect her, serve her, love her. Don't get your hands all over her. You're not her husband, I am. And the other issues that you have to deal with. Well, again, this is where my answer before about a negative and a positive is really important. You are to love your wife. You are to love your body. You are to love your family. And part of that love means compromising. Because like I said, with the homeless people, I've gotta love the homeless people and I've gotta love my church. Now, we usually talk about balance. I don't think that's the right image. But we talk about balance because sometimes I gotta be a little harder on the homeless people in order to love the church people a little better. But is that the right way? I don't think so. And so then part of me asked myself, well, it did restricting a lot of the easy water access around here, is that loving my homeless friends? Because actually, very often I'll go outside and I'll sit down and I will look them in the eye and I will say, this sidewalk outside my door is no place for a human being to live. There's no place for you to store your food. There's no adequate bathroom facilities. There's a little hose with some water in it that I've just turned off. But to be perfectly honest with you, if you were my son living here, I would. But they're not my son. And they're making choices. And even my ways of trying to help them, I've gotta be really respectful of their agency because I could decide that I'm going to end the aspect of their life that is homelessness by maybe putting them in a classroom here. And all of you know right away, and Rick knows especially, the world of trouble, I would be an ASAP, not just from other people, but all of the reasons that contribute to their homelessness would now make all kinds of other problems. So it's figuring out how to love is difficult. And God number one and God number two, when we say love God, well, there's a way in which, we're told to love God and love our neighbor as ourself. It's because there's a connection between God and our neighbor. And Jesus talks about that. And we have difficulty conceptualizing it, articulating it, but it's a deep and profound connection that we get. And in fact, Allah Tom Holland, the success of Christianity has delivered the belief in that connection far beyond people who identify as Christian. And that's the sort of Christian secularity that we live within. And what's interesting, just a little side, when you listen to Shermer and Dawkins talk about Islam, what they're really talking about is making Islam more Christian, which is an enormous irony, but that's what they're trying to do. And Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook at the end of their 9-11 retrospective, were reflecting on that too, because Muslims understand some lines that Christians don't see. And so when George W. Bush was on TV talking all these values, he wasn't understanding that some very, not unlike our friend here who's refusing to get a vaccination, he wasn't understanding that some of the 9-11 people were hearing this as basically religious colonization and a crusade. And so one of the stated goals of the 9-11 hijackers was to destroy international law because they very clearly saw that this secular value of international law is a Christian value and they wanted to take it down. And so ironically, when Americans practiced enhanced interrogation and sort of skirted issues of international law on the bodies of these hijackers, or not the hijackers, because they all died, of course, but on the bodies of these terrorists, in some ways when the terrorists are like, each time you torture me, I win. Because your ideas of international law and the UN declaration of human rights, that's all Christianity-like. You don't see it, but I do. And so I am going to be brutal enough to you to have you betray what you deeply believe. And it's actually, and if you understand that dynamic and you look at Christ crucified, suddenly you'll see something that, and this, again, Peugeot talks about this better than almost anybody else. In that way, Jesus takes that power of the terrorist and Jesus goes to the Roman terrorists and the other religious tyrants of his day and says, go ahead, make me your victim. And one of the most beautiful things about this American civil rights movement, that seems nearly completely lost on this facile wokeism is the spirit that many civil rights, deeply Christian civil rights people said, which was, you can beat my body, you can take away my rights, but you can't make me hate you. Something profoundly Christian in that idea, and it is powerful. And so that's the spirit that a Christian for conscience sake who won't receive a vaccination has to say to those who despise him and say, you may despise me, you may say all kinds of evil things about me, but you can't make me hate you. And he quite rightly comes to me and says, how can I not hate them? They're destroying my life. And that's why I say, turn to Christ, because you look at Christ and Christ alone will say, I know what you mean. I came to this world as its author in order to love its people, and they killed me for it, and I love them still. Not in some facile, shallow, simplistic way, but in a way that fills the cosmos. That's the gospel. It's not the negatives, it's love. So, yeah. What is the church's responsibility in speaking out against evil from your perspective? Speak the truth and love. Because the goal is love. So if you betray the goal in the pursuit of it, that's the whole question of, so Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook said basically, what the 9-11 attackers effectively accomplished was the destruction of America's reputation with much of the world in terms of some of its moral high ground, and they destroyed the reputation of Islam. As Jordan Peterson says again and again and again, it's way easier to make things worse. It's difficult to achieve goodness. That was a great example. So yes, the church has to figure out, and I would say, you say speak out against evil. Okay, your focus is on speech. What does the church really have to do? Is show goodness and evil will be revealed as it is in exactly the proper way as something we should flee from? So if Christians believe that same-sex sexuality is evil, Christians can say that all day long. I think we know that many of the people pursuing same-sex sexuality disagree with them. So it's just like this vax mask pandemic. What you're doing when you stand up and you boldly declare the truth as you see it is you are exercising your self-righteous muscles. Maybe you're doing more, I don't know, but you're probably doing that. Okay, so, but I'll tell you something, self-righteousness is not a good look. So if you believe something to be evil, sometimes the best way to have others see it as evil when they're not seeing it as such is to allow the good to be revealed in your life. But that is a costly thing and talk is cheap. So yeah, I get criticized from both sides in a lot of these things because, Paul, you weren't clear enough. Paul, you were equivocating. Paul, that from, let's say, the traditionalists. And then of course, from those who are affirming, they're angry because I'm not cheering their side on. First of all, back to Chad the alcoholics, I'm not in charge and I never will be. So I can't, I might be wrong. Just tell me I'm wrong and walk away. That's fine, I won't be offended. I won't be hurt by that because I'll tell you, I'm wrong about way more than I'm right about. But if you're asking me about how we are to, because the question isn't speaking about evil, that's cheap. Because so often that talk is self-righteous. The question is, how can evil be exposed to be seen as it is for what it is? That's a far better goal. And it's a far more difficult goal. And that's a costly goal. Especially because we're just wrong about a lot of stuff anyway, say that's evil. Well, it's probably somewhat evil and somewhat good. Are the vaccines good? I tend to think so. Is there some evil in there? Probably. I mean, that's the wheat and the tares. The world is all this mixture full of this stuff. There's good things and bad things about the vaccines. There's good things and bad things about vaccination passports. There's good things and bad things. I just triggered a whole bunch of you. Be not triggered, please. Get a hold of yourself. People are gonna say things that offend you. If you feel waves of offense roll over you, let them roll past you. Otherwise, these spirits then possess you. Then you don't wanna be possessed by those spirits. Be filled with the Holy Spirit. Okay, boy. Hopefully another long video. I make long videos so that, I don't know, because sometimes I say things. It's like, I'm just gonna take people off, get myself in trouble. But it's what I think. Just telling you what I think. As a person high in openness, how do you keep yourself grounded in what you do believe while you explore so many other somewhat and very contrary ideas? In other words, how do you guard against undermining your belief structure via your openness? I'm not young. I am embedded in a serious Christian community. I have practices in my life and commitments in my life that limit what I will say and how far I may stray. Part of what's beneath the question is the assumption of the sovereign self. You are not sovereign. You can know that by religious things and you can know that by the science of psychology. So if you want to stay a Christian, make commitments and keep them. Commit to a church. Commit to a body of dogma. Dogma. But also commit to people and commit to love them. And it's in the tensions within the commitment that you'll be able to both have enormous freedom and not lose yourself. Here's a little example. A troubled marriage is much more fragile than a strong marriage. And you say, well, that's obvious. Well, why is a strong marriage strong? It's strong because the two people have made deep commitments to each other. And so the things that they say and the things that they do that other people might look at and say, oh, you shouldn't do that. They can do because their commitments are strong. That's what commitment does. And those commitments will be to ideas, they'll be to practices, and they'll be to people and communities. And so this is why I always chuckle when people say, oh, you're gonna be Roman Catholic. I'm pretty deeply committed to the Christian Reformed Church. Now the Christian Reformed Church might evaporate around me and I'll have to make decisions, but I'm deeply committed to the Christian Reformed Church. Not to Orthodoxy in terms of Big O, an Orthodox Church, or the Roman Catholic Church, or even a Presbyterian Church. I'm deeply committed to the Christian Reformed Church. They are my people. They are my family. I'm deeply committed to my wife and to my children. I have commitments to my friends, but all of these things come in a hierarchy. And again, I need to be, and this is part of the inversion trick of Christianity, because when I say I'm committed to God above all, well, that kind of means I'm committed to all of those things too. So that's how to do it. Make commitments and keep them. But also hold your commitments within a proper hierarchy of commitments. In other words, my commitment to certain things are not as serious as my commitment to other things, but even the seriousnesses are layered in hierarchies. There are ways that I'm committed to my church that are greater than my family, and there are ways that are lesser than my family, because all these conceptualizations sort of distort the way they are. So I hope that helps. Pick. What is your process for evaluating whether an idea, whether an ideal is adopted as a goal? Well, that's a good question. Goals are personal or institutional. You know, I make a video like I made this video this week, and some people are gonna cheer, and some people are gonna curse, and I know that. And it's like, my commitment to the truth and pursuing the truth has to be in some ways greater than my commitment to being committed to God. It has to be in some ways greater than my commitment to being liked. That's a hard one for me, because pastors are people pleasers. Because if we don't please people, we don't eat. But, is it part of me, I know some of you are gonna really hate what I'm about to say. Is it part of me happy that there are affirming churches? Why? Because I have friends who are gay, and I'd rather see them married than monkeying around, and I'd rather see them in a church than in no church. So, but I'm not in charge of those churches. I disagree with them in some ways, but part of me is glad they're there. It's complex like that. So, now I am an office bearer in the Christian Reformed Church. I would love to never say a word about all one body or the human sexuality report. Could I? Probably not, I'm too mouthy, I talk too much. Should I talk about them? Yes, why? Because part of my long-term goals has been to attempt to facilitate better conversation within the Christian Reformed Church around issues that they're having conflict about and should be processed, and just maybe the Christian Reformed Church has something not only to do right by its people, but to offer the rest of the world. So, these questions shouldn't be avoided, and they should be engaged and wrestled with. And if I'm going to wrestle with them, I need to do so honestly and in honesty. And I need to and that means that I will make some people happy and some people angry, so be it. But because I love my church, because ideals are important, I'm going to wrestle with the issues. And so a goal of mine is to talk about these things. Will I lose YouTube subscribers on one end and gain on another? Sure, and then I'll say something else and I'll take off the other side. I'm speaking for me, I'm offering myself. And I think that's what Christ did for us. So we should do it for each other. Disagree with me? Wanna shut me up? Part of the beauty of social media is to do what I do right now, I could never do it sitting in a denominational office in the Christian Reformed Church. Because there's a hierarchy there. And parts of the hierarchy would say, we don't want VanderKlay talking about these things. There's other people in those offices I'm sure would love to have me shut up. Other people are cheering me on. Here we are. So the personal aspect goes into the analysis of which ideals should be a goal. This seems like something Western culture is really struggling with right now because of the push to be inclusive, absolutely. Because, and Holland and Sandbrook in their 9-11 retrospective, I thought handled this quite well, and Tom Holland especially, he said, what George Bush and Osama Bin Laden had in common was a universalist vision. George Bush and the United States, I get so chagrined at evangelicals that are losing their stuff. Over Christian nationalism, all the time on my Twitter feed, I see. Here we're having a conference or symposium about Christian nationalism. Oh, isn't it horrible that all of these Trump supporters had Bibles and crosses and yada, yada, yada in their, what did you expect? The same bandwidth that carries our political allegiance is really close to our religious allegiance. It's really close to our religious allegiance. And the other side of this big fight doesn't recognize their Christian imperialism. Osama Bin Laden saw it. The rest of the world sees it. Africa sees it. Read an article about how part of the reason Africa is cozying up to China is they're sick of the nagging the moralistic nagging from the West. Now I think they're gonna have other issues with China. But, Peugeot was right. You can't include everything. Just think it through. There's gonna be inclusion and exclusion. There's gonna be front, there's gonna be center and fringe. As Peugeot says, thousands of times, reality lays itself out like that. Language does too. You don't get around these things. So stop playing games imagining you can and see the reality and deal with it. I think Christians are called to hold love as our highest ideal. That's right. Not self-sacrifice. That's the negative. Again, I probably read this dozens of times in Lewis before I understood it. The positive thing is the goal, not the negative. And that's why all other reactive things will always be weaker than the thing itself. So strive for the thing itself. And I think that should inform what ideals we try to adopt. Absolutely. And the ideals, like again, back to the, if you're a Roman Catholic and you have a serious conviction about the vaccine, I'm not gonna tell you to betray your conscience. Now maybe your doctor will say, get the darn vaccine, but he's your doctor and I'm me. So context means a lot in this. And so as a Christian, I believe that someday I will stand before my creator and be called to give an account for what I have done with the time I've been given. And my judgment will be, because it'll be a perfect judgment, that we can understand better and worse with respect to perfect and imperfect. I will be judged by virtue of who I am, when I am, what I've been given, all of those things. The judgment is not mine, but I have to make little judgments along the way. So yeah, ideals are the same. So yeah, ideals and goals, a lot of life is tied up in that. And so it's helpful to understand what ideals you're actually pursuing, because we're not transparent to ourselves. Wow, look at this, I've gone 25 minutes too long. Look at the time. Any last things those of you in the comment section wanna say? Paul, I just wanna say another brilliant Q&A. I really like the ending there. And I just wanted to say, Pastor Paul Sellout, if you wanna know more, watch his older videos. And if you wanna know how it ends, keep watching his videos. I'm just trying to help Rick. But- That's right. See, to that Rick, there's some A-level branding that Mark's doing. Yeah, I just wanted to, so I had a chat with Chad the alcoholic and Chris Petcow on Chris's channel. And the way I categorized estuary, see if maybe I'm misunderstanding something, is you're sort of reintroducing critique into the church from the people who deconstructed the church, from the people who left. And by church, I'm probably meaning more the Orthodox and Catholic traditions, because those are the larger, more cohesive traditions. But the church as a body, as maybe three parts of a body as such, does it sound right to you? Yeah, that does sound right. I think that's good. I hadn't thought of it that way, but that's... See, structures have difficulty with critique naturally. But critique is necessary. And so, yeah, no, I think that's good. It's really helpful. Thanks, Mark. Oh, yeah, no problem. And yeah, I think the undertone of the last stuff you were saying, especially, which I thought was, you're just on fire lately, Paul. I thought that was great, is that we've become so disconnected from our values that we're using those values as a given. And this is that middle out. So we're standing on, or some of us are trying to stand on objective material reality saying, well, of course, murder is wrong. And then building everything from there because we're too disconnected from the tradition that created the values that were sort of taken for granted. And I think that might be part of the deep middle out thinking that we're seeing today. Good. And if you haven't noticed in my videos, Mark leaves really long, meaty comments in my videos. And I actually thought of you, Mark, when I listened to Chris Williamson and David Fuller talking about comment sections. And Chris was like, I wish people would leave long, thoughtful comments. And I thought they do on my channel. Y'all who leave long, thoughtful comments are, you've really helped me. And so that's the potential of YouTube. Too bad it's not often realized. So thank you. Anybody else have something to say before I tell Rick to end transmission? Great job. Thank you. Thanks, Chad. Thanks, Chad. All right. This is it for today. And Rick, you can end transmission. And then I'll be back.