https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mwBBrRLGaYQ

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to take a little bit more time with the Audrey Assad Father Chris Foley interview. I played some of it in the in the video yesterday about the Four Horsemen of Meaning video. I didn't play the part about her sacramental association with psychedelics. I found her articulation of deconstructing really quite typical and I thought having both someone who grew up evangelical and then Roman Catholic and then deconstructing out of that to be quite interesting, especially alongside of someone who was also in the music business who went to orthodoxy. I think Justin Brierley, by virtue of exactly what he does and who he talks to, tends to have a little better finger on the pulse than a lot of clergy in the church in terms of at least clergy and hierarchies and especially people in the academy. It takes a while for things to flow down to the academy unless professors are paying careful attention to students and listening carefully to them. So her story was really fairly standard, I thought. And in Syria had been part of a sponsored child. So she talks about her father who came to the United States as a refugee and then got connected into a Plymouth Brethren Church. It's from each other, these assemblies as they're called here. So you could have a very different experience from one to the next, which I'm super aware of because I have friends that- And I thought she was really fair about her own denomination, which was good to hear. Grew up in it that had a very different experience than I did because the culture of that particular gathering was different because it doesn't have- there's no bishops and there's no pope. It's similar to a Quaker type of spirituality in that way and in other ways as well. But so that's where I was raised. What's also interesting here is the push and pull between, let's say, networked and hierarchical visions for betterment and more egalitarian flat visions. Evangelicalism is notably flat and cellular as opposed to hierarchical and integrated. Now you can find elements of both on other sides. On different sides of many issues, many people look at- many people really want autonomy, but autonomy or hierarchy really isn't necessarily a safeguard against whichever side you're fearing, whether that be tyranny or simply people making stuff up as they go along. Now when you say cult, you sort of- okay, what do you mean by cult? How coercive were they? Did they make you sign over your house? Or was it just sort of insular and ingroupishness? I tend to see that more in this than necessarily coercive and, you know, if you leave, we're going to do bad things to your family. Or, you know, after having done years of work to try to untangle the angst I have felt over religion and spirituality, a lot of it starts with that upbringing. And I remember in particular just being terrified all the time of everything, you know, like of physical affection, let's say. I was so scared of that. I mean, I read my journals. I have all these journals from when I was in middle school and high school. And I would write things about how, you know, holding hands leads to kissing, which leads to you know what, and you can't ever do that. And it's bad. And I definitely internalized things in a certain way. And I'm not going to blame that on the people teaching me. I think it was a mix of what was taught and my particular temperaments. And I also now know that I have been managing OCD my whole life, which I didn't know at the time. And so I was sort of diagnosed with this form of OCD called scrupulosity or religious OCD about five or six years ago. And that really cast a lot of light and illumination on my relationship to faith, because I don't think it's easy for me to operate independently of that tendency. So organized religion for me always carried a challenge around not being able to be terrified of hell and doing the wrong thing, you know, hurting someone, hurting God. Now, again, I thought this was remarkably honest and remarkably fair. And she's noting the various layers that she recognizes in herself. And, you know, really quite quite remarkable. It's unusual when you when you often as a pastor meet with people, you'll recognize certain traits and behaviors on their part, but that they recognize it themselves and that they see that these things have contributed to their tellings of their story and their readings. You know, again, points for her on this. Did your kind of experience of Christianity ever kind of turn into something more grace-filled? I mean, I know you eventually kind of took a journey towards Catholicism. Could you talk about that? Definitely. And I would say currently I still have a relationship to Christianity. I mean, I don't think there's a way for me not to do that. And I don't desire to not have a relationship to it actually. And I'll say more. It's a little hard to know exactly what she means by she'll have a relationship to Christianity, but she'll be pretty clear that she's not practicing. So what exactly these things mean? A little slippery. About this later, but when I announced that I'm not currently practicing that that is the material truth of it. I don't mean to say that I hate it or that I could never practice it again, or that I hate Jesus because I honestly don't think any of those things are necessarily the truth. But I am where I am partially because I need to be here. It's sort of, well, I guess wholly because I feel that I need to be where I am. Now, part of what makes this conversation, I'm not going to play much of Father Foley's interview, not because I thought it was unimportant, not because I don't think he spoke well or gave a good account of his life, but partly because his story is so familiar in this little corner of the internet and all of us sort of downstream from Jonathan Peugeot and Jordan Peterson. His story is of less interest to me because it's actually, is it common? I mean, he went all the way to seminary, became a priest. I mean, I would have plenty of my own questions about him, but, and there's some, what's that word, profelicity questions that I have with respect to this whole thing too. I mean, part of this gets into clerical garments and vestments as such, because of course I don't wear them. Some of you wish I would. And there's potentially an entire conversation about that as well. So, but I found her story very interesting and I thought very telling about this whole dynamic. Tell us a little bit about the music as well and where, you know, you really started that, you know, your career. And I'm going to skip over some of the parts of her music because I really do love her music. I started, I first became aware of her, David Brooks. There was a time when I was reading a lot of David Brooks, when David Brooks had mentioned her. And then I looked her up and I immediately really enjoyed her voice, really enjoyed her music. I mostly listened to a lot of her, her hymn stuff, but that's, you know, and I've also mentioned before with another, in another Rando's conversation that I did, Jennifer Knapp, whose music I also really love, especially the music before she sort of resolved her sexuality and identified as, as, as gay in there, in the music before that, as, as mentioned with, with the conversation that I did of the, of the youth pastor that's about my age, who, who went from, went from drugs right into youth pastorship without a, without a background check. That's the title is something like that. You know, she, her songs, Jennifer Knapp's songs in that period were, they're so full of longing and, and pleading with God. And, and it just came through so powerfully. And so with her voice, you know, I've always been, I still listen to Jennifer Knapp songs and I still listen to a lot of Audrey Assad. I don't, I don't have playlists on Spotify or anything like that. But in terms of my Google, went from Google music to YouTube music, in terms of my YouTube music, you know, they're, they're, they're pretty heavy. I listened to, listened to quite a bit of them, but let me jump ahead. Paul Alexander singing and songwriting hasn't gone away even in this, obviously just because of this present, but, but what, what inspired particularly that tweet that got a lot of attention earlier in the year when you said, I no longer consider myself a practicing Christian. What, what had been the journey up to that point? Well, so in 2016, I was diagnosed with PTSD because I was having the, the role of the professional therapeutic community is also interesting in her conversation. And this is often the background with many such deconstructing conversations. I don't think that presence in our cultural matrix is, is without importance in this anxiety and panic attacks with unknown origin. Well, the anxiety attacks had an origin panic attacks don't usually, it's sort of like, you don't know what the trigger is for those. I had several different, um, battles on that front. And I was going to trauma therapy with a Christian therapist actually, who, um, at the time that I was going to see her, I could not even say the word God without triggering an anxiety attack. It was really, really hard. And so I was, I had to cancel the father is a good listener. He, he, he he'll do a lot of listening through the little bits that I, I take. And she probably, I didn't count the minutes. She probably has the majority of the interview. Most of the shows I was doing, I couldn't walk into a church building. I could not, um, could not bear to be in mass. It was really, really sad because I did not desire for that to be my reality whatsoever. It was just sort of happening. And I realized though, through those things, those notifications that my body was giving me, that I had some trauma to process that was spiritual in nature, spiritual and religious. And they have spiritual in nature or is it religious in nature? And again, the, the terminology is important to track in a conversation like this. Abuse are very real things. And at that time I had not really acknowledged or dealt with any of those realities from my upbringing, which is both included the, my internalization of the doctrines is part of that, but also my experiences with human beings who did, um, in various ways, abuse their relationships to me. I had one kind of long experience of one of the elders in my church being, um, sexually and romantically forward with me for years that resulted in a lot of pain and residual issues around spiritual leadership. And so that was the beginning of the deconstruction, which again, I really wasn't looking for it sort of just happened and I found myself in it. And it was, and that is a very common piece in many of these deconstruction stories. These, um, these individuals are not seeking this in many cases, they will lament the loss of relationships, the loss of friendships, and even the loss of faith. I've, I've seen that over and over again, how they, they're losing their faith and it feels like something is slipping away from them and they can't keep it. They can't get it back. And we've spoken many times about the fact that, you know, faith isn't, belief isn't something that's, that's wholly voluntary. You can't choose what to and not to believe. Um, and I don't think we're, we're, we're dealing specifically or exclusively with the propositional. If we think about Verveckis four P's here, we're, we're thinking about, um, perspectival, we're thinking about procedural. Um, we're thinking about participatory. I mean, faith, faith has all of those four P's active in it. And again, her lament here, this isn't, this isn't something she wants necessarily. It's terrifying partially because of my fears of hell and my fears of God and my fears of doing the wrong thing. And partially because my whole living had been made, you know, in a world where that connection based on shared belief is very strong. And so what comes up, you know, I, another parallel conversation to this that, that Justin did, um, in June, 2020 was with John Steingard. And, you know, that, that comes, that, that issue of, well, do you stay in the faith because your job relies on it? And what if Audrey aside renounces the faith and suddenly everybody listens to her songs differently? You know, same for Jennifer Knapp, same for a number of Christian artists. Now, now Esther, my friend, I can call her Bethel now. Um, I, I, if, if someone has a pseudonym, I, I always train myself to only use the pseudonym so that the other name doesn't, doesn't burst out. But now that, that Bethel is, um, now that, that Esther is Bethel, I can, I can use her real name. She, she, she not only, um, she, she sent me this tweet, messaged it so that I wouldn't use it. And then she said, and you can use this in your video, public service amount amounts announcement, sacramentalist here. This is your weekly reminder that the sacrament is not about you or your feelings. Okay. Thanks. Bye. And that's, that's, that's Bethel being Bethel. Um, but part of the, part of the reason why so many artists, I think, are doing this is, is because artists are, artists are sensitive and they are sensitive to spirits, let's say, and spirits in the sense of how I've been using the word for a while. And those of you who, I have a fairly, those of you, when I do big videos, like with the Jordan Peterson stuff, I always get people who just stumble into the channel and then I get all the usual comments about these videos are so long and you're so verbose and get to the point and, and, and, and, yeah, I know, just watch the, watch the introductory video to the channel. I can explain some of the verbosity and what exactly I'm doing with this. So, so artists are particularly sensitive to spirit, let's say, and, and many different spirits, the spirits in the culture, the spirit of the zeitgeist. Um, and, and so they, I tweeted about this, I should pull it up. It's the job of the artists to feel for the culture. And it's the job of the rest of us to watch those feelings take those, um, where to watch where those feelings take those artists. And that's what's happening here. It's rather amazing. People volunteer for this dangerous work, but they really have no choice. It's their nature. And again, in this, in this conversation, she's remarkably transparent. She's remarkably disclosing. And I, as I've said before, even with, you know, I did my interview with John Sook, who was a CRC minister and left for a Canadian mainline denomination. I, I, and I'm with, I'm with father Chris Foley on this. I'm, I'm not necessarily tremendously disturbed by deconstructions because sometimes people need, need to deconstruct in order to reconstruct somewhere else. And we're going to get into the reconstruction language a little bit later too, because I want to take this into some more culture war waters as we get further into this video, because these things are in fact, I think connected. I was talking to a colleague of mine, I think I've mentioned this before on the channel and we talked about how many young people come out of Christian colleges and in my language, sort of pre-wired for deconstruction. And what's, what's so remarkable about, about her story is again, she, she tells it with so much transparency and honesty and, and a fair amount of self-knowledge that it's, it's, it's quite remarkable. And it's, it's takes a toll to live in the public. Like an artist like this does, she derives her income and her living from it. So again, I have a lot of respect for her honesty, I have more respect for her to, to actually tell us what she thinks than to necessarily just sort of always fake it. I mean, I've seen, I've seen clergy do this, you know, they've, they've got a, they've got a job, they've got a pension, they've got a family. So they're going to just keep doing it until they retire. And then suddenly find out what they really think. I have a lot less, I understand why that happens, but I have a lot less respect for, for that move. Um, people were listening to me partly because they liked my sound, but in a, in large part also, because they believed what I did or shared a lot of that, you know, perspective on the world. So that makes a lot of sense. And I just was like, I feel so responsible for this and I want to be, she's, she means she's obviously a sensitive person. Um, she's, I, I haven't, I haven't peeked at her know yourself profile, you know, that you can get from Jordan B Peterson, but seems very high in conscientiousness and probably quite high and negative emotion as well in her big five personality profile, authentic and truthful, but I don't know where this is going to land. Like I might go through this therapy and then be right back where I was. And so I don't want to say, you know, right now that I'm leaving church because I don't, I really didn't know if that would be the case. Yeah. Um, I didn't want that. I was having a conversation with a colleague this morning and I just told him, I said, I, I don't envy you. He has a church plant full of young, younger people. And I said, you've just got the world's messiest job right now because this being pushed to and fro by spirits in the culture is, is where a lot of young people are at. By the time you get into your fifties and sixties and seventies and eighties, like people in my congregation, well, again, the cake is baked. And I don't know if you get that on your bingo card, but they're, they're, they're done with their, you know, they're done with their divorcing. They're done with their deconstructing. They're done with all of this. And they're actually, I love ministering to people in their seventies and eighties because in many ways they're, they're ready to get serious about far bigger questions. I far rather do funerals than weddings, not because I like to see people die, but because at a wedding, there's so much distract in it at a funeral, death focuses the mind and says, what really matters in this world? And why are we here? And why is there a gospel? And why is there a church? But if you're in your twenties and thirties, and even now with delayed adolescence, even in your forties, people are, people are still being pushed to and fro by every wind of spiritual power that flows through the culture. That's to be the case, to be honest. And, and it's like a lot of, I'm hearing my critics in my head right now going, well, why just, why not just go back if you didn't want to leave? She's got a consciousness Congress too. And I wish it was that simple. And it's such a long story and someday I'll tell it in more detail, but long and short of it is that after a few years of not going to mass because I kept trying to go to mass and having panic attacks, I decided to be truthful about where I am right now. I didn't want people to feel like I was being deceitful by just kind of being quiet about it and not admitting what had gone on and what it shifted. And I did go through an angry phase where I had the burn it all down feeling, but again, I'm not really, it's not my style, I think to come out of the gate with a torch while I'm still processing my own issues. And, and again, I just get, I've just got a world of compassion for this woman and respect because, you know, I know there's this whole tribal fight about her letting down the side, yada, yada, yada, but you know, she's a real human being and she's got to process this stuff. And whether you agree or disagree, again, she's an artist, artists are sort of like ships with big sales, bigger than the rest of us. And, and, and they're, you know, they're, they're catching the wind and, you know, the same for the, you know, again, there's a, there's a dude sitting here who also came from a band and he went all the way through to seminary and is, you know, sitting in, sitting in vestments as an Orthodox priest. So the winds blow in different ways. Yeah. And what I get from this story is, is you're as human as anyone else, Audrey, but the unfortunate aspect of it is that- And I have a world of respect too for Justin Briarley and he's just such a master at these things. Often people who are, you know, Christian musicians or musicians in general, you know, with, with a following, they kind of have to often process, you know, their own journey kind of in public. And it's almost like the priest, especially because I'm not playing what he says and just go ahead and watch the whole thing. You know, he's just sort of like the silent presence of God, patiently listening. And that's what vestments will do for you. And that can be a really difficult thing to do when you've got other people's expectations and following and everything else on your shoulders. But we'll come back to your story in just a moment, Audrey, and thank you for sharing so honestly. And, and, and okay. So give, give Justin the clicks, go to, go to listen to Father Chris Foley talk about, talk about his story. And, and I loved his story too, but again, it, it's not dealing with what I as a pastor am seeing the culture dealing with. If someone takes their ship into the harbor of orthodoxy, you know, me and the angels cheer. So that's as a, as a shepherd. As a shepherd who cares for lost sheep, you know, her story really touches my heart. But the, the question that we've been looking at today, Audrey, is, you know, why to some extent there have been so many of these stories of late of people deconstructing and so on yours is not the only one I mentioned others such as Michael and Lisa Gunga, John Steingard, Kevin Max, Dave, Dave Bazan. So, you know, do you, I mean, maybe there isn't anything. Does me, does me good to watch Justin not finish his sentences. I don't feel so alone. Specific behind this maybe is just that people go on journeys and we're more aware of, you know, our stars, you know, the people we follow through social media and everything else than perhaps we ever were. But, but what do you think there's sort of, do you notice anything in this particular kind of whole area of people going on similar journeys to you in the Christian music scene? I do. And I mean, I know a lot of those people personally, we've had many conversations about why and without betraying anyone's confidence, I think it's safe to say a similar sentiment or similar feeling to what Father Chris, you expressed about, we weren't told the whole story. There comes a point when you were raised in a very insular way, which a lot of us were, to some degree or another, sort of taught that this is the structure of things. This is the order. Now, part of what I want to push back on a little bit in this is that, and Tim Keller does a good job talking about this, I found that kind of the image of this is that there are people kind of shut up in these little huts and these little narrow epistemological communities and what breaks them free is they're aware of a bigger world. That's true, but that's pretty normal to any developmental story. You know, we don't plop into the world suddenly on the internet, hopefully. And if your parents are putting you on the internet at a very young age, chances are you're not going to be looking at a lot of religion very early unless you're someone like Bethel McGrew, who is a rather unusual person. I know she'll listen to this. But part of the deceit of that way of thinking about it is that you imagine that it's just all open skies where we are now. It's almost like a monarchical vision, a modernist monarchical vision where you're just up there and you can see everything. And this is where John Vervecky in the video I just played from the Four Horsemen, because modernity imagines that all knowledge is just out there in the open and accessible to all of us. But again, that's one of the features or bugs of, I'd say it's a bug of modernity because we can't mind read each other. And so then when you get into a bunch of this postmodern standpoint epistemology, you have to realize that her story with her background, the Plymouth Brethren, the abuse that she suffered, her OCD, all of that goes into her perspective. And then the Roman Catholics who were sort of there to sort of catch her and raise her up and catechize her, well that's a part of her story. It's not the case that before she was somehow in a little huddle and now there's wide open spaces and she stands above everything looking at everything. No, she's still going through a journey and sort of like in a video game, I used to watch my kids play Uncharted and part of many video games today is the sense that, well I can go anywhere, but if you play the game enough you realize, no there are actually sort of edges to the map that they sort of keep you in and what you really have is much more of an epistemological tunnel that you're going through. Because there's of course combinatorial explosiveness. You can't see everything and you don't see anything through clear eyes. You always have your biases and again she's remarkably self-knowing, but this image that suddenly out I am, now suddenly I see through clear eyes and I can judge the world from my new standpoint high above everything. I mean she's not saying that in those ways, but that's sort of built into this, to many of these stories where these deconstruction stories, well now I'm just kind of out there in the real world, whereas before I was sort of you know in the Truman show in Christoph's little planned community. Things you know in my case even like being taught that evolution was an evil philosophy that sought to undermine the creator of the universe and me getting to a point where my reason outpaced my need to obey the rules because I started getting too curious. You know I didn't even know who Martin Luther was. I was so insulated from even that because we were instructed only to read Plymouth Brethren authors and I remember the moment that it changed because I was in high school and I was in a church library somewhere and I found a Josephus book and I had never heard of Josephus which is you know he was a scribe and writer at the time of Christ around that same era in that same era and I was reading through this book and thinking like wait there's more information. What if this is forbidden like what else is forbidden you know this kind of forbidden fruit fear-based way of living can produce a need to go find out what's been hidden because in my opinion a thinking person which every person is a thinking person but a curious intellectually that might be a little generous a stimulated interested person being shown all of a sudden like wait there's a lot more out here I've never even considered or given the time of day to and I want to do that. I mean I think it's natural you know I don't think it's an evil thing I think it makes so much sense that when for most of your life you've been told for fear-based reasons to stay away from so much and I remember and you know you wonder to what degree her own you know perhaps high level of negative emotions in terms of her personalities is a piece of that you know and again I you know I obviously grew up in a conservative Christian household not as perhaps conservative as hers and it wasn't dispensational and but the posture of my family and of my parents and of my upbringing especially my father was never one of you know here's all these blinders and shutters out of fear but one of a you know a robust belief that we might be small and we might be sheep and we might lose our way but we in fact have a a loving father and a shepherd and a good shepherd and you know that might be I know the Calvinism piece sometimes rolls eyes and people have lots of different takes on Calvinism but part of its part of its strength is that you know we are we are in his care that doesn't mean that somehow Calvinists are not deconstructing and you know dispensationalists are but that posture of of of confidence in our Lord and in his sovereignty and in his providence for my brother this is the last thing I'll say about this but like my brother went on a journey like mine years before I did and at the time this this is often a piece too so the Rhett and Link this is often a piece too in this in these stories. At the time he was really into like Dawkins and Hitchens and he was trying to he was trying to get me to come towards that and he was sending me things and you know I was reading them and going like I just don't I mean I entertained it you know because I how could an artist she's got she's got big sales and so the sound of the the rumblings of the Dawkins the Dawkins Harris machine probably didn't woo her as much. Do not at that point but I remember him saying this thing that really stuck with me and he said you know they said like it would be backsliding for me to leave behind some of these ideas and that my life would would be terrible and that my relationships would suffer and he said but for me it's been the opposite for me I'm flourishing more than I ever have because I'm allowing my mind to explore the things that it wants to explore and I'm not living from angst and fear all the time and I think this is especially for Christian clergy this is a point where the clergy ought not to clench because hey if if you've been sort of living in a religious tyranny and you found a new enthusiastic avenue out of it it certainly feels like proximal betterment and it is. Now how proximal that betterment is will be seen in years and one of the difficulties that we have in human life is that unlike perhaps you know loop movies like Groundhog Day and boy there's doing a whole bunch of them lately I like every time I turn around there seems to be another movie about waking up in the same day and on and on and all these multiple timelines we don't get that we don't get to look back and say well what if I had not deconstructed or what if I had you know stayed in this church or what if I had stayed in this relationship and and not or pursued the other relationship we don't really get to do that in our life and the the math is way way way too hard to actually do with any kind of confidence we often feel like we can sort of imaginarily do it but we we really can't again combinatorial explosiveness each different day you know leads to these never-ending forks of alternatives and again you can watch lots of timeline movies about those kinds of things and um I don't think that Christianity and angst and fear have to be synonymous but I think a lot of us were raised in a tradition where they were where they were synonymous and so the exploration phase feels like necessary it's like an adolescence in a way that we weren't given the chance it's exhilarating and to have and so I'm not saying that's what mine is but I think there is part there's definitely a part of me that's being a 16 year old now instead of at 16 because I just wasn't given the opportunity to do that yeah go ahead Audrey I mean I was going to say that obviously your your your journey isn't completely encompassed by by those experiences you had in the the brethren church obviously in a way you could argue Catholicism not a million miles from the the orthodox tradition is certainly evangelical but but yeah I mean did did you still not find the kind of the latitude you felt you needed within that tradition did you still have just a lot of questions that ultimately led you to to feeling it you couldn't stay there oh well these are the questions I'm always asking myself I mean currently the way I feel is that and again this is this is just a wonderful interview she's she's transparent you get a sense that she's honest she's giving you you know she's giving us it's just a it's just a remarkable interview when I became a Catholic at 24 it was for most of the reasons you're describing Father Chris I mean and I did look into orthodoxy at the time but what happened to happen was that I was catechized by Catholics because that was who I met I met Catholics at that time who were very and again right there you have tensions with this imagination that we sort of lift above things and can look over the landscape and see through to everything versus the fact that no we're really making our way through and there's sort of a epistemological tunnel that's journeying with us develop and very kind of um educated in the tradition which I had grown up around Christmas and Easter Catholics in New Jersey I mean I just didn't really realize there was such and she's from New Jersey lovely lovely an intellectual and also mystical um component because the way I observed it was like this is a dead shell of a I just didn't know you know until I met some Catholics who were much more deeply invested in their faith and so that was who really helped catechize me and I did find so much relief from becoming Catholic it was um massively different than now now don't forget the trauma the OCD that she spoke of earlier when she she she couldn't keep going to mass because just being in church would trigger her so she's obviously working through a lot of stuff here where I was brought up and um however there's so much clericalism inside Catholicism that after a few years when the honeymoon period wore off and I started to encounter um you know the clericalism and the different kind of evangelical as well um cultural things that have crept into Catholicism because that's what happens things evolve and they they entangle with the culture okay now we sort of have a uh so you got Plymouth Brethrenism where it's all disconnected it's all egalitarian it's all flat and then well now Roman Catholicism so you've got deep history you've got deep roots you've got sacramentalism you've got all of those things you've got the majesty you've got the tradition but you've also got all of this stuff that you have with a hierarchy and so what what do you do I mean there's there's there's problems on every side the nature of things I started to realize that I would I was starting to come to a place where I was like wow my objections to Christianity or or my um difficulties with it let's say more so aren't limited to just evangelicalism I okay now we're going to get into there are there's a landscape of reasons individual temperamental for which and that are that are that are involved in the deconstruction of any given individual okay that's always there but these points come through pretty commonly struggle uh still a lot with the kind of gender based ideas that institutional Christianity mainly espouses and the sexuality discussion is so interesting and difficult right like lgbtq issues and now now let's pause and think about say the posture of the knowing self and the deep assumptions in the world about proximal betterment about what is good all the dead reckoning we're doing because so far this has always all been about sort of the individual it's very much the individual a path of discovery um I'm trying to uh trying to craigslist a bunch of furniture here at church while I'm doing this and I've got I've got it on Facebook marketplace and so if you ever send me a message on Facebook and I never get back to it's because I hate Facebook and I never go there and I I can't turn it off because the church needs access to it but I never go to my page but I had to do Facebook messenger to try and get rid of a whole bunch of shelving units because city life church one of our darter churches is moving back into the house and so they're painting classrooms and we've got all kinds of furniture from past child care places that we lease to and it's just you know the pastor of a local church and doing all this kind of crazy stuff anyway I distract myself so so the it's kind of the posture of the individuals kind of kind of kind of goes through and well you bump into clericalism and hey what about the sexuality thing well what where does this align with the sexuality thing well well the person navigating the the sexuality proximal betterment matrix is also well you know about what about flourishing what about what about I mean my brother deconstructed and he feels liberated and you know I've there's been all these restraints on my sexuality and the church is so restrictive sexually and you know that maybe you know liberation you know progressive liberationism is something in of calling that's sort of what we're looking for is just this progressive liberation and it's sort of a it's sort of what modernity has that well we rise above and we see our options and when we get to choose our options will be fulfilled it's sort of consumerism that that just keeps going lgbtq people and how that interfaces with what God wants for love and for sexuality and basically I came to a place where I was like I no longer currently believe in a God who is a singular person with a God number two see now the number one and number two start to come into play because whenever we thought of God what did we think of did we think of another being that's in the world another being in this meta divine realm in this space and sort of this epistemological tunnel and the way that this God intersects with our epistemological tunnel singular will and mind who is a singular person with a singular will and mind and and you think about some of the videos that I did with Nathan Nathan Jacobs years ago and you know he you know did that film on Amazon where again it's the problem of evil and that comes in and the one woman tells a story about how her uncle who was a really great guy and he smoked well see there if he if he was a good Christian he wouldn't have been smoking but he you know fell asleep with a cigarette and the bed caught fire and you know couldn't a loving God an all-powerful God just have sent an angel to move the cigarette but but even just when you said well sent the angel well why why why would a God who is personal need an angel isn't isn't God again this is God number one God number two again I always get asked do you have a video that succinctly tells us exactly what you mean by God number one and God number two no I don't and the reason I don't and the reason I keep it number one and number two because these are sort of box on my theoretical work bench work bench that that I put things into and so we have the agent arena relationship we have general and special revelation but I think right now the agent arena is is a good one young young Chu asked me objective subjective I don't think so and I'm gonna stay away from those words someone else asked me the the emanation versus emergent oh boy there's another one of these dualisms and that's why I'm working that's why there's no number three because I'm I'm working with dualisms here but right away what what's completely within this is this is well and of course this is Christianity so Jesus is God and then well God the father well that's kind of the old man in the Sistine Chapel with the finger right but again it's all these gods are other beings in the world like us just with more power it's sort of the the pagan the pagan idea of God that has has just kind of crept back into the cultural imaginary and that is that is the reason I do not practice Christianity is that at this moment it does not square with my own intellectual understanding of the psyche to now that was an interesting phrase and one could poke a little bit more around in there imagine that there's a god who has a kind of list of behavioral desires for people now that was a super interesting thing to say because of course she has a list of behavioral desires for people she doesn't particularly like the way she was treated in the Plymouth Brethren Church especially not by the abusive elder she doesn't like the way other people treat other people and this is what's so funny because it seems well if you're going to have a personal god but we don't want this god having any ideas any moral ideas about what we should and shouldn't do and certainly not one that will hold us accountable to them but yeah we hold each other accountable to these things so without too much work you can begin to ask some really difficult questions about well what what well then I just I'm just going to sort of back away into into this world and you know I'm going to be able to and yeah but you're backing away into this world this this world isn't this neutral space I loved what John Vervecky in the Four Horsemen video talked about you know when you roll the pencil what's happening well it's suddenly it's Newtonian physics and he's like no there's the table and you have to turn around and say well there's the world you're you're not none of us are just sort of these impartial observers hovering above sort of with clarity of moral insight and freedom of choice and will and and somehow free of judgment yet making constantly making judgments in fact the story entire story is a story about discerning and judging and choosing not this church not that church well then what because it isn't it isn't that you're choosing nothing you're always choosing one thing instead of another and you know she's keeping her options open but I'll tell you you know I got all this someone said don't you dare shave that before boxing day maybe I'll keep it through the 12 days of Christmas maybe come January I'll I'll shave it all off again or maybe I'll like it maybe I'll just see how big it can grow I've got a cousin who's got a massive one given the given the gene pool I don't have any doubt mine could get really big I just have to decide if I want it and then it gets real big and my wife's like you know if you're gonna let that thing grow you should probably like shouldn't you trim it or comb it or you know look at look at the nice look at the nice orthodox priest he's got you know he's got a well manicured beard what's wrong with you Vanderclay anyway I distract myself back to the subject around things like sexuality that we've to imagine that there's a god who has a kind of list of behavioral desires for people around like she's clearly not happy with the behavioral desires of the clericalism and the Roman Catholic priests and their abuse or the abuse that she was the victim of shouldn't shouldn't and now we can sort of deconstruct everything well shouldn't the universe kind of be against that well we don't want the unit we use universe instead of god because we want to depersonalize it but we're very selective about what we want depersonalized and what we want personalized I mean maybe we're going to be all about justice but you can't be talking about justice if you're not talking about consequences and picking and choosing behaviors these things go together and we can't just escape them and and part of what I get the sense of is that we live in a time of such amazing freedom and affluence and and I there's a there's a really lovely great courses course on Augustine's city of god and Augustine is always pushing against the libido see if I can remember it's been a few years since I've listened to it last libido dominante I don't know latin so sorry if you want more latin you gotta go talk to the bishop but but Augustine was was looking at this this this avaricious dominating spirit that was rome and you think about Romulus and remus suckling on the she-wolf and that and that in that mythical sense of what it means to be roman and here in our culture it's we have the we have the birthright to have our right to have our desires not only fulfilled the ones we choose but that whatever we desire will turn out well that's it's a lot to ask isn't it because even with the kinds of affluence and freedom that many of us here in North America enjoy to to have sort of the implicit expectation and demand that what I choose will turn out well well be careful about your choices you know choosing a meal at a restaurant is one thing choosing a spouse deciding to love another human being whether that be a partner or a child picking choosing to commit oneself to to a religion to a local denomination to a congregation even to a friendship all of that freedom is by no means a a guarantee of satisfaction with the choice so that almost seems to be the American birthright that almost seems to be the American birthright around things like sexuality that we've evolved to have oh oh well there's the there's the arena isn't there it's it's the arena of evolution and so now suddenly there's constraints in me that I'm constrained and if I'm constrained then surely the universe must be such a thing that even within my constraints if those go in to create the desires that I have surely when I when I am able surely there should be nothing institutional or or creational that that gets between me and my desire and then once I have my desire I ought to be fulfilled and fulfilled forever right but none of us really believe that that seems just insane and again I'm open-minded I read I mean I'm sort of I'm still interested in this you know it's not something I've kind of closed the book on and I'm walking away now it's just that she said yes to Justin Briley after all so she's staying in the conversation and the the the orthodox priest will have make a few good points on on some of these scores it's where I sit you know that's where I am right now and um I am a truth seeker though that is my nature it is how I am I cannot imagine oh that's very modern though too because I am sort of hovering about and I see the world um it it completely opens itself up to me and again back to the verveky comments in the four horsemen where on one hand we look around and we say oh standpoint epistemology but on the other hand I am the exception to standpoint epistemology I see the world as it is all of these other people they're all trapped by their the the little their their race or their gender or that they're all trapped by the blindness and there are all these unseen forces that are actually at work in them they're all they're all victims of of oppressive standpoint epistemologies but me I have to one degree a certain amount of epistemological superiority because well in her case she can speak as a woman which I cannot and she can speak as a victim of abuse which I cannot and and she can speak as uh someone who has experienced certain things which I cannot and back to the psychedelic thing she can speak as someone who has who has who has taken psychedelics and so had experiences and I who have never taken that psychedelics and have no desire to cannot and so we're very selective about this standpoint epistemology business and on one point we certainly want to sort of rise above the world and see it all as it is on the other point we say well wait a minute don't you can't say that to that person how do you know the way the world looks through them it's like hey wait a minute is the world open or not can I really know just by being a truth seeker and what if you if you're a truth seeker will you be satisfied by the truth that you find be a part of this is of age you know you if you're a man like me maybe don't like going to the doctor so much partly because you don't like hearing what the doctor's gonna say well you know paul you should really lose some weight and um you know you gotta be better watch your cholesterol and your blood pressure and you really should exercise more and um doctor what about the hair yeah that's what happens well you can yeah i'm not gonna i'm not gonna get hair i'm not i don't want to take rogaine or anything like that you know i already have hair growing in other places of my body and not where i'd like it to grow there's a whole lot of truth i don't want to know and don't like and this this idea of a truth seeker sounds so noble and and it is in many ways um but there's the true the beautiful and the good and yeah am i gonna elevate truth over the beautiful and the good this this is this is not such an easy thing in a life where i'm not always trying to refine my understanding of what is true and good and beautiful and those transcendental kind of qualities of the god that was described to me in the catholic church are still very important and so i mean that's that's where i am i don't think it's totally a reaction to evangelicalism i think i have some i know that i have some other questions and struggles that aren't limited to just that but a large part of the reason why i started questioning was that evangelical experience and you can see she's she's no dummy i mean the good the true and the beautiful the transcendentals i mean that's exactly what bishop barron said i mean she's been it sounds like she's been catechized well oh let's listen to the road let's listen to the orthodox priest shall we let's not cut him out of the video entirely that would be unfair particular issues that that that audrey ultimately felt she couldn't yeah yeah i was thinking um thinking a few things i mean kind of what drew me to the eastern church is that um you know for us the model of our understanding of salvation and our relationship to god is not a courtroom but it's a hospital um and you know i think having that mindset it changes a lot of there's a really cool video on youtube about the chairs and explaining orthodoxy and that's fair but i didn't find that to be exclusively orthodox i mean these ideas have been around a long time and i think that's a good thing because i think that's a good thing because i think that's i mean these ideas have been around a long time and they certainly have found their way into non-orthodox places like where i go things or it certainly did for me you know that christ is our divine physician and healer um and you know if we speak of sin or if missing of the mark it's you know we're just ceasing to you know kind of live this true authentic life uh in christ and so salvation is about uh healing about change and about transformation rather than being kind of declared righteous and you know kind of the substitutionary atonement models and things that are in that legal system and so this certainly resonated you know with me because it has room for for doubt it has room for you know we are struggling you know through this salvation is a process that we go through and and these are of course you know smart pastoral moves you know i'm with you i understand you're not alone and they're right and on the sunday after easter we have a sunday called the sunday of saint thomas thomas sunday and even in the hymns it says we we praise thomas's doubt and we sing oh most wonderful doubt of thomas doubt bore certain faith there is this sense that you know is through even thomas's doubt you know that we have these you know scriptural accounts of you know thomas touching christ's side and all of that and i was going to ask father chris i mean obviously your your perspective on christianity has changed as you've um you know gone into the orthodox church a lot of the the deconstructing if you like christian artists and indeed generally artists out there musicians i tend to find have a fairly a more kind of diffuse if you like idea of god um i think i was reading just an interview the other day actually with chris martin the lead singer of coldplay and and he actually his parents you know grew up in a church um an evangelical church now he says well now i don't really have a kind of specific idea of god i think of god more as a kind of shared consciousness and but but very few are very very much going from oh no god number two we got number one but with just god number one people don't look at what they're losing with just god number one artist i tend to meet are hard and fast materialist atheists of the dorkins variety they i don't think um musicians generally like to think that there's there's nothing but you know matter out there if you like there's there's that's because they're artists they've got big sales they're they're they're they're being blown by the spirits something but they don't like to necessarily put a specific name on it i mean is is that your experience they're sailboats they're not tugboats experience chris that of of the musicians that you meet that that there is an openness but but not necessarily desire to kind of name name exactly what that is yeah and i think that's why i mean i'm a musician and you know that's why it's kind of my tribe a little bit because what i what i appreciate about artists really of any type there's the sense of you know the journey continues and let's not put an exclamation point too carefully there's definitely an openness to the mystery of god and you know the mystery of faith and there's this wonderful quote father alexander schmemann is a well-known theologian in our tradition and he quotes this french theologian simone veal where he says you know even though a person might be running in the opposite direction of christ if they are running towards what they believe to be true this truth seeking they are in fact running straight into the arms of christ and i just think that's such a beautiful statement you know that the journey continues and in and this is why i appreciate on some level the deconstruction discussion because it's attempting to be honest and at least acknowledge what is and i think that is so important well what he and i are on the same page what what do you how do you say your relationship is now to the person of christ audrey um in you know you've spoken a little bit about about god kind of not being quite such a hard and fast um being as such you know giving commandments and laws and so on where do you put not so much god number two um we'll see you know she's certainly out there in the arena christ in that so several years ago i got very interested in quantum physics and of course i'm a lay person i'm not a physicist i don't really have a sophisticated understanding of quantum physics but it's very interesting to me so i read a lot about it because one of the questions i always lived with um as a christian as a child was like how am i communicating to god and how am i communicating to jesus like what does it mean that he's everywhere what does that mean practically ah there's there's some god number people say well is god the father god number one and jesus god number two no we're in christ so there's a there's god number one and god number two and all three members of the trinity now now you're like oh vander clay why do i need to cut it out with this god number one and god number two you wouldn't be the first one to tell me clearly i don't understand how that's possible we don't believe in ghosts you know and it's fascinating that ghosts come up because well she knows you wouldn't call jesus a ghost he ate a fish but how is it that well what if god isn't just another being among all the other beings and you know a lot of we we we struggle to find language for this god is being itself or the ground of being or and and in many ways all of this stuff is sort of insufficient you know we probably do best with with narrative i think in many ways although of course john vervecky has doubts about that um how is it possible for a god and a man to permeate not only space and time but like all of space and time so you can see the god number one god number two tensions she's she's working there and you know she's kind of accessing that through physics and again i did the listen to bishop barron he writes listen to brett sockeld if if you don't like the latin and the garments and brett sockeld's a little bit more you know down home he's not a cleric but he is a theologian and god is god is not just another thing in the meta divine realm the catholic church sort of spoke of the crucifixion and the mass as a moment outside of time that we could return to and enter into at any moment but again i found myself wondering like what are the quantum physics of that i don't understand but interestingly and those are good questions she's asking as i've read about you know quantum physics and space time and string theory and all these different things it's actually made it sound more possible to me and not less that god could be real that god could be outside or or at least not limited by space time linear timelines but yet whenever just it it's so hard to undo i mean it's so deep within us we can't help but use god like another noun and and so a deep appreciation for the jewish tradition of don't even use the word yeah but then you can't you can't you can't do anything without using the word then you have all these circumlocutions like hasham you know the name or um i don't know or something like that all these well the name of god well fair enough but it's so hard for us i no longer believe in time is linear you know it is right here the way that we experience it but you know however many thousands of miles out time operates differently and um we don't even know the half of that right so my my relationship to prayer and to jesus is still one of curiosity and interest i don't really find myself praying to jesus much but um i that would be a mistake why not what's it gonna hurt you really try it do it some more well but but um i will always i think be curious about jesus and in a way haunted by jesus like as if he were a ghost because not it's a mosaic of whoever jesus really is and what i've been taught and what i've experienced in humanity you know that's true of every person even the people you know better than anyone else in the world know about who jesus is and i'm piecing together a mosaic of him just the way everyone is and i have no interest in stopping that process it's not a very specific answer but i'm i am like uh i'm forever curious about jesus and what it means to be in a relationship with a person who died 2000 years ago but who has impacted the world as much as he has those are good questions keep pursuing them um with at least his alleged life and teachings right i believe he existed but we all of our filter all of our uh knowledge is filtered through experience and humanity and being human beings and and i i think there's something really profound about it and also you know i don't stress too much about what jesus is thinking about me anymore which i hope is good i think it is um i love what i get that this this whole thing is just delightful i just find it delightful and again not or i don't find her deconstruction delightful but i find her person delightful and and i i will pray for her because god is the best story writer we know what you said about this was it schmaman quoting simone yeah yeah yeah schmaman was quoting i like uh simone veal as well quite a bit but this is something i've been thinking about too because i'm probably not going to be able to get to the second part of this where i wanted to get into some neil shenvey stuff maybe i'll do some of that tomorrow i've got some randall's conversations tomorrow morning but notice how we how we attach to the person and our attachment to the person colors our ideas of the person another buddy that somebody else messaged me on facebook marketplace hang on but but notice how we attach to the person and we don't know why we attach to the person there might be reasons maybe they think like us they're part of our tribe for some reason you know i was i was looking at the i was looking at the neil shenvey stuff and how boy neil is just driving certain people crazy and there's this there's this little there's a little infight in evangelicalism and and you know some some of the people are bad people and some of the people are good people even though you might agree with them more than you agree with all kinds of other people but they're going in there i mean but we've we we attach to the person what is that that's simply how we are and so ah simone vale oh i like her um you know um maybe i don't know franklin graham oh i don't like him um what's with us and it colors all of their ideas that we have of them but um i feel that that particular thing you're saying has not changed about me and never will um and that's why i don't lose sleep at night right now because i'm like well all i know is i'm running toward what i feel what does she have faith in did you notice that that that'll that'll never change about me and never will i don't know i'm in my 50s i've had things change about me i certainly hoped i wouldn't have changed and and this is where again i'm a calvinist i think in some ways my my faith is it's it's not even something that i have it's a gift from god to me and and it's not that i am so able to hang on to him it's that he is so able to hang on to me and my prayer for her is that with all of these through this and through that and here and there here and there and everything going on that god has her and god is leading her and god is doing something through her yeah and and that's that's very agentic again i think of c.s lewis's critique of of pantheism that you know we're gonna search for god but what if god is searching for us and she'll she'll mention you know i'll let her talk some more is calling me in that kind of deep soul guttural place um and and embracing those things and i will continue to do that you know and so jesus has always been part of that in a way and i probably always will institutional church and jesus are related but they're not the same exact thing you know and so they're not one is the husband and one is the bride it's not always an easy marriage so wherever my journeys take me i think i'm still curious whereas father chris in a sense you have found a home in a quote-unquote institutional church i mean you are a priest now so so what yeah how how you know you obviously have gone on a different kind of journey to to audrey here what why did the pieces fall where they have for you when it comes to you know the being able to say no this is where i place my faith my trust this this is the the institution within which i believe we have been given access to god's graces yeah no it's a great question i mean you know i it's funny because i you know i live here and so i i don't take a step back and think about these questions sometimes but i would say it has everything to do with the person of christ and this whole idea of the incarnation you know the fact that god himself in a mystery and however that works itself out he he took on this flesh he took on matter and now matter matters and now god communicates with us and we participate in him through material things and this is the whole underpinning of of sacramental life and theology and that would be the same i would say probably between the catholic church and the orthodox church but again with the model being you know christ as the divine physician and healer um it just takes now i he um liked the tweet that i did about this conversation a little bit so i don't know if he knows much of my work but notice how the god number one god number two stuff is is coming through now and and what he just offered there again is very much bishop barren is saying what brett suckled is saying what have i been saying it's this i call it neo sacramentalism it's it's obviously not new but it's it's maybe new to us and it's it's putting the world back together again in many ways and and dealing with with some of those some of those issues it's on this other element that you know christ came in order to unite humanity with his divinity to restore communion not to just to declare us righteous um you know a priest friend of mine likes to say that you know god came and the person of christ not to make bad men good but to make dead men live and so this experience of christ as the one who is actively bringing me back to life again to the degree that i want it just like christ when he healed this lame man by the pool he asked him a very important question do you want to be made well um and so it's just every day i need guy needed help getting one of the shelving units in his car give me a card same on both sides told me emphatically how he's going to be the governor of california next year and he's going to abolish the police and have a private security force only answerable to him and all the criminals will be put in jail and there won't be any trials to mess it up and see why i love my job it's wonderful it's it the the world is full of interesting people i said well i look forward to seeing you next year when you're governor so his english was pretty rough from his business card obviously of chinese descent um um let's see einstein professor ceo chief scientist clinic expert physicist in medical physics chinese phd in theater theoretical physics usa phd in medical physics you never know who you're gonna meet so future governor of california just has one of the uh shelving units from living stones church anyway back to the video i need to wake up and answer that question yes i do want to be made well well that might mean picking up my mat and walking christ might be asking me to do the impossible thing that i don't think i can do um and so it's this understanding of christ we are participating in his life here and now he came to show us what true humanity really is and this restoration to communion with god where i tend to want to i think all of us be c.s lewis speaks of the the gates of hell being locked from the inside we can choose to like we don't want it but then christ burst into that place in order to bring his light there and change and transformation so it makes me a a better husband a better father hopefully a better priest but as a christian priest i mean this is what my life is about now is trying to encourage people does it make him a better musician i don't know i haven't listened to his stuff i'm inviting them into this relationship with christ himself do you miss anything of that yourself audrey you know as someone who has sort of consciously said no i can't do that at the moment is is there nevertheless anything about the mass the the sacraments that you that you miss in that way at times yeah i think i'm trying to parse out what i'm really missing exactly because a lot of it is my perception of what it did you know all of it is i guess in a way my perception of what it was but that's a thought loop i often get tripped up and so i'm gonna just skip it and simplify and say what i'm missing but um i think yes i i really love yeah um and i have to some degree replaced but not all because it's hard to it's hard to have this same kind of feeling around a just few set of ideas um i do miss a shared understanding of how the universe works and of what's um like in the eucharist in particular the feeling of meeting with god in matter in that specific way um i missed that because for me it felt uh it was very potent for sure a potent experience even when i wasn't feeling emotions because of it it just felt it felt good to have a weekly moment where in the moment of the mass where i was sort of there to sort of commune in a more pointed potent way still fairly individual i mean again she's remarkably articulate and she's saying what many people have tried to say to me in many different ways way um with the god i believed in the god of my understanding you know at that time um and there's not really a church for people who aren't you know i mean there are there's unitarian universalist churches and i've gone to some of those and i've visited episcopal churches and i've tried to you threw the episcopalians in with the uu all the poor episcopalians but you know her point is that it's really hard to coalesce and that's what we want isn't it because on one hand we want to be our on our individual journey but we want then to arrive and we want there to be a meeting where we arrive and we want there to be a gathering and but it's sort of um the more diffuse it gets the less it feels uh to me compelling to go to church it's you know what i'm saying i suppose it's it's less it it's you know rick warren to quote a boomer evangelical the more specific the more powerful the more than then you know to follow up with aristotle the more concrete the more tangible it's this isn't about everything and anything in all possibilities this is about me here now no one else but then together with and attention to becomes less concrete the yeah the more the incarnational nature of orthodox and catholic and catholic tradition was really what drew me into it in the first place that is kind of a consumer and there's some of the standpoint epistemology that imprisons because the more difficult prisons are the ones we can't see um so i don't really have a sacrament now in the same way although i could and here comes the zinger i don't really have a sacrament what do you mean that i don't have i don't have a tangible point of conflict where time and space and heaven and earth and all things come together and and not just me all by myself in my own little consciousness but but a community around me and a time and a space and a tradition where everything a nexus point where it all meets look at look at look at my conversation with lenn van der zee on the crisis of protestant worship and then the zinger which i didn't see until because after i had released yesterday's video definitely make an argument for and this is another podcast but my relationship to psychedelic plants having definitely taken on some of that same um power for me but i way more rare i don't do that weekly or monthly or anything like that you know it's sort of a yeah yeah an occasional journey that i take to but alone deal with or heal from some particular thing um deal with or heal from some particular thing but again proximal betterment versus ultimate betterment can we know but that that is the closest thing i can come up with yeah but that's that's that's so interesting to hear that that if there was anything you could reach for it would be that was physical that gave you some sense of transcendent communion it might be a psychedelic and just interestingly just is is communion not a plant it's the bread i mean just like a look at the roman catholic liturgy which i don't know at all except i heard from bishop baron i know y'all thought i was dunking on bishop baron i'm not dunking on bishop baron i'm just doing a little evaluation i mean i y'all are evaluating me on in the comment section every day and uh i don't hold it against you it's a couple of months ago we did we did an interesting show on psychedelics um that oh it was very interesting so after i listened to this last night i listened to this and then this morning i listened to part of it so this morning i thought well i'll take a look at it and it's so much better on video to list to it's so much better on video i mean you think this is the the psychedelic guy or the former psychedelic person you just guess and uh that was fascinating too because i mean twitter's funny because suddenly the um ashley land then um came into the twitter conversation and i chatted with her a little bit so oh are we done with the um oops oops oops no are we done with oh i shouldn't have gone that way i should have i would encourage anyone watching or listening to to go and check out on well wait wait wait a way to keep the industry going there justin but we're going to go to a final break and we're not so anyway watch the whole thing it's delightful i'm out of time i wanted to get into some neil shenby stuff because again in some ways i think we're pre-wiring some people for deconstruction and i think we should be a little aware of some of that so maybe i'll do a video tomorrow i've got a couple randos tomorrow conversations tomorrow i'll post this for tomorrow morning so um hope this was helpful you know i i always struggle with whether i should keep doing this i'm gonna keep doing it just because i love doing it so much it is so much fun and to be virtually not alone senior grim gris and to have someone to talk about and share these videos with and that's that's kind of what we're doing here and i was thinking about doing a video today on youtube churn because part of the difference between a an in-person in real life community and this online thing we have going is the churn and you know i churned through channels and i have fads and i haven't listened to a lot of tom holland lately but i'll then i'll go back and listen to more tom holland and of course you're on and off of jordan peterson and but the the individual relationships and of course i part of the distortion of this strange video machine is it feels to you and and to me sometimes like a relationship um it's there's distortion and so it's in the it's in the body of christ it's in the face to face it's in the point where heaven and earth all come together which is what a sacrament is is anyway so leave a message let me know what you think uh watch the whole video you know i do these and i sometimes feel a little bad that you know hey i'm taking clicks away from justin but this channel is so much larger so i i don't really think i'm harming it and i know justin sometimes watches these so i'll do it i'll do a freddy hi justin and um he you know before covid he he was coming to california and there was i was gonna i was gonna hit one of the conferences he comes to southern california does a church thing so anyway i i gotta land the plane here so thanks for watching leave a comment last video someone said only 52 likes and 150 comments people like to talk people like to talk so if you want more people to watch the video hit the like button and you know every every youtuber like and subscribe a lot of you aren't even logged into youtube because you're concerned about the coming the coming apocalyptic um yeah they'll have they'll have me um how google knows everything about you but um whether you like or subscribe thank you for giving me your time and attention i really do appreciate your um hanging out with this crazy rambling hairy man