https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=p6z0HhHr7Kk

 In 2005, this monument became a very big deal. It was on the 10th Amendment, and it was on the grounds of the Texas State House, and became the subject of a Supreme Court battle by a group of Texas that wanted it removed, stating that it was a violation of the separation of church and state. And the Supreme Court eventually said, no, it could stay, that as long as there was space for other things, the state house didn't necessarily violate the Constitution. It became, for many people, part of a narrative of religion and anti-religion. A lot less was known about actually when the monument was placed on the Texas, on the lawn of the Texas State House, and why. Most of you, if I said the name Cecil B. DeMille, what do you think of? The movies, what movie in particular? The Ten Commandments. Actually, there are thousands of these statues all over the United States, on state house lawns and parks and cities all over the place, and most of these monuments will actually place, by Cecil B. DeMille and other organizations that he worked with in promotion of his movie. Does that make the statues seem a little different? If in fact you go just downtown to the Capitol Mall and kind of walk around the grounds, you will see a whole hodgepodge of statues at Capitol Mall. Firefighters, cops, I think there's a soldier from the Spanish-American War. There's all kinds of statues. Does this statue say something important? If so, what? As a response to this, a group that calls themselves the Satanic Temple has been trying to get this statue placed on the state house grounds of Oklahoma. It's called a Baphomet, and this goat-man type creature is kind of an occult symbol, and here they place two children lovingly looking out at him. And right away it sounds like, oh, this is a classic confrontation between the church and Satanists. The truth is actually that these supposed Satanists don't believe in Satan at all themselves. Their leader, who's named Lucian Greaves, was actually not given that name at birth. Who would name their child Lucian Greaves? And the whole thing is really a humanist, kind of a humanist trick to try to annoy religious people in America. These are their basic tenets, which actually have very little to do with Satan. The first one says, one should strive to act with compassion and empathy towards all creatures in accordance with reason. That sounds like a bad thing. The struggle for justice is ongoing and a necessary pursuit that should prevail over laws and institutions. And on and on it goes with their seven tenets, none of which has anything to do with Satan, because actually the group doesn't believe in Satan at all, but just decides to take out all of this stuff to annoy religious people. So I ask myself, is there anything in the Bible about putting words on stones as monuments for us to remember? Actually, there is. Deuteronomy 27. Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people, keep all these commands that I am giving you today. When you have crossed a Jordan into the land the Lord your God has given you, set up some large stones and coat them with plaster. Write on them all the words of this law, we have crossed over to enter the land the Lord your God has given you. A land flowing with milk and honey, just as the Lord the God of your ancestors promised you. And when you have crossed the Jordan, set out these stones on Mount Ebal as I command you today and coat them with plaster. On that same day, Moses command, well let me pause there for a minute. What I find interesting about this passage is that they are going to cross the Jordan down by Jericho, but the place that this whole ceremony is intended to happen is up by Mount Ebal and Mount Gerizim and Shechem, which is quite a ways to the north. And in fact, it will be quite a while before Israel actually gets up there, conquers that territory and can inhabit it. And we also find no reference later on in the Bible that they actually did this. A second interesting note is that Moses says, take some large stones, cover them with plaster and carve in them all the words of the law. We are not quite sure which words he needs. It could mean the Ten Commandments or it could mean the whole book of Deuteronomy. If you look at the ancient world there are in fact often large stones that are carved with writings that stipulate what the rules of the land are. So this idea is not necessarily new and not necessarily uncommon. And then Moses goes on to dictate to them a ceremony of covenant renewal that they should have. On the same day Moses commanded the people, when you have crossed the Jordan, each tribe shall stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Isetar, Joseph, and Benjamin. And these tribes shall stand on Mount Ebal to pronounce curses, Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zedulim, Ben, and Naphtali. So kind of the idea is that they're going to take these large stones, they're going to set them up, they're going to carve the words of the law into them, and then on the two sides of this valley, six tribes are going to stand on one side and pronounce blessings in the land, and six tribes are going to stand on the other side and pronounce curses in the land. And then what follows now is in fact the curses. The Levites shall recite to all the people of Israel in a loud voice, and these are the curses, Cursed is anyone who makes an idol, a thing detestable to the Lord, the works of skilled hands, and sets it up in secret, that all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is anyone who dishonors their father or mother, that all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is anyone who moves their neighbor's boundary stone, that all the people shall say, Amen. Boundary stones were markers which would show where the inheritance that a family received as their land, which was to stay within their family throughout generations, if you moved the boundary stone, in a sense it was a way of stealing your neighbor's property. Cursed is anyone who leads the blind astray on the road, that all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is anyone who withholds justice from the foreigner, the fatherless, or the widowed, that all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his father's wife, for he desires his father's bed, that all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is anyone who has sexual relations with any animal, that all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his sister, the daughter of his father, the daughter of his mother, that all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his mother-in-law, that all the people shall say, Amen. Cursed is anyone who kills their neighbor secretly, then all the people shall say, Amen. Cursing is anyone who accepts a bride to kill an innocent person, then all the people shall say, Amen. Cursing is anyone who does not uphold the words of this law by carrying them out, then all the people shall say, Amen. Now what's interesting is that this, like the famous Ten Commandments, is a nice summarized preaching of the law. And despite all of people's misgivings and anxieties about the bad Old Testament and the angry God of the Old Testament, if you look at these 12 laws, you'll notice that a lot of them, in fact, agree with the Ten Commandments. And you might also notice that nearly everyone, even in our own society, who looked at these laws would say, these are good laws. We don't believe in bestiality or incest or stealing your neighbor's property or taking advantage of the blind or taking advantage of the weak or taking advantage of the foreign or any of these things. These 12 curses, sometimes known as the, as the Doe, oh, now I forgot. The Doe Decalogue, so it's the law of 12. These 12 curses, actually, if we were to rewrite them and edit them a bit, most Americans would look at them and say, yeah, these are laws I can agree with. These are the kinds of rules that I think we, as a group, should embrace. Even the idea of taking rules like this and putting them up as slogans, most Americans could also agree with. If you go down Florin Road, you'll see slogans on the overpass where the light rail goes. If you go down to the new water up, down, if you walk on the levee over at the pocket and get down to the nice little plaza, there's nice sayings on the wall. We Americans actually believe that if you have good ideas and moral ideas, that if you write them on the walls and repeat them, that people will take them in and they will be blessed by them. Now, we might, in fact, be a little thrown by the cursing language, but I would recommend that actually, we even as secular Americans don't really have a big problem with this. While we might feel a little uncomfortable saying, cursing be the one who sleeps with his mother-in-law, I don't think we would have any trouble saying, sleeping with your mother-in-law is not a good idea. You will have all kinds of family problems and it's probably not moral or right to do. And again, you can go down the list as well and say, there's a lot of things in this list that are about right and wrong. You shall not lead a blind person astray. Well, that's a good thing. Now again, this idea of curses, we get a little uncomfortable with because it kind of, some of us think, well, that kind of makes God this celestial cop. But actually, in the process over the last 500 years of secularization, we've kind of taken this idea and demythologized it and turned it into something like, sleeping with your mother-in-law is not a good idea. Sleeping with animals is not a good idea. Sleeping with incest is a very bad idea. It hurts people. It's the idea that the universe actually has within some kind of moral order that's embedded within psychology or human civilization and that to break these rules, to violate these boundaries will in fact lead to trouble in your life. And so we teach children not to do it. We have this idea of providential deism in the 19th and 18th and 17th century where they said, well, God, read the Declaration of Independence, God has created humanity with inalienable rights. This is the language of providential deism. The idea is that if you do good things, good things will happen. And if you do bad things, bad things will happen. Same idea as karma or the laws of nature. And in fact, people not unlike the Satanic temple, usually around Christmas time, we put up signs around Sacramento that basically say, I'm good without God. But I can learn about what's right and wrong because it's common knowledge, it's common sense. And if we all can agree on even these 12, the substance of these 12 curses, then life will go better. Even though sometimes Christians wring their hands and say, well, we're a relativistic culture, I don't really think so. Because the more I read the news, the more I think we continue to be a moralistic culture. I've noticed that a lot of people who were frustrated Hillary supporters during the election in 2008 are all geared up for Hillary. And if you don't line up and support Hillary, some of them will look at me and say, well, you just don't like Hillary because she's a woman. I'll say, well, maybe I don't like Hillary because she's Hillary. And so you get this idea, and it gets into the culture that are Biden for president supporters all sexes. You just kind of wonder. So we as a culture, in fact, have a lot of moral ideas that have nothing to do with religion. And we believe that we should train children about these morals from a very early age, regardless of their religion. In fact, we have a firm belief in this, that we in fact, continue to censure or shame or even discipline and punish people who break moral codes. Unirony 21, if someone has a stubborn and rebellious son who does not obey his father and mother and will not listen to them when they discipline him, his father and mother shall take hold of them and bring them to the elders at the gate of this town. They shall say to the elders, this son of ours is stubborn and rebellious. He will not obey us. He is a glutton and a drumber. And all of the men of the town are to stone him to death. You must purge the evil from among you. All Israel will hear of it and be afraid. Now we hear this passage and we say, nobody is looking to stone their rebellious son. But we all at the same time say, the people should honor the law. People should honor their parents. And those who fail to honor the law and honor their parents should be punished. The law is a good thing. Laws are good things. Laws make life livable. Laws can be celebrated and it is not a bad thing to put up stones with good rules or words on them to reinforce them so that people obey and do right towards one another. We have a Bible belief that the law is effective at shaking ideas, people and behavior. And you may shake the culture however at the cost of your son. Deuteronomy 21 continues, if someone guilty of a capital offense is put to death and their body is exposed on a pole, you must not leave the body hanging on the pole over night. Be sure to bury it at that same day because anyone who is hung on a pole is under God's curse. You must not disaffrape the land the Lord your God has given you as an inheritance. But here's the problem of the law. We can take these 12 curses and we can re-edit them as 12 good ideas or 12 rules to live by or 12 great ideas to make life workable and all of us can look at those 12 ideas and say, these are good rules. These are things that should be enforced. These are ideas that should be promoted and propagated and society would do well to follow them. Whether you believe in God or don't believe in God, the words of those 12 rules can be helpful, they should be established into law and the laws should be obeyed and violators of the laws should be punished. But here's a question for you. If this is all so obvious, why do we have to keep doing it? Why do we have to keep telling people, don't move your neighbor's boundary stones? Because people move their boundary stones every day. Why do we have to say, don't lead a blind person astray? Because people lead the blind astray every day. Why do we have to keep saying, honor your father and mother? Because people don't honor their father and mother. Why do we have to say, curse it as anyone who secretly plots the murder of another? Because people secretly plot the murder of others every day. So what do we learn by the law? And what do you say to those parents with the rebellious son? The son who has caused them so much grief, the son who has caused them so much distress that they get to a point where they're ready to drag the son in front of the city elders and say, we don't know what to do with our son, take him. And they stone him. What then has that cost them? Where on one hand, they say, our son has torn our heart and we don't know what to do with him. On the other hand, they say, our son is dead and we don't know how to grieve him. See, here is the ironic challenge of the law. We can all look at these 12 birds and say, these are wonderful things to live by. And if we all live by them, then life will go well. On the other hand, we have to say, these are things we don't live up to. What should be done with those who break the law? And the answer of Deuteronomy is clear. Purge the evil from among you. Make an example of them. Cursing is anyone who has hung on a pole. But what do we say when it is our sons or our daughters or our parents or our siblings or our neighbors who are judged rightly, justly, and hung on a pole? And this is where God starts a second movement because God takes the challenge of the law and surrenders his son to the pole. The Apostle Paul makes this observation in the book of Galatians. The book was written to a group of Jews who became Christians and Gentiles who became Christians and said, if being saved by Christ is good, then adding the law on top of Christ is even better. And Paul says, in many ways, if one or the other, if you're looking for qualification, all who rely on the works of the law are under a curse, as it is written. Cursing is everyone who does not continue to do everything written in the book of the law. Again and again and again and again in the book of Deuteronomy, it says this. If you don't obey the law, you will be cursed. And it's true. Even today, if we don't believe in God, if we just believe that humanity has a certain moral code by which it thrives or if we believe that psychology or sociology can teach us how to live well, if you violate those rules, where will you go? What will be left for you? Clearly, no one who relies on the law is justified before God because the righteous will live by faith. The law is not based on faith. On the contrary, it says, the person who does these things will live by them. Christ redeems us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us, for it is written, cursing is everyone who has hung out a pole. He redeemed us in order that the blessings given to Abraham might come to the Gentiles through Christ Jesus so that by faith, we might receive the promise of the Spirit. Now I read those 12 curses and some of you might look at those curses and say, I never violated any of them. And I would say, blessed are you who do good things. Blessed are you who are scrupulous about your life. Blessed are you who are careful in all of your ways not to steal from your neighbor, not to violate yourself in unseemly ways, not to do things that are counterproductive. But I've been a pastor long enough to know that we all break these laws, maybe not in big overt ways, but maybe also so. I read this statement about animals and you might think, well, I don't know anybody who does these kinds of things. And as a pastor, I would say, you might be surprised. We keep putting up monuments about the law because we keep breaking the law. This is who we are. This is how we are. And the problem with the law is it has no mercy. There is. Nothing to say to the family whose son is rebellious and they're at wits ends and all they can think of doing is turning him over to the village elders to be sown. Now, of course, modernists say, well, we don't want to look at the Bible because the Bible has all this language of cursing and things. But I challenge them, what will you do with the law? Because we still believe the law, we still embrace the law. And in fact, all we have is the law. If you demythologize this, all you have is psychology. Let's say the family of origin that you grew up in did not obey the law. Let's say you were raped by your father. Let's say you were raped by your brother. Let's say you were molested by your parent. The rules of psychology will tell you you are personally permanently deformed. Let's say you had bad parents or grew up in a bad neighborhood or had bad genetics or just go down the list. What the society will tell you is, sorry, you lost the existential lottery. There's no hope for you. You might as well be the son dragged in by the parents and given to the village elders and say, stone him because we don't know what to do with him. Because that is all the law can give you. You are locked into the law. Jesus can have no power for you. He can only be an example of convenient dice. The law leaves us childless with our hands full of rocks for stoning. But in the gospel, God's son comes and becomes our victim. We also look to see our victim hanging from a pole with Joseph of Arimathea claiming his body. May we may look on as faithful, diligent women, hurry to the grave on the first Jewish work day of the week to do what is necessary for the body, only to discover that it is gone. And so my question for you is, what monuments would you like to keep? On one hand, we can easily say to our culture, blessed are you if you follow the 10 commandments. Blessed are you if you honor your father and mother. Blessed are you if you love your neighbor as yourself. Blessed are you if you keep the law. Because you will not be shackled with all kinds of things that this world shackles us with. But we can say something more. We can say something to each of you for whom the law has been a curse. And say, our Lord came for victims of the law, for lawbreakers, and victims of providential deism, karma, or any other way we want to say it. His body was broken for you, and he was risen from death for you. This is something no law can give, but this is something he's given to you. Let's pray. Lord, we might go and sit with our counselor. And our counselor might say, given the upbringing you have, given the ways that your parents made mistakes, given the horrible things that have been done to you, you will forever in this world be plagued by fears and bonds and hatred. And bonds and limitations. And Lord, this world can offer nothing but the law. But you've come to us and say, I was the victim of the law that the Lord raised me up. Lord, may we look to you when we have no other place to go. May we look to you when this world looks at us and says, you're lost, you're cursed, you're forsaken. And may we see in your crucifixion the forgiveness of all our rebellions. And may we see in the resurrection the redemption of all of our baggage. Lord, there is no other place that we can go to be truly healed by you. We know Lord, that if we do the law, we will be blessed. But we know also Lord, that if we break the law, we can still be redeemed. And so Lord, may we come to you now with our prideful compliance, but with our need. And may we find in the law a way that we can say thank you. Hear our prayer in the name of Jesus, amen. Will you stand? ["Praise the Lord"] ["Praise the Lord"]