https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=KegG-j7AOb4

 Good. I started recording. So, um, and again, it's nothing that we have to put on the air. I just do this because people often want a record of it and that way it's simple. And then if, if it's a good conversation and we both want to share it, then we do. But other than that, it stays private. About half of them what are willing or wanted on the air and the rest don't. So it's totally cool. Sure. Yeah. I never know what could come out of my mouth. So yeah, here we go. So tell me a little bit about yourself. I read, I read what you wrote on the, on the appointment thing. Um, yeah, um, Australian, um, Queensland Australia, uh, and yeah, born and raised Jehovah's witness, left at about 15 years old. And, um, yeah, part partly putting a, um, a bit of meaning to life ever since or putting it back together and things like that. And a family does a good job of it, uh, initiating, or really starting to bring that together for motivation and that. So a big part of that's been having a little family of mine and not having to, having to worry about someone more than just myself. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah, no. And, um, I've got siblings who are still Jehovah's witnesses, our older sister and a little brother and, uh, my parents have both left. Really? Yes. They both, they both left, uh, slowly over the last 10 years, I'd say. Okay. And, um, yeah. And an older brother who, who left a long time ago as well. And they, it's a, it's not a, not a belief system. I, I view favor favorably. That's for sure. Yeah. There there's a fair, there's a fair number of African, um, there's a fairly significant African American population and Jehovah's witnesses. They, they, uh, they work my neighborhood just about every, every Saturday morning. Um, and yeah, it's it's, it's, it's an interesting, it's an interesting sect. Um, absolutely. What, what, what do, does the, um, the broader Christian world see them like as, because I consider them, if you leave it, they're generally an atheist factory. Like they teach you to disbelieve in every other belief system in the world. So when you can throw that out, them, there's a way you're left with nothing. Pretty much. That's a real big, um, problem I see with a lot of people getting out who are adults, where I'd looking back had one, I'd had one foot in two worlds through people, friends at school. Yeah. So by the time I'd left at 15, I had a whole different world I was sort of able to just walk into with people I'd grown up with all through primary primary school and then through to high school and things like that. And, and, um, but others aren't as fortunate. They're more isolated. And my friends who were in the church, who are my age, we shared the same social group at school. So we were able to organize to do things together and then go and do those things with our friends from school in like a real sneaky. And, um, I've found that we had less of an issue going into the world as Jehovah's Witnesses would call it. Yeah. And, um, and meeting people and starting a life where some leave and they've got nothing strange, just some people they might talk to at work or something. Yeah. And it just, I've seen it. Yeah. It just destroys people at times. Yeah. It's, you know, the way a lot of other Christians regard Jehovah's Witnesses. So even though not a lot of Christians understand creeds, the ancient Christian creeds for many Christians kind of define the boundaries of the church. And so what that usually means is Trinitarian theology. And the more you dig into Jehovah's Witness beliefs, the more you begin to see how basically its origin story, how in the 19th century, and there are a whole number of millennialist movements in the 19th century. That's different from the millennials, the generation, but millennialist movements in the 19th century, where in this burned over area in upstate New York, people said, well, I'm going to read the Bible without any filters, literalistically for the first time and find out what the Bible really says. And then out from that springs Jehovah's Witnesses, Latter-day Saints, Millerites that, you know, became the Seventh-day Adventists. And then other groups, even the, even the, um, even the Oneida community, which is, which was just a fascinating community, but they all kind of sprung up in that same time in that same place. And Trinity wasn't one thing that did well amongst those groups. And same with Jehovah's Witnesses, or same with Latter-day Saints, the Mormon church. So, so most Christians kind of look at the Jehovah's Witnesses and say, yeah, we're gonna, you know, they come to our door and we appreciate the fact that many of them try to live moral lives. And we appreciate the fact that they're sincere. And some, some groups of Christians really want to just kind of go toe to toe. And sometimes if they come to my door and they're really pushy, then I'll say, okay, come on, I'll play your game. And, and, you know, then they're a little surprised that I know what I know. And, but the conversations use, they don't quote real far. And, yeah. And so, yeah. And, and I've had, I've had members of my church who had had parents and such who were, who were Jehovah's Witnesses. And like you said, often people who come out of it don't have a lot of good to say about growing up in it. No, no, you, there's, there's a lot you miss out on that, depending on the, I guess in the individual, but for me, it affected playing sports outside of school time and socializing in those ways and which I enjoyed. I was an athletic kid. I enjoyed playing sports. I played it through high school, which most of the games were through school time. So I did those things, but that was a big catalyst in me leaving. I put an ultimatum at 15 years old to my parents and said football or I, or I leave home and I got to play a year of football for the first time that I begged them my whole life at 16 years old, played a one season of rugby league, one of the national sports we have over here. And it was a dream come true for me, but you know, it took basically 10 years from like the age of six of negotiations to finally get to do it. So then you became an atheist. I was one of the, one of those, those legendary lot that watched a zeitgeist and was converted. As like all our doubts confirmed and from then on it was, yeah, it was game on for the militant, militant atheist phase. There's a lot of people like to call it. Yeah. And it's just any chance you get to have that conversation and call people out on their so-called ridiculous beliefs. You, um, you don't tend to make a lot of friends that way. Thankfully I've got, I've got a good, good, good, a lot of, a lot of, a lot of people around me that, um, it doesn't really care what we say to each other in that regard. So, so then you somehow bumped into Jordan Peterson and how did that happen? I've been quite agnostically minded for the last five or six years, especially. And, um, Joe Rogan's podcast has been a big influence on me, I'd say. And I'm through him through there and just found I had a knack for seeing that certain things would happen in the media in regards to the political correctness and all that. And you could kind of see who was about to be the next podcast guests through the lot of podcasts that would happen that Jordan Peterson came along. And then there was, um, the bloke who got, who tweeted about, um, it's not on international women's day or something like that. I think it was. And he ended up on, um, Dave Rubin and Joe Rogan. And I forget his name. Um, Colin, Colin something. And, um, Colin Moriarty or something like that. Okay. And, uh, yeah, just sort of got into it through the political correctness and side of things. Cause I see the Jehovah's witness as a very, um, kind of a case in point for me for a political politically correct in their own way of, of living where if you step outside the lines, there's punishments socially, um, familiar through in the family even. And yeah, it's, um, so I'll just, I guess those things I picked up on growing up in a church, I can see that through the lens of political correctness and just got interested in. Yeah. I was put off by, cause I was, I've been put off by Christianity through being raised as Jehovah's witness and very, um, quite hostile towards it. I have been. And then was even like put off watching the biblical lectures for a while. Wasn't until I actually finished the maps and meaning lectures and the personality ones and was like, Oh, let's give this a go. And by the second lecture, it was, I was like, yeah, all right, there's something here. Yeah. By the second lecture, which was after he'd done like the giant introduction, which he'd never really got around to actually doing probably, but that's kind of the charm of the whole thing. Yeah. Just, it was from that phenomenological angle, which I didn't realize that's sort of how I'd viewed the world myself. And it was, um, just through like Pajos, Jonathan Pajos, or as I would call him being Australian, the page. And it's seeing patterns and things like that. And I, that's just how I've seen the world my whole life. And it's clicked a few things into gear and I've gone from having a couple of books on my shelf to, I've read about 80 books in the last 12 months, let alone audio books. And it's just, yeah, just, I'm 80 D at ADHD or whatever. I was medicated as a kid. For a short period of time. Um, my parents didn't like the little zombie that the medication gave them. They went, no, give us the little lunatic. We'll deal with him. For better or worse, here I am. For better or worse, here I am. Yeah. So, so yeah, I read tangentially. So at the moment, I'm, I'm part way through about four or five books and I try and make myself finish a book at the end of each week by the end of each week. So I'm at least crunching them over time, getting them done. So I'm partially through Pavel Florensky's, um, at the crossroads of science and mysticism and a introductory book to Eastern Orthodox theology by Andrew Luth. Okay. Um, two main ones I'm sort of trying to smash through. They're not big books. They're about 200 pages each, but it's just tough with kids running around. I've got two kids at home who are five and, and three ones. They're, they're out at the moment. One's going to, um, kindy for the day and the other one's out with, with mum at the park or something. Wonderful. Yeah. Kids are kids. Kids are an enormous blessing and they, they grow us up. Do or die for sure. That's true. That's true. I've got a nine year old daughter as well. Who's, um, who's an absolute card. She's at school at the moment. And, um, yeah, it's, yeah, I'm, I'm, I enjoy having a, having my little family and wow, good stuff. And yeah, now, you know, I guess part, part of it is Chuck and what is it? The old cross over the shoulder and walking up that hill. Yeah. Now where I'm at, I've got to do things to look after. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's not a place here in, in Queensland, Australia, at least in the city where I live, where you can go and do your lots of, of, of manly things out there. So it's a, it's a, it's, it's a matter of, of being as, as a state, I'm parent of has been a bit of a, uh, a battle of masculinity, I guess, or like, you know, battling with it, not having the, I mean, I'm, I'm, digressing, but I used to build houses a lot. Most of my working life as a carpenter's laborer, my family, a carpenter's, my dad, both brothers and my brother in law were all carpenters. So I did that a lot and worked in pubs, but yeah, um, I've lost my train of thought, but, uh, Well, well you were, I mean, you were talking, well, you mentioned your stay at home husband and, and so you're raising the kids. Yeah. Yeah. Um, just through happenstance. I, I lost my job two years ago and she was, had an opportunity to go straight into a full-time job basically. And yeah, we just went with, went with what was thrown at us and I've learned a lot. The five, our five year old has autism and that's been a, um, a big, Wow. Boy or a girl? Boy, little boy with autism. Oh my, and um, it was not, he's started to speak in the last two, two years. It's built up to now. He's talking in sentences, which he was nonverbal. Um, two years ago, he might've counted one, two, three, and only we would sort of understand him. Yeah. And now it's, it's, he's at kindy and, um, yeah, he's, he's a very smart kid. Like he could count and do his ABCs, but they're just over three years old and, and things like that. And which was well above what his sister and a lot of his other surrounding cousins and family members were doing besides that he wouldn't talk, but it's, um, like, um, like with the, Jordan Peterson's stuff with the myths and the archetypes. And you see, I've seen it with when he was nonverbal and starting to talk, he wouldn't say he was angry. He would go, hoat smash. That's how he would say he was angry. And that's to me, when I've read like, um, Joseph Campbell and a lot of those sorts of people, and yeah, and G and there's the time. I see that as sort of how like, you know, man might've fights, like, you know, I got angry and he's just like, I could just say there's like kind of like a little mythic missing in action. And then now, now, now it's, I'm mad or I'm angry. And, and, but if he gets really, really lit up, it's still like arms come up, just, hoat smash. That's when you know it's business. Yeah. That, that, I mean that we had a, we had a family in the congregation when I first got here with a, that was 21 years ago, the little boy was autistic and they, you know, it was about two when they, the doors kind of closed. And then, you know, he still, he's in his twenties now and he's still not verbal and he never will be. But that's a, and I've had other members of people in the church with autistic children. That's a, that's a big challenge. It's a, I mean, it's a full-time job for you. Just that one little boy in many ways, I would imagine. Yes. Yeah, no, it is. And, um, it, it does change. I love, I've, it was different experience as a parent. None of the things that you, that that are the expectations of how things unfold happen. So it's, it's, it's a constant challenge to, to yourself and your ego really as well. Um, and I've described as he's learning and I'm learning who he is and he's an ever evolving Rubik's cube. And as soon as you get to sort of that last click, it's a whole new shape and it's a whole new stage to learn and he, and he learns and, and we learn along with him. And, but yeah, I can also understand when people say I wouldn't change him for the world as well as change them for the world. And that's, that's, that's my little dude. And he's, he's great. Yeah. And he's a very loving, loving little guy too. Yeah. Yeah. How, how is the support in Australia? I mean, do you get much support from, okay. Yeah, you get, you do. Yeah. There's, you know, you got the usual red tape. You've got to go through the paperwork to fill out the phone calls to make, but it's doable for, for being if so. And if you can afford to pay, pay privately, you can, it's, it's easy to it's I wouldn't complain being in Australia with them, with many things in regards to that is lots of help over here for many things. Yeah. Wow. Wow. That's, that's a big deal. That's a big, big deal. You know, it's definitely changed the way I've, I've approached many things and, and, and that, um, reigniting that sort of interest in the phenomenological sort of way of viewing things. Cause I'm constantly thinking of how he's perceiving the world and things like that. And yeah, it's just, yeah, like we've said, I've said through Jordan Peterson, um, Jonathan Paggio and even, um, David Bentley hearts, the experience of God book was, was a, was pretty big cause it clarified a lot of my issues, materialists, science cause it's through the topic of consciousness really that I've come through, like got my interest in Peterson's lectures was through the angle of, of consciousness. And, um, that's where like the material is few. I just did the way they tend to put it with the consciousness is the brain state and the brain state creates the consciousness where I just, I think inverting that immediately makes it make a lot more sense where consciousness is what's doing that to the brain for me makes, it just lets me move forward from that instead of it just being this because they hit up against it. Right. And then I, okay, look, then I, I would, I can see, make more sense of it. Um, yeah, from the, that point of view for myself anyway with, and I find that inverting a lot of their, their things that they actually hit, the walls, they hit, I have more luck just with my own, I'm thinking moving forward with them, even with Daniel Dennett's, um, views of as he likes to call it with evolution, it's universal acid, and it's going to eat through all these different ways we've seen the world. And immediately reading his book, it ate through what he was said like the universal acid and, um, metaphor does that to what exactly what he's presented and it eats it or it eats itself. Yeah. And, um, so yeah, and he likes to invert a lot of people. He openly says it, I find people who invert things, allow the work to speak for itself as opposed to look at what I'm doing. I'm so clever. I'm inverting Hume. Why don't you invert Hume and then let's see who can figure it out and see how clever you are with it. But he likes to let you know who he's inverting. Yeah. And the thing is I like his stuff. I just don't follow. Yeah. I can see almost each step of the way for myself where he goes wrong. And he's, I assume he's a much smarter person than I am. So that's where I get also interested in ideas and how they shape, um, the whole where you end up with your thought tracks. Now, now you mentioned that. So have you, are you worshiping with an Orthodox church? Have you gone that far? You're interested in? There's literally a Greek Orthodox church, 400, 500 meters down the road. That I just haven't got to yet. I sometimes think that, um, like the belief part of me is broken. I just can't, I believe in God. Yeah. I, I don't know. I haven't wrapped my head around Jesus. Um, I, I, I'm one of those people that I was quicker to believe in God before I would, I've, I've, when I was an atheist, I was one that was as far as like Jesus was about as real as Mickey Mouse. And, um, so I'm not, I've, I've guess at the moment, Jesus is in Buddha's own in that a person that taught people beautiful things. But I, I'm, I'm past that. I just, it's a, it's a, it's a mystery to me and I love it. Like that's, that's where I'm at with it. It's, it's, it's, it's the one thing that's challenged. Every preconception I've built since my whole life. I can't get my head around this, this, this bugger's mystery. It's, it's interesting that that's a, that's a place that you struck when your backstory is a Jehovah's witness. Because part of what say the rest of the church looks at the Jehovah's witness church about is exactly the person of Jesus. Because for Jehovah's witnesses, it's an adoptionistic, you know, it's in the spirit, you know, Jesus wasn't, Jesus wasn't the logos. No, Jesus was the incarnation of the archangel Michael. Right. Right. Right. And so it's interesting that for you in terms of the God part, well that wasn't too hard, but the Jesus part, that that's that, you know, the, the thing about, the thing about us is that we are, we really are mysteries to ourselves. And the stuff that happens in life, even when we're in a moment and we think we're like in charge of our thoughts and ideas and beliefs, not so much. And, and I have that, you know, I've talked to many people who, who get to a point and they're like, well, I kind of think I want to believe, but I just don't. And, and that's true about belief that we don't, we don't really choose our beliefs. We don't get up one day and say, I'm going to believe in this. Well, it's not how belief works. It, it kind of bubbles up from below. And so that's, that's, that's really interesting that for you, given your story, this is where, this is where you're at. That's interesting. Yeah. And then cause it's a, for my, I'm finding it, one of the struggles with it is there's kind of what I want it to be. And then there's also what I don't want it to be, which is I don't, my fear is the sky man material, the, the, the, the, basically the inverse of the material is view, but with God and Jesus. And, but yeah, but then I'm not, you know, I also don't buy the not the more Gnostic side of things where he never actually did incarnate or never, yeah. And it's a state of mind that you get into and that way that's, it's I'm lost in somewhere in between there with it all. And it, it's the, the symbolism that I find in the orthodox, that that's, I'm getting the most headway with it and how, because I see the simple, I would call it symbolic cognition. And it's, it's as real to me as, as, as any other part seeing patterns in the world and things like that, like, it's, it's as real as to my experience. So the whole, that them being real, that's not something I have a problem getting my head around, but I don't think Jesus is just a symbol. Right. And sense like this is more to it. Right. And yeah. And I really enjoy that. Um, finding that there's a, there was a part of Christianity that map that in a sense openly is mapping the conscious human experience where, which I've, I've got a, I handle on when I was in, got into a little bit of Buddhism and reading books and meditating. And I found it was, it was, it was soft. Um, I've seen it was immediately open to the, um, ridiculous social, social, social, social, social, social, social, social, social, justice warrior stuff. There's a whole part of Buddhism, engaged Buddhism, which it's the whole activist side of things. And from my readings of, of in the, into Buddhism was that stuff that you would move along from, like you wouldn't get involved in that because it's the petty, individualistic, selfish, um, like I want to change the world before changing yourself really. And so Buddhism, I moved on from, um, personally, because I felt it was, it was soft. There's nothing there underneath it. It was wish washy. In the Western sense, that is like, I did get the sense of the richness of the traditions elsewhere, but they're not mine traditions in a sense. So there, it was, um, a sort of a foreign interest in it. And where I decided to look more into why I held the views I did about why do I like Western civilization and, and things like that. And that's sort of one of the reasons why I also started to read and got into Stoicism and, and that through Marcus Aurelius and, and started to do that. I use Stoic practices, the CBT techniques to quit cigarettes a year ago, about a year ago almost to the day I quit smoking. And, um, after I, in the immediate sort of two days from quitting smoking, I, um, had two days that are basically couldn't get out of a flow state for two whole days. And all I did was start off each morning was to work out and do the dishes and clean up the house, which would things I wasn't doing properly. So just step stepping up to the plate, making these adjustments. I spent two whole, if they changed my life, like I was, I was saying afterwards that like, if, if I was religious and this happened, you'd got me, you got me. And if, if, if it was, it was a full blown religious experience of just the clarity I felt. I was reading, um, a book on the topic of chaos mathematics. And it was, there was a stage reading it in those couple of days where a few things sort of clicked in the sense of what my understanding of chaos mathematics is. It's not, it's, it's the complete Bogan as, which is the redneck version of Australian, um, in Australia is a Bogan and it's the Bogan version of, of chaos mathematics. I've at least got a grasp of, but just the, the, the clarity I felt in those, those two days have set me also is, is a big part on why I've ended up where I am in the questions I'm asking. Cause I'm kind of trying to explain what happened to me those two days, because it's, it's, it's more than, than what I've been able to piece together, um, with the materials point of view that I, that I held for quite a while, too many anomalies as, as Kuhn might say, have accumulated for there not to be a shift into something else. And yeah, yeah. In a sense, it's, yeah, there's a ter, it's kind of terrifying. So did you make this shift before or after you were married? I'm not married yet. I'm living in sin. Oh, okay. Well, before or after you started living with the woman who is the, the, the mother of your children. Cause you're you've got a lot of commitment for each other without being married. Yes. We were engaged and we will be getting married, but yeah, we've been together for eight years. Um, she's been, she's been watching you go through this transformation. Big time. She's, she's watched me the whole time. What does she think? She's, she's, um, really, and likes the changes that have happened. Okay. Um, like, and, and cause I'm a lot harder on myself than she is. And she, like, instead of me, like saying I'm changing, she'll also say, you're also refining your great, your better qualities as well along the way. Oh, good. Which is good. It's, um, it's the, the improvements tend to come in hindsight, like it's, which is, I'd have got no problem with that. Like it's, you look, you look back a few months or for me a year, a year ago, I was, I was drinking, you know, not heavily, but more than I'd like to, given like just my, my family's history and smoking cigarettes, chain smoking, and just wasn't, my priorities just weren't, weren't, where they were. And, um, just feeling frustrated with angry at times. And, um, it just had to make some changes and just a couple of small ships. It was literally doing my housework and starting to exercise and it just went from there. And yeah, it's, it's, it's been really good. I would say overall of the last 12 months, especially it has been, and I look forward to where it takes me. I really am. It's, um, Christianity is a bit of a fricking rabbit hole that I wasn't expecting to have. I thought it was dealt with. It's, it's, it's a humbling because I did have my mind made up about Christianity, God, it was done. What exactly did you have your mind made up about? I mean, which aspects? Yeah. Um, I, I, I was, I was thought I was extremely clever by discounting sky man because that's the basically the virgin you get from Jehovah's witnesses. And there's enough, you know, I've fascinated enough in history to, to go back to, to go back 2000 years and there's, you know, there's enough skepticism for me to confirm my own wants because I didn't, uh, the way I see it, I didn't like the way I was raised and it was a rebellion against that. And that's what I had to discard. And I have, but that's not what the O what is by discarding that I didn't discard the strongest argument for what I thought I was throwing out. And that's, that's been a big thing. I have consciously tried to tackle the stuff that makes me uncomfortable in, in like, that does challenge me in that sense. And that's, that's not easy for any, for anyone. I don't think is sort of go with that, that challenge of, if I've a response to someone or something of like, Oh, it I've tend to try and follow that a little bit and see where that takes me. And that tends to take me into things that challenge my beliefs and perceptions. And it's, it's a little bit addictive at times to be honest, is, is, is having that, I enjoy learning new things. And when you try and make yourself live up to that, it's, it's not as easy, but it's definitely more exciting. Yeah. Yeah. And your own videos I've come across from just someone commenting in a problem, Jordan Peterson clip or something and said, Oh, this guy's putting out videos. I was like, all right, YouTube, your name and went from there. And at first it's just like, Oh, this is just a Christian talking about Peterson click. And then because I've clicked on why Nick come up in the fit more and more than then it's just the topics got me and then it's what was, what's gets said. And it's like, okay, this isn't what I thought I was discarded. And then it's, yeah, it's, it's been great. I've enjoyed your content and how you have been breaking down. Jordan Peterson has been helpful as well. I know your chats with, with just the people you have on your show have been a lot of, a lot of help for me of something. Yeah. Just feel like you're getting in a rut and I was like, Oh, you know, where's this, where's this going? And then it might just be something you mentioned, CS Lewis and, and the inklings or something. And next thing I've, I've Googled that and it's like, Oh, they've this whole club of these little, these blokes that went to, went to the pub, had some drinks, spoke about some ideas. This just basically described what, what I would do every Friday if I could was just go have some drinks with my favorite people and let's, let's, let's shoot the shit. Yeah. And, um, and talk about, talk about important things and not, you know, something more than just what, what's happening in sports or politics, but things that are consequential. Yeah. And I, like that's funny a lot with cause they, it seems to be a pub or things like that, that they did it at. And yeah, being Australian, I have a, quite an appreciation for the pub. And I, I regard it as a Jehovah's witness. Go there as a Jehovah's witness. That's right. And, um, and it's, I see it as the forgotten institution, to be honest, especially in English. I'm not sure about America so much, but in England, in the English culture in Australia, it's like, I've gotten jobs from the pub. I've met people. I met my, my, my wife, my future wife at the pub. Um, but the, uh, lives are saved at the pub for just conversation. I'm, I've worked behind the bar. I've seen the state people can walk in and then, and just emotional state that is. And then, um, it just, I'm sure that, yeah, I've just, I've, I've got a, an idea that I've been percolating my head for a long time of, I'd love if I could do a documentary about anything, to be honest, it'd be about the institution of the pub in Australian culture and that the pub, we've also got things called sports clubs. So like our, our junior sport teams generally have like a drinking facility nearby to help fund the sports clubs and things like that. So we have lots of different drinking institutions around in our culture that just, I consider it kind of a secular church for a lot of people. They get what you would get from a church on the pub. Sure. The big time. And, um, yeah, it's, it's definitely something that's been in a sense under attack in the political, politically correct environment here in Australia is really the, um, the, the, because it's a, a harbor of toxic masculinity, like out of the pub and let's go pick up girls and, and this all like, it's, it's, it's, you know, a harbor of toxic masculine. That's hilarious. But I believe it. I can, I can understand how that would, well, it's, you know, the pub, it's funny because it's that third space. And you're right, that America, America in some place, some ways, I think early on, especially out of new England, which was of course Puritan, the, um, the, the church became the third space for a lot in America. And in terms of my life, because I don't drink, just, I, I'm not an alcoholic. I just, I've never, just never got into drinking, but the church was that third space for me. And you know, Starbucks, the coffee shop is kind of becoming, you know, a politically correct third space because out East, you know, you had the corner bar and the corner bar was kind of the pub, but it was mostly masculine. It was often seedy. And, and then it kind of had, you know, women needed their own third space. And so, you know, they had to kind of construct that, which sometimes was church or, or just, you know, the playground or the PTA, or something like that. But it's, it's interesting, but you know, Lewis and his inklings, you know, very, very British. And so the bird and the, you know, I forget the name of their pub. Someone's going to take away my CS Lewis card by forgetting the name of the pub, but, um, the bird and the baby, this is what they called it, but it wasn't, that wasn't the name of the pub, but no, that's really interesting. That's really interesting. Our pubs tend to be more taken care of than our churches. Really? They're even more well designed. Some of, some of our pubs are ridiculous. Like they're four stories high. There's accommodation. Like, so this is really, Australians have, have, have, have thought about this. We've got, we've got one floor will be like pool tables. Another floor will be for food and they have a bar there. Then another floor is just for drinking. And another floor will be accommodation where maybe the public and who runs the place will live, but also like workers passing through, we'll stay there. It's, um, wow. They've served as, as, like our pubs generally have, um, partially evolved along the old highways. So our towns, you're not a town here. Um, and unless you've got at least a main street with a pub, like you could have a main street with a pub and a post office and two houses and you've got a town, but you could have a street with a hundred houses, no pub and a post office and you're just a place with houses. You haven't qualified as a town. You need, there's certain unofficial requirements I'd say. And, um, yeah, the pubs were like the road houses of America, of America. In Australia, they very much served as a road house that have accommodation, food and, and, and drinks for your passes through. And a lot of pubs have died because we're by, we're building bypasses of the old highways and we're building super freeways that bypass everything. So all these towns are dying along the East coast of Australia at the moment over the last decade to 20 years, 10, 20 years where we're bypassing all these places you used to drive through and they, the whole business was people coming through the towns and things like that. So there's, there's, there's a shift there actually now I'm thinking of it. And then, yeah. So then what are you left with McDonald's and hotels that like in America? It is happening. It's that Australia has, um, definitely Americanized itself. Um, we like to think of ourselves as the smarter little brother, where in Great Britain's the parents and you guys left home and did your thing and you know, you sports out a great path. We're the one that stayed home and did the farming and stayed good with mom and dad. And, but also you're like, you know, we'll learn from your mistakes and things like that. We definitely have a little brother mentality with America and there is like a common thing I roll of like, Oh America, but nowadays so much of what's happening there, it's here next in the next week, where, because if I have, have you heard of the TV show, the Goldbergs? It's set in the eight. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's not relevant unless you it's in Australia, unless you grew up in the nineties because all that stuff didn't really get here till the nineties. So if you're a nineties kid, the Goldbergs is a nineties show for many people, cultural, in the cultural references. That's fascinating. But when now it's, it's, it's almost immediate because it was the internet and things. So these used to take more time. We had more of a filter even before getting things from the rest of Western civilization as we're isolated down the bottom of the world here. It's so globalization. Yeah. Our culture just keeps the American empire one gold at a time. And it's, it's sped up immensely. Like we've even got young ones with our own Australian accented vocal fries at the end of words. We've got that in our young ones, this new way of talking that's like almost like I've got this British twang on, on it. It's ridiculous. You want to slap them. It's tough. It's, it's, it's tough to listen to that. That's for sure. Huh? Well, we got 15 minutes left and I don't want to, I don't want to, if there's anything you wanted to get to, I don't want to, I want to make sure we have time for it. I did do a quick little bit of scribbling down of things in case I got lost of what I wanted to talk about. But I think I've mostly covered all that. It's, it is fascinating to me. You know, there's a, there's a possibility. I might come to Australia early next year. Someone would like me to come out and do a conference. And you know, I've never been to Australia and I, there are a lot of people who listen and watch from Australia and New Zealand and Tasmania of all places. You know, I've started to get these emails from Tasmania and it's like, wow, you know, about all I know about is the, you know, the Tasmanian devil is about the only thing I knew about Tasmania. But it's, I mean your description, your description of the country and the culture is fascinating in terms of the pub. But yet, you know, the Amer, it's, but you're over in Asia too, basically too. So I mean, it's, it's, it's really interesting. Yeah. It's sports is, is another big thing over here as well. Much like America, but it is, it does appear to be different. It's definitely not on the scale. It is over there. And that's also, that was another thing I did want to talk about now. I've brought up elite sports is when I had my two days of that flow state, I was telling you about last year, I basically burnt through every secularized version of, which I hadn't heard of or remembered maps of meaning at this time. But the most I come to was mud maps of human potential was what religions were. There were mud maps of human potential was the idea I was playing with back then. And that at the moment we're seeing like, what would that be at the moment? Who's pushing the boundaries of human potential and that's elite sports, especially across the board, but in, in realms of fitness, health, nutrition and even strategy. There's and then looking for other parallels in the culture along those lines was it's still an interest of mine, but it's definitely much less aggressively against religion. If I'm using that metaphor now, where it was very much as a to discount religion where I kind of rough anthropology of it was caveman lived in that primitive state or, you know, primitive man lived in that state where they were constantly having to be on alert and have that focus. So you kind of had no choice, but to be in a flow state of you would have been fasting by not my choice. It was just, you know, and so, and at the time I was eating ridiculously well, I was even doing a bit of that ketogenic in the aftermath of that. So, um, there was the fasting element to feeling the way I was as well. And, uh, so the way I was saying it was that religions in some respect were just a way of facilitating that way of being moving into civilization. And, but yeah, it's roughly there still as a sketch, but it seems to be fading more and more of that completely secular material is sort of angle, angle of view of that. But that was definitely the main metaphor of that I was playing with better year ago after, after all that was mud maps to human potential and looking at elite sports as well of where that is at the moment. And, um, yeah, it's that I'd say that's that, that's something that's, that's, that's changed as well with looking into the and, and for a lot of philosophy, a lot more was basically learning where the holes were in my own ideas have been a big thing. Now, how much, how much formal education did you get? Cause you're, you're obviously doing a lot of reading and did you get a college degree? No, I, um, I finished year 12. I went to the end of high school in Australia. We have the reverse culture of America. We have, we encourage most of our young people to go into full-time work and trades at a high school. Really possible. And universities more, like if you've got the grades, go do it. Huh? You're reading all these fancy books. Yeah. Yeah. The way I like to like to see it is if I'm the dumbest person in Australia, the dumbest person in Australia is reading these books. So we should be a lot. I'm just immensely interested in these ideas. And I've just sort of basically I've got to put my money where my mouth is. If I want to talk about these things and, um, and do it. Yeah. Handle them. I will try and get a handle on them. I've got to had a lot more reading to do. And the more I read, the more real as I did not know and do not know, but it's, it's awesome. And I'm definitely, you know, self-educated in that sense. I can thank some good teachers that I had for just getting that little bit of love of learning in me and that, but I was, I can say, I've put off reading being a braised Jehovah's witness for a long time. Um, I just, especially the Bible man, like that's, I've got an old, I've got to get a, um, a new copy of the Bible. I've got a, like a 70 or 80 year old, um, King James version. That was my great grandmother's Bible that it's more of an heirloom than something to read. I don't want it to fall apart. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But yeah, we got self-educated, um, dilettante. You know, that's one of the really interesting things about what Jordan Peterson has done is that he has, I mean, I talked to a lot of people who, you know, they could be wasting their life on computer games and Netflix and that they're, they're reading books and they're, you know, that they're, they're reading Nietzsche and Heidegger and they're, you know, they're trying to, they're trying to read the Bible, which is, which is not an easy book in and of itself and amazing. We can read it at all. And, and so, you know, it's, it's, it really, I continue to be, I continued to be impressed at what this Jordan Peterson phenomenon has done and, you know, all the way out there and in Australia to me, that, that blows my mind too, that, you know, he's, he's got a European tour and he's been to Australia, you know, be there again. And, you know, I kind of expect them to tour. I mean, Canada, Canada has fewer people than the state of California. So we're, you know, poor Canada. They got a lot of land, but not a lot of people. So, you know, they're always coming down here. We've got a lot of land, not a lot of people, only 24, 25 million. I think we're at now. Wow. Oh yeah. Yeah. A lot of space, but you also have a lot of desert. A lot of desert as a bit. There's a bit here. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, we won't, we won't deal well with any giant rise of water over a few centuries. Our cities will be underwater. Yeah. Most of your cities are on the coasts. Almost all of it. Like this really nothing. So the most, most of the interiors just desert desert and country towns. Yeah. Country towns. Yep. We have, um, what we'd call regional hubs throughout the more interior. There'd be like a country town that the rest of the peripheral will, well, it'll, it'll service the peripheral areas and we'll have them. We have a couple of town cities and then smack bang in the middle of the country, like Ellis Springs and a few of those sorts of places. I think they're about 50,000 people. They're not big, but they, um, they do what they do. Wow. Wow. It's an interesting place. You know, old Australia. Where's, are you getting much immigration and where from? I believe that we, uh, think we take in or we were taking in 200,000 a year. Okay. And that that's just our immigration all round policy. Oh, and that's, but that was, I think in the late nineties, it was only in the, I may be speaking out of turn, but I think it was only in the under a hundred thousand 20 years ago. Okay. Is there a lot of illegal immigration? You don't have any land connection. We have the, what, what, what we have in place is what the rest of the world gets called bigoted for having or wanting to implement. We have border, we have border patrols. We will turn boats back. We had a lot of tragedies here in the nineties and two thousands of boats coming on mass and sinking with people in them off our shores. And so we, the government brought in a policy basically of zero tolerance of we will turn your view will be turned around. Wow. And, um, yeah, I always used to sort of joke and like, um, that if you can build the boat, come build your boat. If you can build your own boat and get here, have a seat. It's all good. And then like, it's funny cause there was this show on, um, Australia. And one of the people on it and like with real people is like an Australian reality show, but one of the people on it, she was a Vietnamese migrant and her dad literally built the boat that got the family to Australia. And I just thought that's welcome. Like, Hey, if you're going to build the boat yourself, they ought to let you in. Yes. You know, if you can build it, yeah, like, yeah, it's, it's obviously, obviously a joke, but that in Australia at the moment, that's, that's a pretty offensive thing to say, which is kind of sad. Well, one of my best friends, he's a journalist in, um, in Sydney with, I won't say with who actually, um, one of the larger ones. Okay. And he, he would, I wouldn't know anyway. So no, no. Um, he wouldn't come on my podcast had last year, just in case he didn't say it explicitly, but just in case he sort of, you know, jeopardize what he wanted to do in journalism. Absolutely. Cause we, like, we, he's one of my best friends. So we can get very casual with, you know, how we're talking and sure there's no, we don't have things that are off off sort of off out of bounds. Yeah. And, um, oh, that was another thing I wanted to sort of point out, um, that I've thought about, um, with the Western civilizations, um, we seem to lack any initiation for young people and coming into, into adulthood and how it's going to manifest itself anyway. Yes. Um, we will look at, and in Australia, at least we've, there's, there's at least people who are inclined to smoke pot, right? Yeah. We'll that we'll have a little circle. There'll be a circle. And it's the, looking back on the times I did it with my friends growing up and as a young adult, it's a space that we've created where you can say and do say anything, question anything, especially whether you are like from the ground up. Am I even real? Like, you know, people smoking pot, sitting around like am I even real? And from the ground up, like it's a, it's a makeshift mystery school in a sense. And, um, that's, and like we look like a lot of us would look about my, all my friends, I'm still friends with today and now we've all sort of grown up a lot more. They were the ones in that circle. Many of them in this, you know, the sort of circle that we formed of, and it was at times literally a circle you'd sit around, you know, in, in interesting wind down at the end on a Friday afternoon after the week unload. And it's looking back. It's, we didn't have, we're making do really. We didn't have anything to sort of go into from there. And, um, you know, what once served a lot of people that way was apprenticeships, but that's now very much a sterilized, um, employee, employer relationship instead of a master student relationship as it should be. And you, you're very rare to be an apprentice and finish your trade under more than under less than like five people, you'll get passed around all different tradesmen, which is good if you're in very, in giving you a diverse range of ways of doing things, but we lose something in not having that, that I think in having that strong, you know, master of a craft and a student of the craft bond and relationship going more so and not just isolated in the trades. You tend to see it a lot in the football teams that, that is sports teams that are successful. There tends to be, it's generally not a fluke that tends to be a, you know, the coaches, a master or the master plays in a team and they've brought up this, it's the best champion teams are the rag tag teams with the couple of old heads, the young blokes that should have never been there. The guys that have been to seven or different teams and they all come together and there's this, it tends to be a bond that's that you create in the, in the, um, well it's just pretty intense environment. You're forging those bonds in the, in, in the, um, in the fire of competition. And that's all the thing over here in Australia too, is they're questioning competition. We've, we've had a gradual thing of what we'd call participation trophies brought in where everyone gets a ribbon and you know, you feel that they stopped scoring certain kids sports games under a certain age. And now they're even, um, creating weight divisions for kids playing football. So the little kids don't get smashed by the big kids or something. And it's just, it's a, yeah, I don't know. For me it's just a bit too much to a bit bubble wrap in regards to doing all that. And yeah, this is a bit silly. Wow. Wow. That's interesting. Well, well, thank you so much, Jason. I really appreciate you, you know, reaching out and signing up and. Thank you. No, thanks. Thanks for all your stuff, mate. I, I, part of me is just really surprised. I mean, my videos really are just thinking out loud for the most part. It's, it's helpful for me to have people listen and comment and give feedback because you know, like you say, you, you have ideas and sometimes, you know, who can you talk to about these things? And just having the ideas in your head all by yourself. Well, that's no fun. And, and so learning from each other. So. Yeah. No big time. That's one of the great best things that the internet's done for us. Yeah. There's plenty, plenty wrong that plenty that's gone wrong with it, but. Yeah. Yeah. That it's definitely helped satiate my appetite for new information. That's for sure. Well, well thank you. And I'll send you a copy of this and then we can decide what we want to do with it. Sounds good. Okay. Thanks Paul. Thank you, Jason. Bye bye.