https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=kzbUwShT8y8

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my sermon for this week. Now, there won't be a rough draft next week because I'm not preaching next week, so there won't be a rough draft for a couple of weeks. One of the biggest podcasters in the country, most people in my church don't know who he is, is this guy named Joe Rogan. Not too long ago, Joe Rogan had one of the most famous celebrity atheists on his show on, Richard Dawkins. Joe Rogan isn't terribly friendly to religion and Dawkins can be sometimes downright hostile. They were going back and forth and talking about religion and people who believe in things that they can't see and superstition and stories. At one point in the conversation, they asked the question, why was there so much religion? How would this idea get started? Why in fact, up until really not very long ago, even in human terms, did pretty much everyone in the world believe in a god or the gods or spirits or spiritual forces or all of these things that these two people look at and say, well, you can't see any of this stuff. It's just all superstition and made up stories and caused a lot of problems in the world. But none of that explains why it's been so enormously popular. In fact, almost ubiquitous. Even today, the number of atheists in the United States barely gets above 10 to 12 percent, even though the rate of people who aren't religiously affiliated has climbed. People who still believe in God or believe in karma or believe in some sort of purpose out there is the vast majority of people in the United States, a good many in Western Europe and just about everywhere in the world, just about everyone else. So what's the deal with religion? Why does it keep coming up and why do people keep believing in things? Well, part of it is because religion has always been about testing the gods to see what would bring you favor. You know, basically it was sort of like karma. If you do right by the gods or the spirits, they will reward you. And if you do wrong by them, you'll be punished. And it's sort of like the story of Job and Job's three friends who said, Job, if you're suffering, you're obviously doing something wrong. And whatever religious language you concoct that into being, you know, it sort of works. And it's sort of like morality. People get a sense that there's justice in the world. And they certainly don't want to think that there is no justice in the world, that doing bad things will get you good things, which everybody knows it sort of does. But we want to imagine that there's an arc of history and it's bent towards justice and all kinds of things like that. And people have been believing this pretty much always. And we can see why it's in our interest to believe it, especially as communities and societies and people who don't believe in such things. Well, we usually find ways to isolate those people and marginalize those people. And if they step out of line too badly, punish those people. And again, this isn't this isn't a new thing. In the sack of Rome in 410 by the something that's almost never brought up, the Visigoths were Aryan Christians and they they sacked Rome and they plundered the pagan temples and the mansions of the of the pagan people and the unconverted Romans blamed the failure of Rome on Christians because Christians were not supporting the the the cult sacrifices and the imperial sacrifices and the sacrifices to the traditional gods. And they said, that's why the city fell. And of course, Satan, Gustin wrote his his magnum opus, the city of God, in response to those ideas. But yet the ideas persist and they persist in among churches and among religious peoples of just about every kind. Richard Dawkins wants to make the point that here in the modern era, we assert that there's no intentionality or purpose behind the universe. It's these are just mechanisms of nature. And what we should do is use the power we have to achieve or secure the outcomes we desire. And it's sort of when you believe this, you'd better hope that people desire good things, because that's all we're playing with. And so the blind, the watchmaker who who wound up the world was blind and there's no purpose or intentionality in the world. And in which case, religion sort of becomes politics. And and my political tribe will save the world and will save the world by virtue of our economic policy or the president or the prime minister or the party we elect or or or or. And so so politics is the means by which we secure for ourselves using the mechanisms of nature, all of the things that we desire. And then we just try to get each other to believe as we believe. You sort of strip away the religion. This can be seen in in polling. In fact, there's a there's a big difference between people in this country who watch the news all the time, whether they watch CNN or MSNBC or Fox News or the major networks amongst people who watch the news and who are politically are politically engaged. There's been a tremendous amount of polarization over the last 20 years, from 1994 to 2014. Democrats and Republicans share very little mind space between those who are politically engaged. Now, those who are less politically engaged, you can see that, in fact, by the charts below, it hasn't changed that much. And in fact, there's a there's a nonbelieving blogger who writes a very prominent blog called Slate Star Codex. And he had a fascinating post this week, which he said the new atheism, the godlessness that failed. And he ran through the numbers of a bunch of these things. And he basically said, you know, all the the new atheism that that that came about and was and was so was so prominent. Richard Dawkins was there at their head. Well, they kind of caverned out. And it didn't mean that they necessarily all went believing in God, but they just all really got political and politics became their new godless religion. Now, Jesus lived in a political culture war that was at least as hot as ours and at least as polarized as ours. And their politics and religion were were all mushed together. And so in those days, we're continuing on through the Gospel of Mark. In those days, when they were when there was, again, a great crowd without anything to eat following Jesus, listening to his teaching, he called his disciples and said to them, I have compassion for the crowd because they have they have been with me now for three days and have had nothing to eat. If I send them away to their homes, they will faint on the way. And some of them have come a great distance. His disciples replied, how can one feed these people with bread here in the desert? And some of you might be thinking, didn't we read this story a few weeks ago? He asked, how many loaves do you have? And they said seven. Then he ordered the crowd to sit down on the ground and he took the seven loaves. And after giving thanks, he broke them and gave them to his disciples to distribute. And they distributed them to the crowd. And again, this all sounds so familiar. They also found a few small fish. And after blessing them, he ordered that they too should be distributed. And they ate and were filled. And they took up the broken pieces left over seven baskets full. Now, there were about four thousand people and he sent them away. Before there was five thousand people and there were 12 baskets full. And there were five loaves and two fish. And now there's seven loaves and a few small fish and seven baskets full left over. Is this the same story? A lot of people have wondered that, but we'll keep reading. And immediately he got into the boat with his disciples and went to the district of Dalmanutha. Now the Pharisees came and began to argue with him. Now, in my adult Sunday school class, I did a fair amount of explaining how the Pharisees were sort of a religious political party. Because in many ways, politics and religion weren't divided in the ancient world. Politics and religion were one thing. And the gods were involved in both all the time. And the Pharisees were sort of moderates. They very much wanted the Romans out. And so they tried to enforce moral behavior and enforce religious observance amongst the people. Hoping and waiting that God would rescue Israel from her imperial enslavers, which at that point were the Romans, who were polluting the morality and the belief of the people. And so the Pharisees wanted them out. And the Pharisees would have very much liked to have recruited Jesus. But if Jesus wouldn't join them, then they would oppose him. And so they often walked around trying to test Jesus and to see if they could recruit him. And because he did these miracles and he was very popular, he would have been a very tempting target. But they were unsure because he wasn't totally in alignment with everything that they thought and believed. Again, much like religion and politics today. The Pharisees came and began to argue with him, asking him for a sign from heaven. To test him. And, well, we might notice this is sort of Richard Dawkins and Joe Rogan. Because, well, if there's something we could see, well, then maybe we would believe. Oh, he sighed deeply. And if you remember the sermon from last week, this is the second time that he sighed. This time he sighed deeply. He sighed deeply in his spirit and said, why does this generation ask for a sign? Now, that word generation is kind of funny. It could mean we use generation. But when we think generation, we sort of think of a horizontal slice in the vertical flow of history. It also means race. It means sort of a group of people that inherits. And, well, let's imagine he's saying the human race. Because we all sort of seem to do this. Even Richard Dawkins, who would say, well, this is all superstition and I don't believe in the Bible. But a sign, yes, if we met Jesus today, we would want him to do something miraculous. We'd want him to bend the laws of nature. And then we would believe. Because if there's no sign in the heavens or something up there that we can see, well, why should we believe? Why does this generation ask for a sign? Truly, I tell you, no sign will be given to this generation. Now, Matthew, he says the sign of Jonah, but we'll leave that alone for now. And then he left them. Getting into the boat again, he went across to the other side. Now, many of you might say, well, now, wait a minute. Didn't he just feed 4,000 people with seven loaves and a few small fish and had seven baskets full left over? Surely that demonstration of power, that miracle, should have been enough to convince the Pharisees and everyone else, 4,000 men plus women and children, saw him do it. Surely that should be enough. And anyone would believe it. And we might say, well, if Jesus came and did something like that, I would believe. I'd be down. I'd be on Team Jesus. That would be it. Now, the disciples had forgotten to bring bread. Well, they had eaten over there where Jesus had fed them. And then they crossed and they were hungry again because, you know, we get hungry if we don't eat or drink for a little while. Now, the disciples had forgotten to bring any bread. And they had only one loaf with them. One loaf with, you know, at least 12 of them. Oh, crisis. It's seven loaves for 4,000 men plus women and children. Now they've got one loaf for 12 disciples. And he cautioned them, saying, watch out. Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and the yeast of Herod. What? They said to one another, is it because we have no bread? They don't understand them at all. And probably most of us listening don't understand them at all. Well, you have to pause and say, well, what is yeast? If you go to the grocery store and if you're going to actually, most Americans don't do this much, actually go through the process of baking bread. You take this loaf and you knead this dough and it becomes a sort of a ball. And, you know, you have this stuff and then you put this tiny little almost grains of sand and it makes the loaf rise. This tiny little thing changes the whole loaf. And now remember that the Israelites leaving Egypt ate unleavened bread. And so there are all these ideas about what is this leaven that makes it rise, just a tiny little bit changes the whole loaf. Now, beware of the yeast of the Pharisees. Well, that's just who Jesus was talking to. And of Herod. Herod's on the other side of the culture war. And the disciples are scratching their heads. Is it because we don't have any bread? And becoming aware of this, Jesus said to them, why are you talking about having no bread? Do you still not perceive or understand? Clearly not. Are your hearts hardened? Yeah. In fact, that's the whole problem. And that's what he's warning them about with this, the yeast of the Pharisees and Herod. That the Pharisees and the Herod, they're spoiling the whole loaf. Do you not have eyes to see and fail to do you not have eyes and fail to see? Do you not have ears and fail to hear? And do you not remember when I broke the five loaves for the 5,000? How many baskets full of broken pieces did you collect? 12. And the seven for the 4,000, how many baskets of broken pieces did you collect? Well, he said seven. And he said to them, do you not yet understand? And at this point, probably a lot of us are saying, no, and we don't either. What is Jesus talking about? What is this business of the Pharisees and Herod? And actually, a little bit later at Jesus' trial, Jesus will be pulled in front of Herod. And Herod will be very disappointed because Herod wanted to see Jesus do tricks. Maybe he'll do some miracle. If he does some miracle, then I'll believe he came from the gods. But here are the disciples who have seen, we've been following the gospel of Mark, miracle after miracle after miracle after miracle, and they don't understand and they don't believe because their hearts are hard. Now, where did we hear that before? Well, we remember Pharaoh. Is he saying the disciples are like Pharaoh? Yeah, and so are the Pharisees. And so is Herod. And so are our hearts. What point is Jesus making? Well, you see, the religion of the world is the way of the world, and religion and politics are one. And this is an artist's rendition of the triumph of Pompeii. And the way the religion worked is just like it worked with Job. Well, how do you know that God favors someone? Well, clearly by their success. And so when the Roman emperors would march through Rome celebrating the thousands of slaves that they had taken and the thousands of deaths that they had had at their hands and all the loot that they had taken, well, clearly the gods were smiling because they had success. Who needs signs when you have triumphs? Who needs signs when you have wealth and riches and powers and everyone agrees with you? This is the religion of the regular world. And this, in fact, is the religion of politics. It's all one. Winners take. Losers too bad. But what did they imagine Jesus was doing with all of his miracles? It's the craziest thing because they ask him for a sign, and when we read the Gospel of Mark we think there are signs all over the place. Then you read the Gospel of John, there are even called signs in the Gospel of John, and it's like, well, what do you mean you're asking for a sign? If you wait 10 minutes you'll see him do another one. He's always bringing, you know, bringing, giving someone sight and helping them here and giving the lame to walk. Last week we read Isaiah 35. Everywhere he goes he seems to be doing these things. You almost can't stop him from doing these things and he stopped and said, let me see a sign in, oh, a sign in heaven this time. Just move the stars around, turn the moon back, do something that will demonstrate that you're in control of the world. And Jesus says, I will do something that will demonstrate that I'm in control of the world. I'm going to change world history because all of your religion and politics is the same, and I'm going to change it all. What the emperors did with their triumphs? Well, that was their version of miracles. Well, they expected that what Jesus was doing with his little tricks was just like emperors would do. They impressed the people, gain faith in the Lord, they impressed the people, gain favoritism, gather a big following, and once they all believe in you, then put weapons in their hand and have them go kill their enemies. Have them vote them out of office, have them marginalize them, push them around and get to the top of the heap. That's religion and politics. That's what Job's friends looked at. There's Job sitting in sackcloth and ashes and before he was wealthy and powerful. They say, see Job, you must have done something wrong. You crossed the gods, you crossed God, and now you're paying for it. One minute you're up and then you're down. And that's the God speaking. Those are the signs. And Jesus says, I'm going to perform a sign and I will move heaven and earth, and you won't be able to see it. You can't even see the signs I'm doing now. You have no idea what I'm doing, not even the disciples. He says, watch out for the yeast of the Pharisees' inherit. They're like, huh? But if you look at what Peter's about to say, a few chapters from now, Peter and the Pharisees' inherit, they're all on the same page. In fact, the whole world is on the same page. Nobody's on Team Jesus. He's alone. They couldn't see the signs, even though the signs were right in front of their eyes. The sign he would give is the sign that would change the world. Now, some of you are wondering, well, why do you keep showing this? Well, there's Jesus on the cross there and we're in church, so he's going to say something about the cross. But what's with that book? Well, this week, this book came out and this book was by a scholar named Tom Holland, who grew up and went to church when he was a kid and because of dinosaurs and whatnot, decided it was Sunday School teachers' day. Sunday School teachers doesn't know anything and went on to get advanced degrees and study history and write really cool history books that read like novels and told the stories of all the ancient heroes, the great men like Julius Caesar and the Caesars and the Persian emperors like Darius and Cyrus and all the wonderful old stories with all of their religion, but no religion for him because we all know, we all know there's no such thing. And then he wrote a book on Islam and someone didn't like the book and said, well, why don't you, why don't you do an expose of the roots of your own religion? He's like, I don't really have a religion, but fair enough. I'll look at Christianity and say, well, what happened? And what he discovered shocked him and seems to be changing him that this man on the cross, the sign that he gave changed the world and it completely upended all of their assumptions about what actually moves the heavens, what's right and what's wrong. And in fact, it's, it's been so successful. Even Richard Dawkins believes it without believing it. He said this in an interview recently, imagine you've got to write a story in which for the first time, someone who suffers the excruciating death of a slave is going to be cast as being in some way part of the creator God who's fashioned everything. And he's got to be convincing, not just the people now, which I meant then the first centuries, but for the next 2000 years and across the whole span of the world. In other words, these stories would be translated into every conceivable people group and language and, and propagated throughout history all over the world. And it would so deeply impact people without them knowing it, that their whole ideas of God and what God cares about, because of course God cares about the rich because that's who he gives all the money and the power to. Aren't they right? Isn't that? How God is supposed to work. That's how our politics works. That's how we think religion is supposed to work. Do good things and God blesses you do bad things. And God curses you but there we see the son of God and these writers had to write the story in such a way that everyone would imagine that God was being revealed in Jesus being crucified on a cross stripped naked mocked by his enemies. And they did it. It's a really astonishing thing. This author writes. To have pulled off such a literary feat and four people did it. Those four people did it pretty much about the same time and they did it all about the same person. Now, you'll often hear me say that the biblical writings are literary masterpieces and they are. We study them. We study them. We study them. Writings are literary masterpieces and they are. We study them. But it's sheer. It surely is far beyond coincidence that all of them could write about the same person and have the same effect. Surely it must be not just their writing style or their writing skill but the subject and the history of who they wrote. Now, this week in my crazy new internet life I did a little debate with a guy who's a, I don't know if he's a communist or a socialist and he told me he was a gender abolitionist and we had a wonderful conversation. I enjoyed it greatly. But the thing is he would say, because he doesn't believe in any of this and he's an atheist, he says, yeah, you'd have to, you'd have to break the laws of physics for me to believe and I would assert, no, I don't think that would actually do much of anything. Well, why don't you think it would do anything? Because it didn't do anything for the disciples. They saw it act, they saw it act all the time and in fact I know it doesn't do stuff for people because even as a pastor for people who believe they come to me and say, pastor, I'm in trouble, I gotta pray and sometimes they pray and every now and then there's something happens and they're saying, pastor, it's like a miracle. And then a year or two later they're in trouble again and say, pastor, I gotta pray, we need another one. The last time I read the book, I was like, another one. The last one didn't sink in, did it? Because those kind of miracles don't do what you imagine that they would do. What do you think that they'd do? Well, they'd make me never doubt again. No, that's not the way it works. It's not how our works, our hearts work because our hearts are hard. The disciples didn't understand it. We don't understand it. So what sign actually does it? Well, actually it doesn't look much like a sign. It's as common as crucifixions were in the ancient world. It's sacrificial love. Everybody wants to be loved sacrificially, but to love sacrificially, that looks irresponsible. But isn't that the sign of the cross? Isn't that the sign that for the last 2000 years has completely upended our ideas of what is right and wrong? Isn't that the sign that actually changed history?