https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=KepFHHEA4ao

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. As you can see, I'm back in my little box doing my normal things. There will be another pause and more strange videos coming out, probably more personal videos to the membership channel, less of the regular content, but I am preaching this Sunday and I have been working on the sermon and this is what I've got so far. So in my travels over the last couple of weeks, I've talked to a number of people and there's definitely an anxiety in the Christian Reformed Church, but I think in the church in the United States overall about church decline in America. This one chart from a few years ago in 2020 shows the rise of the nuns, N-O-N-E-S's, people who don't see themselves as being attached to any religion. In the Christian Reformed Church, the other membership chart is between 1963 and 2021 and it shows that the Christian Reformed Church peaked about 1992 in terms of overall membership. I had lunch with a friend who is a retired minister and I asked some questions about numbers in terms of some churches and he mentioned churches in Massachusetts where I just was, Pleasant Street Church grew to about a thousand people, that would be mega church standard, and then had to split off another congregation, Fairlawn, and I had an estuary meeting with the pastors of those two churches. Both of those churches are significantly smaller than they were say back in the 70s and 80s and they're filled with a number of people who are aging and elderly and churches are worried about this. I think in the next 10 to 20 years, we're going to see a lot of churches close and there's going to be a lot of anxiety about what's going to happen to these buildings and the kinds of services that these churches have given to communities are going to go missing and governments tend to do many of these services less well and quite a bit more costly. And so yeah, there's a lot of anxiety about church decline. I think Christians, however, have sort of absorbed an implicit subtraction story. Listening to new atheists, one might think that Christianity has just been in this big, long decline for the last 500 years. Now there certainly are elements to this, especially if you look at Europe. Church participation in many places in Europe, notably in the United Kingdom, is tiny compared to what it was even a hundred years ago. But paying closer attention to church history notes that the story is in fact far more complex. There have regularly been rises and fallings of people's interest, devotion, and participation in church and other elements of their practice of the Christian religion. I just had, I did, Justin Briarley is about to publish a book. This is a pre-publication copy. I did an interview with him. He's going to do a podcast, something sort of in the vein of the J.K. Rowling witch trial or rise and fall of Mars Hill, but on the subject of his new book, The Surprising Rebirth of Belief in God, because there are signs that in fact we've sort of trends have been going down, but there seems to be an uptake in certain groups and among certain people. Of course, those who are aware of what's going on in this little corner will notice that. And so this leads me to ponder the questions about, okay, what actually, how do we actually become aware of these things? The influence and power of Christ surges in surprising and quite unexpected ways. This is in fact a lot of what we see in the Book of Acts. And the way Christ conquers is often quite counterintuitive. I was doing a lot of thinking about that this morning and thinking how I really should pay more attention to this and either do some videos or maybe even do some writing about this because it's a difficult question to get one's mind around. Three weeks ago, when last I preached, I preached on Acts 19, on the riot in the church of Ephesus. In fact, Paul's missionary activities in the region of Ephesus was so disruptive that those who were deriving a good living around the temple of Diana or Artemis were concerned that the surge in Christianity in this region would negatively impact the sales of their little silver idols and the other wares that they were doing. Paul in fact was doing so many miracles and every day teaching in this rented hall of Tyrannus that an enormous amount of the population, including a lot of elites, were at least at that moment very interested in Christianity. Now we tend to look back through a very shallow lens and think, okay, Christian, non-Christian, people are sort of crossing the line here and there. It probably was quite a bit more messy than that. I just recently saw that the Jesus Revolution movie has come to Netflix. I never saw it in the theater so I'm going to get a chance of seeing it. Something can go through the culture like in the 1970s, this born again. Jimmy Carter was our first born again president. Chuck Colson wrote a big book, Born Again, and so you get these waves going up and down of popularity and resurgence and sometimes people who are sort of on the margins might participate in church and then sort of fall back. It's a very messy fluid situation and quite clearly the interest in Christianity and Jesus Resurrection hit a peak in Ephesus and resulted in a riot and a major disruption. Now in past years I have often come around taking a look at Mark Ehrman's, I think it's a very interesting book about the triumph of Christianity. I think his thesis is quite true even though Bart Ehrman doesn't believe in that any of these miracles happened, but it's quite clear that Christianity in 500 years completely transformed the Roman Empire, but it's a very slow, subtle process and we tend to look at buildings or certain artifacts to try to record the influence of Christ and his spirit throughout the world and it's actually remarkably difficult to do so. Over the very long run of course pagan temples would become neglected. They're threatened. It's in a sense what happened in Ephesus was a harbinger of what was going to happen throughout the Greco-Roman world. Churches of course would be built after Constantine, but before then church buildings weren't where Christians were worshipping, but they were worshipping in homes. And the total, the whole moral imagination of these communities would begin to be rewired and of course Tom Holland's book Dominion is about this massive transformation that Jesus has brought into the entire world through Christianity. Now to dip back into Acts 19 we can see the beginnings of this. God did extraordinary miracles through Paul so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick and their illnesses were cured and their evil spirits left them. Some Jews who went around driving out spirits tried to invoke the name of Jesus over those who were demon possessed. They would say in the name of Jesus whom, in the name of the Jesus whom Paul preaches I command you to come out. Oh see, I haven't, this is why I do rough drafts because you pick up errors like this. Seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this. One day the evil spirit answered them, Jesus I know and Paul I know about, but who are you? When the man who had the evil spirit jumped on them, the man who had the evil spirit jumped on them and overpowered them all. He gave them such a beating that they ran out of the house naked and bleeding. It's exactly these kinds of stories that propelled, this is according again to Bart Ehrman, that propelled the popularity of Christianity in the Roman Empire. They got people's imaginations and they began to wonder, who is this Jesus? What power does he have? Of course they lived in a very enchanted, spiritually infused world and so the name and the power of Jesus made a big splash in the empire. When this became known to the Jews and Greeks living in Ephesus, they were all seized with fear and the name of the Lord Jesus was held in high honor. Many of those who believed now came and openly confessed what they had done. A number who had practiced sorcery brought their scrolls together and burned them publicly. When they calculated the value of the scrolls, the total came to 50,000 drachma. In this way the word of the Lord spread widely and grew in power. And then of course the next section is the riot over the temple. Chapter 20. When the uproar had ended, Paul sent for the disciples and after encouraging them, said goodbye and set out for Macedonia. He traveled through that area, speaking many words of encouragement to the people and finally arrived in Greece. There he stayed for three months. Because some of the Jews had plotted against him, just as he was about to sail for Syria, he decided to go back through Macedonia. Now a few weeks ago we talked about this collection and Paul was likely collecting money and so he's gathering people from all of these gentile churches to bring this donation, this gift for the poor in Jerusalem to go back to Jerusalem and this would in one way certainly help the poor but in another way give the Jewish Christians a sense of the value of this gentile ministry. Because of course there were a whole range of tensions between these Jewish Christians who basically saw Jesus as the fulfillment of the story of Israel and the gentile Christians who didn't have all of that background. He was accompanied by Sopater, son of Pyrrhus from Borea, Aristarchus and Segundas from Thessalonica, Gaius from Derbe, Timothy also Antichicus and Trophenus from the province of Asia. Now you see these Greek names, these are people that are very much from the Greek part of the empire but also notice the detail in all the names and then this other detail that comes next. These men went on to head and waited for us at Troas. In other words, Luke was going to join him probably from Philippi where it's quite likely that Luke was living. If you read the book of Acts quite carefully you notice that Luke is telling the story of Paul. Some of this story he didn't just know by the stories told from others but by eye witnesses and so the reason he could easily name these names is because he was there. We sailed from Philippi after the feast of unleavened bread and five days later joined the others at Troas where we sailed seven days. Now what we're beginning to see is sort of an interesting overlap between of course the Jewish practices that were in the church that sort of went out into the synagogues and then as we're going to see in the next verse, the emerging Christian practices. So you've got these two populations, you've got these two cultures and they're sort of organically mixing and matching to put together what would become the church. Now again Luke was possibly living in Philippi probably worshiping in the church founded by Lydia and you can read that story earlier in Paul's first missionary journey and you find again Derbe and many of these other places these were places that Paul had planted church. Now they had taken a collection and they were going to bring that collection to Jerusalem. Why no mention of the collection? It's something that a lot of scholars ask. Luke doesn't forefront the collection in the book of Acts for some reason but we clearly find it in the letter to the Galatians, we find it in the books, the letters to the Corinthians and we find it in Paul's letter to the Romans and so there's obvious some tension that we'll never understand between Paul and Luke with respect to this collection. But so then they all meet at Troas and Troas becomes the setting for the story that we're about to hear and you can see here on the map that Ephesus you can make your way sort of up the coast, up the road to Pergamum and then you've got Philippi and now actually Paul will go back up into there instead of going down to Syria. Now when he says he's going down to Syria that would lead eventually down to Jerusalem and Paul with the collection to the saints in Jerusalem. And then verse 7 says this, on the first day of the week we came together to break bread. Right there you see the emergence of Christian practice around the Lord's Supper or the Eucharist and this is being practiced on the first day of the week. Well why the first day of the week? Because this is the day of resurrection and whereas the Jews of course had their Sabbath on the Sabbath, Christians are coming together with this practice to break bread on the first day of the week and this is very early and Paul and Luke basically throws it out rather unselfconsciously because well this is what the Christians do and we see it's already forming the church as of course we know it today. Paul spoke to the people and because he intended to leave the next day kept on talking till midnight. Paul likes to talk. Twenty years after Christ this practice is already a ritual assumed by the followers. Again Luke mentions sort of nonchalantly. There's no animal sacrifice. You don't get the sense that this is synagogue worship. Already a practice of Christian communal remembering and remembrance of me is already taking place in the church very early. There are many lamps in the upstairs room where we, again Luke is an eyewitness to all of this, where we were meeting. Seated in a window was a young man named Eudicus. Now Eudicus in Greek basically means lucky or fortunate who was sinking into a deep sleep as Paul talked on and on so already we not only have the practice of the Lord's Supper we have the practice of long-winded preachers. When he was sound asleep he fell to the ground from the third story and was picked up dead. So here Paul obviously wanted to make the most of his time going on and on into the night goes on and on and this young man probably a warm room the smell of these torches and this burned oil sort of filling the room falls asleep and falls to his death onto the street below. Now this is no legend, this is no story sort of passed one hand to another. Luke is the eyewitness to all of this and he's very clear with it. This is his letter to, you know, the second letter to Theophilus saying these are the stories of Paul. This is how the church got going. Paul went down threw himself on the young man and put his arms around him. Now many have noted that this is reminiscent of Elijah and Elisha and raising the dead in the Book of Kings in the Old Testament. Don't be alarmed he said he's alive. Then he went upstairs again and broke bread and ate. After talking until daylight he left. In other words the service goes all night long and even this tragedy and miracle in the middle of it doesn't interrupt it and the party continues. The love feast if they ate more. Again we talked about the love feast and the Lord's Supper and the sermon about 1 Corinthians 11. The people took the young man home alive and were greatly comforted and everything was good. Here's this story in the Book of Acts that is sort of told almost nonchalantly. It's certainly a story that everyone in the region would have heard about and again it's one of these miracle stories like Bart Ehrman noted in his book about the victory of Christianity. People would hear these stories and they would begin to wonder and they would begin to think and Christianity would have credibility in this world because well there's power in this name as we saw already and there's power in this community and there's power in some of these people like Peter and like Paul. The story is also laden with symbolism and again the symbolism doesn't take anything away from the historical quality of the story but the story is laden with it. This is the first day of the week. This is the day that they are celebrating the resurrection of Jesus and what better way to celebrate it than a resurrection or a restoration of a young man. The man falls to his death and he is restored like Jesus restored Lazarus like Peter restored Dorcas and now Paul with Eutychus and you can see the pattern developing in Luke that even among the Christians death no longer has the grip that it used to have. The story is just so real in the particulars it's not embroidered. NT Wright had made the comment about the resurrection stories about Jesus being not embroidered yet these stories of these other resurrections like Lazarus and Dorcas and Eutychus there have a different quality they sort of resonate with Jesus resurrection but Jesus resurrection is of a class and category that is different from these because of course Lazarus Dorcas and Eutychus would go on to die. But this is the way that the spirit sort of sneaks into the world sort of taking people by surprise not overpowering but just setting them to wonder and setting them to explore and bit by bit by bit Christ makes his way into the culture and begins to conquer the communities and this very much is the pattern and the story that we will see through history it's not by force or coercion it's by love and mercy and power. These are stories that the neighbors very much believe because they believe it from people that they believe are credible and now skeptics might scoff and others might We of course had doubting Thomas about the resurrection of Jesus but on and on it goes bit by bit person by person the Holy Spirit is doing a surprising work. I think this is important in our time when Christians are anxious about the future of the church when we buy into these subtraction stories again I would say that if you look at the history of the church these kinds of comings and goings rising and ebbing seem to be the way that the spirit works in the world to plant his church and bring faith and the way that the Holy Spirit is in fact governing over human history. Paul has built a network of love all of these little groups that are they're not building big temples they're not putting up statues they're not putting on a big show like all of what the pagan temples would do it's people loving one another it's people loving the stranger. This is God's power manifest in surprising ways that real people really believe. Now again not everyone who will die accidentally in the course of a Christian worship service will be raised but yet here is this just like all of the other miracles here is this sample here is this pointing remember Eudicus raised up again from the dead on resurrection day at the breaking of the bread all of the things sort of resonate around it and it leaves us wondering and pondering and this becomes sort of the fertile space in which faith begins to grow among us. One young man named Lucky of all things was fortunate enough to host a moment that helped the community believe in God's power to save God's power to rescue to redeem and renew. Now what we do on Sunday is very much in line with what happens and what happened in that probably someone's home in Troas where Lucky was in one moment seen as unfortunate and the next moment seen as the most fortunate. The humble simple communion that stretches through the centuries the communion that speaks to us of God's self donation of giving us his son as a guilt offering to make us free of giving of ourselves to each other which is what we do in the church. It's the body life of the church even if the preacher drones on and on for too long and we fall asleep. God is with us his kingdom come his will be done on earth as it is in heaven remains God's mission and where we place our faith. Amen.