https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Ii1A5DcrBl0

 Hi, this is Paul. And a couple of years ago now, I had a conversation with Sherry Harkin, who was very interested in starting an arts group. And that arts group did in fact start, and they have been working, they have a Discord together, and they've been working and meeting online. And just Caleb has been on the channel a couple of times, and he reached out to me and said that they're getting to a point of looking for some more attention for a specific project. And so I thought it'd be a good chance to bring in a bunch of people from the group to give us a little bit of update on the group and what they're doing. And then also we can take a look at this project that they've got on Indiegogo. So thank you all for joining me today. So Caleb, before each of you sort of has a chance to talk about yourself and what you're interested in and your participation in this group, why don't you, because you were right there, you know, almost right from the start with this group. Tell us a little bit about this group and what its goals are. Yeah, so this is a group sort of bubbling up out of Bridges of Meeting that was started by Sherry Harkins. And our kind of our two main goals are to engage with the meaning crisis and to explore things sort of theologically and philosophically in a way that dovetails into our art. And the main reason for that is because Sherry felt that there aren't many places in the art world where you can talk about spirituality and faith in your art and how it influences what you're doing. And so she gathered a bunch of like-minded artists who are wanting to be able to explore that more openly. And then the second thing is we're working together to try and share ideas and kind of cross-pollinate and hopefully produce more art out of these interactions and connections and exploring some of the themes that we're discussing through work like the meaning crisis and Peugeot's work and your work and a plethora of other more French sources. So that's kind of the gist of what we do. Okay, okay. And Caleb, you got in this fairly quickly after Sherry and I did our event, but let's hear from some of the rest of you. And when did you get in? Why did you get in? What's your story? What's your story? Why did you get in? What's been your experience? What kind of things are you working on? Anybody can go first. I'll go first. Actually from all of us, I kind of joined last, but you know, the last should be first, right? So yeah, I joined because of Caleb, you know, I met him through the Orthodox Church. It's been a very interesting year for me last year. Joining all of these fellow artists who are also trying to deal with the meaning crisis and trying to find a way of bringing the logos into their art and kind of transferring that to other people. So for me, just being a great experience, just talking with them and sharing ideas. And we're basically trying to figure out, you know, what more can we build together and where, you know, where are we heading with this? But I feel that we have talent. I feel that something great is going to come. So it's just a very exciting opportunity. Okay, wonderful. What kind of art do you do? Right. So I do film. Recently, maybe some of your viewers had seen Derpoo Robin's. I made a short film slash music video in collaboration with them. And, you know, I'm just thrilled, thrilled about the whole thing. So just film and screenwriting. So that's the things that I'm focusing on right now. Okay, great. Thank you. Who's next? Well, I guess I'll go next. I got invited by another member who is not here with us right now. Just to, it was matched as some kind of art discussion group. I thought this is interesting. And when I joined, it was so, you know, such an experience. I think kind of a jack of all trades, master of none in terms of art, you know, doing various things, music and stuff. But when I started studying film studies, which also came with literature studies, I really sort of started taking art more seriously. And then I also got asked by someone to help them in a project to design Christian video games. So the seriousness really ramped up. And this art group has been for me, just excellent in terms of discussing all kinds of ideas. Yeah, just really staying in that sort of enchanted world in a way. Okay, and you live and work in the Netherlands? Yes. Okay. Okay. Wonderful. Okay. Miranda. Yeah. Yeah, I'm Miranda. I'm an animator by trade. And I also do illustration. I'm from Ottawa, Canada. I've been coming almost from the beginning as well. I think I've joined like the third or fourth meeting or something. I heard about it through your channel, because I listened to a lot of you while I work, which is nice. Yeah, I found it very, very helpful in terms of like, connecting the faith aspect and the art aspect, and having discussions about things that you don't often get to discuss in the art community. And also looking for like a higher purpose in the art that I do. And so I really find it quite important and quite good, this group. Okay. So how many, have there been many collective projects that all of you have done together? Or is this mostly you're talking about things and you take what you learn back to your own specific projects? Thus far, it's definitely been more of the latter. It's been influencing each other. There's been a little bit of collaboration and working on projects together. But as far as doing like a big cohesive project, we're just in the early stages of our first major project together. Okay. And this project that you want to talk about, is that project of this first major thing you're putting together? Not so much. It's more so my first major project in sort of answering the call to artists personally. But it dovetails with the art gallery that we're trying to put together, which is the big project. Okay. Okay. Well, let me share the screen and now this is the, no, that doesn't help me. Oh, zoom. Let's see. Share screen. I want to share this screen or maybe it's this screen. There we go. Does that work? What do you, do you see any or you see zoom? Yeah, we're seeing it. Oh, you're seeing that you're seeing the project. Yes. Okay, good. So, tell me about this thing. So this is a short film that I'm currently in pre-production on. It really started, this was very early in sort of the meaning crisis for me personally. I think I started developing the idea for this even before my first discussion with you or my first meeting with the art group. And it was inspired by an essay that Jordan Peterson did. I think it may have been in one of the chapters in 12 Rules for Life, but he did a video on it where he read the entire essay. And it had like a really profound effect on me when he was discussing the paeda and the suffering and how you can see kind of the pinnacle of all suffering in this one image. And I thought about that for a really long time. And Akira the Don had done a really great song using that essay. And I listened to it for hours and hours and hours and was thinking about it and thinking about it. And this was something that I had tried to get made in the film school world and just met a mountain of resistance, sort of like a strange sort of resistance where before I even got the first sentence of my pitch out, I would sort of be told no or it couldn't work. And I never got to explain theme or world or anything like that. But I wanted to make this film that was very much steeped in the development of Christian art and like the long history of Christian art and sort of played with some of the different interpretations and was less of a sort of, I don't know, evangelical tract and was more of just a piece of illuminated art. And so I was looking a lot at like Caravaggio's work and Michelangelo's work. And I was like, I just want to make a piece that explores theme and the essence of part of a scripture, of part of a Christian story without trying to win anybody over or tell the entire story in its scope, but just show how rich the text and the themes are. And so this is a film that is built entirely around the paeta and it's kind of the pinnacle moment of the film. And I could go on and on, so I'll try not to go on too long about it, but we're playing with nonlinear time, which is a really interesting film mechanic that isn't used super often, but is used really effectively in films like Arrival or Memento or The Prestige, where you can play with the audience's perception of time to help reveal things that they otherwise would just gloss over in a film. And so we're trying to do that here because we feel like it's very representative of the idea of divine time and how there are two different experiences of time, sort of the divine and then the personal, and we don't really understand the divine. And I thought this mechanic was a great way to show the way God sort of touches the material world and transforms it. So those are some of the things we're playing with here. Very interesting. And any of the rest of you, any thoughts on this? I wanted to be able to, we'll put the link below, you'll have to send me the link to your group that people can participate. I've got to figure out how to, all right, here we go. How we can get back to sort of normal view. Any of the rest of you working on this or have thoughts on this project? So Caleb sent me the script a little while ago, and he knows I can be very critical. I'm going to be honest. So I'm not saying this because I'm his friend, but honestly, when I read the script, I was like, this is one of the best Gospel themed things I've read, period. And I don't say that lightly, and he knows it. But I think one of the great things that he's doing with this project is that he's not simply just showing us like scenes from the Gospel, but he's giving us a perspective, right? And I think that's something that we're trying to deal with. It's a matter of perspective, you know, the modern perspective versus the traditional Christian perspective. So, you know, we can look at the Gospel and if we see it with the wrong perspective, we might take something wrong out of it, right? And I know he's not trying to focus so much on like giving like a doctrinal, you know, statement or anything like that. But I feel that what he's trying to do with the concept of time and the way that he's linking the scenes in terms of theme and meaning and symbolism, it's something that touches more the core of the Gospel, I think, than just merely just trying to retell the story like it has been done before. He's trying to touch the, like what's behind the letter rather than just describe in visual form what the letter is saying. So I find that that's really interesting. I think that when people begin to get immersed in the film, I think they're going to start not just looking at the Gospel differently when they start reading the text again, but I think they would just like start thinking about their lives differently, which I think it's, I know it's a lot of like high praise, but honestly, I think that he's going to be able to do that with this project. Now, when this thing comes out, how will people be able to see it? So at some point, we're going to have it public for free for everyone to see, but we're going to be sending it to our backers first and letting them see it in advance. We'll do some screenings of it, and then one of the things we're trying to do that is a new venture for me, so it's something that we're needing a lot of help on, is we're trying to connect with churches and art groups and church groups and make it free and available to them first so that they can do screenings of it, discussions, things like that, because one of the big things with this project is we're trying to do fundraising, not just to help us make the film, because if we did the work and took a lot longer to do it and everything, we could probably clear it ourselves in the long run, but we want to get people involved because we want to play with the patron form of art and like we want to create art in service of the community that actually serves a purpose and they can engage with it, and then we sort of create a relationship between the artist and the community where I'm directly working with the community to try to bring them something that they're already sort of needing and wanting to engage with and to have this kind of dialogue process in art again rather than just a sort of a commercial approach. So how can people be involved in this? Through supporting us and sharing it, obviously, but then if you are part of any church, community, art group that is interested in a project like this, they can reach out to me directly. We're trying to put together a network of groups and contact lists so that we can send the film out as soon as it's done and engage with people directly. What was their response to it? What was their community's response to it? What questions came out of it? That sort of thing, because ultimately we'd like to build a network of people through this process so that we can also help bring more people's art to light and start getting people focused more communally on working within a group and serving each other and sort of building kind of an alternative economy for art and meaning, I guess. Okay, that's exciting. Any idea when you hope for this time to be out and finished? I mean, obviously the themes look like they would match with Holy Week coming up, but I don't know what kind of timeline you're working on. That's actually my hope. From the previous project that I did that was of the scale, I know that I can do this project within a year. I'm hoping to do it even quicker, but I'd really like to start production in March and then have it coming to our audience next Lent and around that time. If not then, then our next thing that we would be aiming for is either Mother's Day or the door mission because those are all essential themes of the film. Okay, super. Anything else you guys wanted to say or do or promote or talk about? I do want to promote real quick. I just want to shout out Mudhut, Emily Verdun for the amazing artwork that she produced for this. That artwork that people saw is a piece that I commissioned from her so that we can try to start this process of working together and getting people involved directly. Yeah, the art on this is really something. I mean, this one in particular just really strikes me. That's the one that Emily did. Yeah, that's really powerful. This is very exciting. I'm just terrifically excited that I've had at least a tiny little hand in the process of the community coming together and then seeing the fruit that is coming out of it. That's just tremendously exciting. Yeah, I mean, you guys were the ones starting this. So you guys, whenever it comes out of here, it's a bit of your fault, okay? Just the same. It might get me in trouble in some way. Who knows? Well, wonderful. Well, thank you all for taking some time and being willing to come in here and share a little bit of what's going on. Caleb, make sure you send me, you know, I've got the link to this obviously, but any other links that you might want people to have. If any of you have other work that you'd like me to put links down here in the show notes, please do so. I'm going to put links down here in the show notes. Please do. I'd love to see this, you know, again, two years, not everything you start ever succeeds, but to have you guys still doing this and watching it thrive and hearing about more things you're putting together, just very exciting. I would like to just plug what we're doing on the bigger picture because we'd like more people to get involved with this. This is sort of just a first fruit, but we're looking at Sherry's trying to organize an entire gallery on the book of Exodus, and we're in the early stages of creating art for that as well. And one of the things we're really wanting to do, the philosophy I'm bringing to this, we want to bring to our entire process, and we're right now workshopping how to create a really strong network for artists so that people can find them, their voices are amplified, and we're able to sort of mutually mentorship each other so that we can sort of produce more capable artists for this whole process. And so we'd really like people to get engaged with us in that way. And if that's interesting to anybody, if you're interested in that, we'd love to hear from you. And so interesting to anybody, we're looking to do a lot more projects like this in the future. Wow. That's just super exciting. So, great. So, yeah. Caleb, send me the links. Anything you guys want to send me, send me. We'll put it in the notes. And thank you all for jumping in here and being willing to share. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you for having us.