https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=kofO9YP84Rs

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Rough Draft for Friday. This year, Christmas falls on a Tuesday, which means Christmas Eve is on a Monday, which means we're not going to have a service on Christmas Eve. We just have our Sunday service. And so this is my Christmas sermon, and it's going to fall on Sunday, the day before Christmas Eve. A number of people sent me Jaco Willink's Christmas Truce 2014. This is why I do a rough draft. 1914. And Akira the Don, who does some really cool stuff with with Jordan Peterson and some other people in terms of in terms of music that a really cool mashup of Jaco Willink reading a note by Henry. Oh no, I see that. I don't have it in front of me. Will... it comes up later in my in my in my PowerPoint here. This is a very famous truce in 1914 and you'll find this truce retold and it's this lovely story of the of the Germans and the English and the French creeping up out of the out of the trenches to to celebrate Christmas together. Now, I don't think this would ever happen outside of Christendom. And, and in some ways, the the Christmas truce of 2014 was the last gasp of an old Christendom that wouldn't be seen during the war in 1915 1617 18 or 19. It was very famous. Snoopy and the Red Bear and I remember a song growing up about about that Christmas truce. They played soccer and all this is a beautiful, beautiful story. The truce was spontaneous and done by foot soldiers. It didn't happen everywhere. There was plenty of fighting in other parts of the line. It seemed to often be started by the Germans, who, at least for people on the other side of the Germans think, well, they're evil. Why would the Germans start Germany was a very, very Christian nation. Followed by strict orders against fraternizing with the enemy, the officers made sure that the truth ended so they could get back to the bloody business of killing each other. And if you read at least the Wikipedia entry on this truce, you know, there's always soldiers who didn't want to fight. And and normally we call those soldiers cowards. And and here's the thing we like to imagine. Well, well, why couldn't we just end the war right then and there? Well, how do you think the Belgians would have been would have felt? How do you think the Belgian farmers that whose land has now been dug up and was full of corpses and that land didn't just materialize out of thin air? OK, truce. But but what would the truce mean? In other words, the truce would have to scale up and the truce would have to, in fact, encompass the whole world for for the truce. This this this romantic, this beautiful vision that we have of of somehow if if we could only if that one moment could somehow could somehow as a as a wonderful virus infect the rest of the world and we'd have no more war. That's in a sense the face to face fantasy. And we indulge in it often. And it's often the idea that, well, if if it's all these structures that evil comes from, this is this is basically from romanticism and Rousseau, that it's all these these structures that evil comes from. And and we and ourselves, we're naturally good and pure. And and we don't want to hurt anyone. But it's all these evil structures that make us do it that the devil makes us do it. And the evil structures are the devil. That's not true. Because if you look at the fiercest hatreds, they often almost they often start at home that some of the fiercest hatreds are face to face. You know, it's whenever a often a woman shows up, you know, winds up missing or dead. Suspect number one is the husband or boyfriend. Well, why? You know, years before they they stood before they stood before their friends and relatives and vowed undying love. And now they can't stand each other. About half of those situations end in divorce, right? Less than half. We invest in larger structures in order to amplify power in order to achieve things that strict trickle down to our individual welfare. That's why we invest in families and marriages and governments and businesses and and institutions and in all those things. And the idea that, well, if we could get rid of all those things, everything would be great. It's just not true. Why don't you go ahead and turn off the electricity and grow your own food and and go out to some wilderness? Now, some people do it and some people do very well at it and enjoy it. But for the most part, we all like our civilization. And so we embrace it. So let's not indulge in any fantasies of the face to face idea that that evil just comes from structures and groups of people. It comes from inside of each of our hearts. Now, at Christmas time, we love to take snippets of the prophets. And in a sense, the the common lectionary that gives us our text today gives us some of that. But you, Bethlehem, though you are small among the clans of Judah, out of you will come for me one who will rule over Israel, one whose origins are from of old from ancient times. But we seldom keep reading. Therefore, Israel will be abandoned until the time when she who is in labor bears a son and the rest of his brothers return to join the Israelites. He will stand and shepherd his flock in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the Lord, his God, and they will live securely. For then his greatness will reach to the ends of the earth. That's beautiful. It's eschatological. It frames up and scales up large. Now, it's found in the Book of Micah, and the Book of Micah is a fierce book. It's a book of it's a book against the sin in Judah. Bail and Asherah worship brought down from from Israel and Samaria, corrupting Judah, corruption and oppression of the powerful against the poor and the weak. And the image of God in the Book of Micah is God splitting the clouds and coming down to earth because he's going to clean house and he's going to wreak havoc because those who are supposed to be his representatives have failed in their mission to rightly represent him to the rest of this rebellious world. And so God is not going to allow his name and his reputation to be sullied by rebellious Israel and Judah. And so we see Assyrian troops and Babylonian troops coming in and it's the day of the Lord. It's the day where God shows up and finally sets things straight at the cost and the blood of all of the rebellious. If you know anything about John the Baptist, this is what he was envisioning. The book starts this way. The word of the Lord came to Micah of Morisheth during the reign of Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, good and bad kings, kings of Judah. The vision he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem. Hear you people, all of you listen, earth and all who live in it that the sovereign Lord may bear witness against you. The Lord from his holy temple. Look, the Lord is coming from his dwelling place. He comes down and treads on the heights of the earth. The mountains melt beneath him and the valleys split apart like wax before the fire, like water rushes down a slope. All this is because of Jacob's transgression, because of the sins of the people Israel. What is Jacob's transgression? Is it not Samaria? What is Judah's high place? Is it not Jerusalem? Therefore, I will make Samaria a heap of rubble, a place of planting vineyards. I will pour her stones into the valleys and lay bare her foundations. All her idols will be broken to pieces. All her temple gifts will be burned with fire. I will destroy all her images since she gathered her gifts from the wages of prostitutes as the wages of prostitutes, they will again be used. This usually doesn't show up on the Christmas card. If you keep reading from where we did read the Christmas card passage, look at what it says about this one who will come out of Bethlehem. And he will be our peace when the Assyrians invade our land and march against our fortresses. He will raise against, he will raise against them seven shepherds, even eight commanders, who will rule the land of Assyria with the sword, the land of Nibran with drawn sword. He will deliver us from the Assyrians when they invade our lands and march across our borders. We should be pretty understanding to those who received Jesus in the Galilee and in Judea during the Roman period for expecting exactly this. This is exactly what Micah says. So where is this Messiah that will deliver his people from the tyrants? Henry Williamson writes on the Christmas truce. The shallowest graves were dug, filled and set with crosses knocked together from lengths of ration box wood, marked with indelible pencil for God and country. Ver Vaterland und, I can't, I don't know German, und Feithheit, God and country, I suppose. Fatherland and Feithheit? Some German who knows German in the comments will let me know. Fatherland and freedom. Freedom? How was this? We were fighting for freedom. Our cause was just. We were defending Belgium, civilization. These fellows in gray were good fellows. They were strangely just like ourselves. And now we kind of have the brotherhood of man vision. And so our different systems come together and we're trying to make sense of them. How can we lose the war, English comrade? Our cause is just. We were ringed with enemies. The war was thrust on us. We are defending our parents, our homes, our German soil. A most shaky, staggering thought that both sides thought they were fighting for the same cause. One of the most interesting books I ever read on World War I was Philip Jenkins, A Great and Holy War. How World War I became a religious crusade. A most shaking, staggering thought that both sides thought they were fighting for the same cause. The war was a terrible mistake. People at home did not know this. Are we really that innocent? Do we really not know? Are we really not that aggressive? Are we really not that activistic and moralistic that we imagine we should kill for the reasons that we find just? Then the idea came to the young and callow soldier that if only he could tell them at home what was really happening. And if the German soldiers told their people the truth about us, the war would be over. But we hardly dared to think it even to himself. Doesn't that happen in every war? Aren't there voices that cry out and say, this is a bad idea, this is terrible? Yet we fight them. Well, Jocko Willink, former Green Beret silver and bronze star. You know, decorated veteran in Iraq. The Iraq War. Do we really know? Is it just information? These momentary truces, do they somehow reveal the truth? Because this group of World War I soldiers felt betrayed by their leaders' 1919 truth. You can probably recognize one of them in the middle. And you know where that led. This time of year I so often think of one of my favorite Christmas songs, which is Bayou 2, which isn't really a Christmas song. Peace on Earth. Heaven on Earth. We need it now. I'm sick of all this hanging around. Sick of sorrow, sick of pain, sick of hearing it again and again that there's going to be peace on Earth. Can we believe this? Or will this just continue until we kill each other? In those days, Caesar Augustus, ruler of the world by force, issued a decree, not a suggestion, that a census should be taken in the entire Roman world for taxation. This was the first census that took place while Quirinius was governor of Syria, and everyone went to their town to be registered. So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth and Galilee to Judea, to Bethlehem, the town of David, because he belonged to the house and the line of David. He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child. While they were there, the time came for the baby to be born. And there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night. An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified. But the angel said to them, Do not be afraid. Angels were considered warriors from heaven. Do not be afraid. This is not God rending the skies to take your blood. I bring you good news that will cause great joy for all people. This isn't just for you, chosen people. This is for the whole world. Today, in the town of David, a Savior has been born to you. He is the Messiah, the Lord. This will be a sign to you. You will find a baby wrapped in cloths, lying in a manger. Suddenly, a great company of heavenly hosts appeared with the angel, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace for those on whom his favor rests. Peace on earth. We need it now. We long for the angel's song to finally come fully. We long for the truth to actually scale out. When the angels had left and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, Let us go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about. So they hurried off and found Mary and Joseph and the baby, who were lying in the manger. When they had seen them, they spread the word concerning what had been told them about this child. And all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them. But Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart. The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, which were just as they had been told. Now hope in mere sentiment evaporates. The detruse was a beautiful thing, but it didn't last. And it wasn't going to last because all of those soldiers were connected with way too much. And we are not anywhere near as innocent as we would like to imagine we are. And that's true way down at the local level. And it's true all the way to the heights of government. It's true through and through. We need a peace from top to bottom. Nothing short than a renovation of everything. And this is not something within our power. God parted the skies. His answer wasn't Babylonian armies. His answer wasn't the God of war. Angels sang. The shepherds and the mother wondered. The baby would grow to bear judgment rather than bring judgment at first. How should we respond? The truce is beautiful. It's exactly the proper response of gratitude. And there even in their culture that brought about war, there was enough of Christianity left on both sides that they would say, this day is special. Let's make it holy. But you would know that it wouldn't happen in 1915 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19. And even the truce would go on to lead to another war. Because at Versailles, they didn't turn swords into plowshares or spears into pruning hooks. You know in that truce in 1914, someone had to be the first to step into no man's land. And I wouldn't be surprised if someone tried it and got shot. I'm sure there were shots fired and some missteps. Many lose, so we lose many battles. And to be the first often means to be shot. But we try to bear witness to Jesus' costly form of peace on earth. Typo. And you might say, well how can you have the courage to do this? Because if you actually practice this in most truces, you get shot. And in many places in the world, you get killed. Well, that's why if you anticipate the resurrection, this is in fact something you can give your life for. And I'm sure there were Germans and Englishmen in that truce. And they knew when they stepped out into that field, they were doing so at the risk of their life to bear witness to something they could barely understand. But did it nevertheless. And that momentary truce was a witness. It wasn't the reality. We weren't ready for the reality. It was a witness to an age to come. That's what we're able to do. That's what we're able to begin to believe in. And that's what we're called. That's how we're called to live our lives.