https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=js0s9z3h4K0

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. These two people were very famous in the 60s and 70s. Achievements and gifts run in an interesting economy together. Both of these people obviously had genetics that gifted them for what they would be known for. Achievements, if you look at Arnold and his bodybuilding, I don't know to what degree chemicals were used back in the day, but he, yeah, a lot of hours in the gym, a lot of working on diet, a lot of a lot of a lot of. I'm not going to say Rockwell Welch didn't put in the hours in terms of beauty and image and all of those things, but I look at these two and I see gifts and achievements. Now almost everyone who achieves something has received a certain degree of giftedness in order to achieve that. There's the getting discovered, the time and the place, the look, all of those things are beyond our control, but then there's the work that someone puts in. Rockwell Welch died this year, February of 2023. This was a picture taken of her and whereas people probably wouldn't have looked twice at this, basically in comparison to what she used to look like, well, the age of decay wreaks havoc. Arnold too continues apparently surreptitiously to get his picture taken without his shirt on, but like I said, the age of decay does its thing. Over the course of time, gifts and achievements might look different in terms of how we value them and what they mean to us. We've been reading the book of Philippians and depending on whether you look at N.T. Wright, who thinks that Paul was perhaps imprisoned in Ephesus and then wrote the church in Philippi or Paul imprisoned in Rome towards the end of his life and then wrote the church in Philippi, he is an older man now looking back on his years, his achievements, his gifts and he's doing some summing up and some evaluating. He's probably not going to be taking the kinds of missionary trips he used to take. He's probably not going to cause riots in cities the way he used to. He is in chains and well, of course, depending on the timeline for this, he might have, well, not that much time left. And he's writing to churches to try to encourage them and strengthen them and secure them and to consolidate what he has done before. He's praying for them, he loves them and he wants them to flourish. And he sees his own life as an archetype for the overall journey of the Christian. He's exhorting them to live out the story of Christ found in the Christ song that we talked about last week, who being in very nature, God did not consider equality with God as something to be used to his own advantage but became a servant to all until death on a cross and was raised to the highest place that it is named, every knee shall bow. So we pick it up in chapter three. Further, my brothers and sisters, rejoice in the Lord. It is no trouble for me to write the same things to you again and it is a safeguard for you. Watch out for those dogs, those evildoers, those mutilators of the flesh. Now, this catches a lot of biblical interpreters with a bit of confusion because he's writing to Philippi. And if you go back in the book of Acts and look how the Philippian church started, it was one of these towns in which there wasn't a synagogue at all. There were some God-fearing women who were meeting down by the river and Lydia seemed to be their leader and Paul received her hospitality and took and was welcomed into her home. But is there a real conflict among the Jews in that town with respect to Jewish practices and circumcision and dietary restrictions and the ways that they distinguish themselves from the rest of the Roman population? Now, it could be that there was a sudden emergence of teachers. We know that different teachers that were very interested in Jesus and were also Jews were sort of circulating among these new churches and maybe some had come through Philippi and maybe some had told them that they should, all of the men there should be circumcised. And well, Paul took a very strong stand against that. You can read about that in the book of Colossians. But part of the irony is that Paul himself is circumcised and Paul in fact circumcised Timothy, which is interesting. But of course, Timothy's mother was Jewish and so we're not going to get into the details of Paul's perspective on circumcision, but he has some strong words to say to the church at Philippi with respect to the insistence of some that they be circumcised. For it is we who are the circumcision. That's a very interesting thing. What he's clearly do is sort of saying circumcision is a symbol for something that goes beyond the physical reality of whether or not a person is circumcised. And so this circumcision in Paul's mind is true of both men and women, whereas of course only men could be circumcised. For it is we who are the circumcision. We who serve God by his spirit, who boast in Christ Jesus and who put no confidence in the flesh. Though I myself have such reason for such confidence. For if someone else thinks they have reason to put confidence in the flesh, I have more. Paul is saying that if these teachers that are going around telling all of the men they must be circumcised and the whole community they need to follow certain practices, even though they're Gentiles, Paul says no. I have some feelings about these practices and these practices themselves won't get you where you want to be and they won't get you where you should want to go. And in fact, for you to appeal to them would be stepping backwards in terms of your faith and your life in Christ Jesus. That's the point he makes in the book of Galatians. He's talking about himself. Circumcised on the eighth day of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews, in regard to the law of Pharisee, as for zeal, persecuting the church, as for righteousness based on the law, faultless. Paul looks back at his earlier stage of life before the road to Damascus incident and says, I worked this program hard. And what did it make me? He was gifted, born to God-chosen people. In terms of achievement, he worked to this program, he says, like no one else. Now while there was differentiation lines between Jews and Gentiles, the lines between Jew and Christian was by no means clear. Christian, of course, Jesus, of course, was a Jew. And the churches saw themselves as the fulfillment of God's plan to Israel for Jews and Gentiles alike. On what terms were Gentiles, however, included into the covenant? Now, Acts 15 gives a brief sketch, but obviously in the ups and downs of life, there are many more things that often need to be addressed. Now it's clear that Paul's journey in this was personal. He excelled at being zealous for the law as he understood it, and it made him an angry man hurting good people. For the rest of his life, he would look back at this period of persecution that he dealt to the church, and he felt great sorrow and grief over it. He indeed was zealous, and he pursued his achievements, and, well, while many celebrated those achievements, now he looked back on them with a completely different perspective. He was putting his confidence in this sort of zealous moral performance. He sees putting one's confidence in this sort of zealous moral performance as being future to become what he saw as futile, not future. This is why this is a rough draft. He sees putting one's confidence in this sort of zealous moral performance as being futile to become what he saw in Christ Jesus. But whatever were gains to me, I now consider loss for the sake of Christ. What is more, I consider everything a loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whose sake I have lost all things. I consider them garbage, that I may gain Christ and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness that comes from God on the basis of faith. I want to know Christ, yes, to know the power of his resurrection and participation in his In Christ he saw the pearl of great price. In Christ he saw something that all of his achievements couldn't yield. In Christ he saw something that was more beautiful, that was more powerful, that was more strong than all of the ideals that he had had before. For Christ his righteousness was a vision of himself as an angry zealot, destroying ideas by destroying the people hosting them. The vision of Christ's love so inhabits him that a new righteousness has moved him in a new direction. And this isn't a righteousness built up on very carefully following the observances. This is a righteousness that he believes he receives through Christ. He sees them in Christ. He finds them in Christ and by virtue of seeing them in Christ and finding them in Christ he receives them from Christ and he receives them through Christ. He is poured out, as he says in Philippians 2. He believes that this sacrifice of his will not be in vain and for this reason he writes to the Philippian churches and to the other churches. He anticipates that by participating in Christ's way of life he will participate in Christ's pattern of death and resurrection as well. Christ now has become his ideal, his goal, his love, his beauty. This is what everything is pointing to and he will let nothing get in the way. He remains a man full of zeal. That seems to be a personality feature of Paul. But now his zeal is redirected towards Christ Jesus. Not that I have already obtained all this or have already achieved at my goal, but I press on to take hold of that for which Christ Jesus took hold of me. Brothers and sisters, I do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it, but one thing I do, forgetting what is behind and straining towards what is ahead, I press on towards the goal to win the prize for which God has called me heavenward in Christ Jesus. I dare bet that Arnold in his prime would look at himself and say, I haven't quite reached the ideal. I bet that Raquel in her prime looked at herself and thought, I haven't quite reached the ideal. Paul looks at himself, compared to Christ, and says, I have not yet reached the ideal. Gifts and achievements live in a strange economy. Paul was given a gift. That was the road to Damascus. Paul was given a gift in our Adult Sunday School class when we start talking about Romans 9 this week. So those of you who follow the Adult Sunday School live stream, it will be on Sunday morning again, and I'll also post the Adult Sunday School class on my main channel as I was before the summer break. He wants to pursue an ideal, not and, he wants to pursue an ideal which is both gift and grows into achievement. In this case, it isn't muscles or beauty, but the muscular love and the beauty of Christ crucified. Now youthful strivings look different as time moves on. I don't know how Arnold Schwarzenegger, former governor of the state of California, feels about his young days. I'm sure he has mixed feelings. Whether it was his behavior or his performance or what he did to get there, I'm sure has many complex thoughts on it. I'm sure Raquel Welch, as she aged, had a lot of thoughts about the loss of her power and the beauty that she wielded. Maybe she got tired of the attention of men. Maybe she missed it. Youthful strivings look different as time moves on. Mixtures of gift and achievement of youth were assessed by their outcomes and some were found wanting. Age, loss, change, perspectives reoriented Paul's view of what was worth it and how he spent his time and what he used to long for and what fails to endure even in our short lifetimes. All of us, then, Paul writes, who are mature should take such a view of things. And if on some point you think differently, that too God will make clear to you. Only let us live up to what we have already attained. Join together in following my example, brothers and sisters, and just as you have us as a model, keep your eyes on those who live as we do. In other words, Paul says, I'm following Christ. If you haven't seen him the way I have, hopefully you will see him through me. For as often as I have told you before and now tell you again, even with tears, many live as enemies of the cross of Christ. Their destiny is destruction, their God is their stomach, and their glory is in their shame. Their mind is set on earthly things, but our citizenship is in heaven. And we eagerly await a Savior from there. The Lord Jesus Christ, who by the power that enables him to bring everything under his control will transform our lowly bodies so that they will be like his glorious body. Now there certainly was glory in youth, and that was gift, and of course achievement, and that glory of youth fades with the age of decay and with time. Paul reminds his people, whether they are slave or free, whether they live in comfortable circumstance or difficult circumstance, our citizenship is in heaven. That is where our primary identity is kept. And we eagerly await a Savior from there. The Lord Christ Jesus, who by the power that enables him to bring everything under his control will transform our lowly bodies so that they will be like his glorious body. We will be like him. Will we be strong? Yes. Will we be beautiful? Yes. What exactly will it be like? It will be like this, and it will not be like this. It will be glorious. It will be more fully spiritual than we can attain here. Yet it will also, obviously, be at least as physical as we are now, and even were in our youth. Therefore, do not lose heart. Though outwardly we are wasting away, yet inwardly we are being renewed day by day. For our light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory that far outweighs them all. So we fix our eyes not on what is seen, but what is unseen, since what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal. The giftedness and the ability to achieve were given as signs of one day becoming more than what we have been. Youth is but a beginning. Wisdom can replace beauty. In the resurrection, all the gifts will be brought to completion. The best is yet to come. Amen. Amen.