https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=zNJe9-JdJRs

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a very special guest today, Dr. Nathan Jacobs. I first became aware of him watching a video from the Orthodox Church in America, I believe, a three, actually, Luke, who I'm going to talk to later today, sent me a link to these videos and I was absolutely intrigued by them. And then I watched the movie that he made, Becoming Fully Human, and I learned that he had spent time at Calvin Seminary and Calvin College where I am from and so I knew I simply had to talk to Nathan. And so that's what we're going to do today. So Nathan and I, we had a brief phone call before where we got to know each other a little bit but we really haven't spoken much. And so, Nathan, I really appreciate you taking the time to talk to me today. Yeah, my pleasure. Well, I appreciate you taking the time to watch some very long lectures and then proceed to actually look at them with some amount of depth on your own channel. I'm always impressed whenever somebody says, oh, I watched your lectures and I thought, really, I was exhausted just giving those. I can imagine listening to an hour and a half, you know, but anyway. I thought they were wonderful. I thought they were terrific. They were very much right at my alley. Part of the beauty of having a YouTube channel is that I have these people out there who, when they see something that they think I'll like, they send it to me and often they're right. One of the things that I did laugh at quite a bit during those lectures, I don't know who did the recording, but there are a lot of shots of the back of the heads of the listeners and if you get a bunch of priests and people my age, you get a bunch of bald spots and gray hair. The cinematography was quite dramatic for those people. I love that sort of thing. Okay. Well, fair enough. I was not involved in the cinematography. That was ancient faith there. And so if you like it or didn't like it, you know, I'll leave that between you and ancient faith. I just, I was there to speak. That was my job. Well, I was so completely intrigued not only by your presentation, but also by your film and by your story. So I thought maybe a good place to start the conversation today for those who haven't had the benefit of watching your movie yet. I think probably after this, some folks will find it on Amazon Prime, which so you can, if you have Amazon Prime, you can just watch it. You don't have to buy it. Why don't we, you went into quite a bit of depth about your story and the premise of talking to nuns and dons of which you considered yourself one of them. Could you give us a little aversion of your story and, you know, how you came to faith and faith in the practice in the Orthodox Church? I mean, it's a very interesting story to me. Yeah. Well, I'm glad it's interesting. We'll see if anybody else finds it interesting. Trust me. Trust me. So I was raised in the, my mom was Missouri Senate Lutheran. And so I come from a long line of German Lutherans on her side, taught growing up that, you know, the Roman Catholic Church was the Antichrist and things like that. It was very conservative Lutheran. And whereas on my dad's side, he was not really somebody who practiced anything, at least when I was growing up. I think he started to have his own faith journey in recent years. As a child, I really had no idea if what he believed, you know, about God or religion or any, as I said in the film, I knew what he thought about unions. I knew what he thought about politicians, but about God and the meaning of life, I wasn't so sure. And as I got to know him, as I got older, I realized that his mother was very deeply religious, but in this sort of Missouri, backwoods sort of Missouri Pentecostal sort of way. And then his dad was a complete pagan. So you know, he came from a mixed family as well. And I think how that played out is he had some vague sense of spirituality, but it wasn't really a fully formed sense of spirituality. And then he certainly deferred to my mom in terms of all matters of religion for raising the kids. And she sent me to a private Lutheran school growing up. So I was catechized in the Lutheran Church and, you know, communed and confirmed in the Lutheran Church. And I just kind of took that all as a default. But for me, I don't know how much exposure you have to Lutherans, but growing up, my impression was the only thing that mattered in terms of religion, what it boiled, what Christianity boiled down to, as far as I knew, was that if you think that you can earn God's favor, that's detrimental to your soul. What's important to understand is that Jesus died for your sins. And there's a pretty specific understanding of what that means. And as long as you believe that all is well. And really, that's the sum total of being a Christian, which left me with a big question, Mark, of what do you do? Like, I mean, I guess, OK, check. I believe that. Now I guess I'll go just live my life like a heathen. And which is exactly what I actually did. And that's why I think a lot of the spirituality started to fall away because it had no real substantive practice behind it. It just had a basic believe this one premise or conclusion, I suppose, and everything. And that's kind of it. You're all set. And yet, with that, one of the things that I think was perhaps a little more unique to me, maybe not, but my impression talking to other nuns and duns is this was a little more unique to me. My mom was deeply concerned about apologetics. So she would introduce me to certain Christian apologists when I would press on a question, which was pretty normal in our family. We would debate. You sit around the coffee table, dinner table, pounding the table, arguing about things. That was just normal family conversation. I actually remember my wife, whose family quite literally talks about the weather. I didn't know. I thought that was a saying. I didn't know there were people who actually talked about the weather until I first met her family. And they said, you know, big storm came through last weekend. They're really talking about the weather. That's a thing. That's amazing. And so anyway, whereas my family, you'd sit there and you'd argue and you'd debate. And I remember my wife had to get used to this because she would come away in tears and mortified from our family gatherings because you guys hate each other. I said, what are you talking about? She said, I heard you in there arguing and you're shouting and we're like, that's just normal conversation. So apparently that wasn't quite normal, I guess. So at least it was normal for us. Maybe that's Chicago construction worker family sort of thing. I don't know. But anyway, so that was the environment I came from. And so, you know, I was used to things like I asked pretty early on certain questions about first time I read the book of Genesis. My impression of Genesis was, you know, it sounds kind of like Moses is describing the world. I'm probably in like junior high. When I'm asking this sounds like he's describing the world like there's a dome and there's water above the dome and then there's like earth and then there's these foundations and there's water below the foundations and like that's what opens up and the flood narrative. And my mom said, well, that's not true. Here's Hugh Ross. And she gave me Hugh Ross, who I don't know if you're familiar with his apologetic stuff, but he's a long earth creationist quantum physicist type guy who turned Christian apologist. Anyway, it doesn't matter what you think about Hugh Ross. But the thing that was interesting about it was I was immediately encountering this idea that, oh, you can ask hard questions and you might find answers. And if you press those hard questions, you start to dig down deep into foundations and maybe find new and interesting insights. And that happened to me quite a bit. And I think with that, also, my mom instilled in me this lack of fear about asking questions. So she would also or even define certain, you know, historically orthodox parameters. And by that, I mean, lower case, so not Eastern Orthodox, obviously, because she would send me to school and say things like, oh, by the way, in school, they might tell you that the earth was created in like, you know, six days. That's not true. Just ignore that. And so I was like, oh, OK, you know, I guess you just ignore that. So anyway, what that ended up doing is once I hit a point in my high school years where, you know, I was on the one hand, I was already I had become familiar enough with apologetics and enjoyed arguing with people enough that I would be sitting there at a party where we're all stoned to be, you know, candid. Right. You know, we're all on different hallucinogens. Somebody brings up like hell. And I jump into the theological discussion just for fun because good academic intellectual sparring is, you know, that's that's a good time, you know, as far as I was concerned growing up. And and we'd have debates, but I didn't really have any sort of practice that went with it. You know, there was an intellectual exercise to it, but there was no substantive spirituality that went with it. But then what happened is at some point, I fell into a bit of a crisis, a personal crisis, as I came to see my own mortality and impending death. And I'll chance actually putting out there, I was vague about this in in the film, but I'll take the risk of actually being completely transparent about what sparked it. I was on I was having I was on an acid trip and I was having a really bad acid trip. And what made it particularly bad was I was having certain realizations about consciousness in the soul. And specifically what I knew what I would recognize now as I was sort of just coming to realize Socrates argument from affinity for the immortality of the soul. So Socrates argument from affinity is basically the idea that you have two types of features of reality, things that are organic and can break down and decay and, you know, you know, fall away, dissipate. And then you have things that are these invisible, immaterial realities like numbers, laws of logic, laws of physics. And those things don't decay and break down in a road and aren't subject to that sort of change. And Socrates argument is that consciousness itself is much more like the latter than it is like the former. So what that means is even though the body breaks down and decays, that doesn't mean consciousness itself will break down and decay and dissipate. Well, while I was on LSD, what I started to realize was I really want to get off of this bad acid trip. But how do I get off of it when I am my own consciousness is the ride. How do you get off the ride when you are the ride? And that was a deeply disturbing question for me, especially because I did think of things like, well, if I kill my body, will that actually kill my consciousness? And I thought, maybe not. Maybe my consciousness is actually more than just my body. And and essentially, I started going through this sort of Socratic argument for the immortality of the soul. And even though, you know, I came, thankfully, I didn't do anything like, well, I'll give it a whirl and kill myself. Instead, what I did is I realized, you know, OK, I'm going to just ride out the acid trip. Then it'll calm down. I actually picked up the Bible and tried to read it because I was so freaked out by the question. And I started reading Jesus's Sermon on the Mount. I don't think I got past two sentences over four hours because reading on LSD is really, really hard. But but what happened was that that awakened in me this realization that I'm mortal and my body is going to die. And if my consciousness survives death and I have some sort of capacity to shape that into something desirable or undesirable, there may be ramifications for that. It's possible that I'm shaping myself into something that is damnable. Right. And that I'm, you know, sort of positioning myself for something like hell. Now, I think one of the things that I tried to convey this part in the film, and I hope it came through, but I wasn't really so much concerned about like being locked in a torture chamber with demons who are going to jab you or something like that. I was more obsessed with the fact that kind of like the, you know, the acid trip, the state of my own consciousness, the state of my own soul can be a place of torments, right, where the places are more allegorical. And the real problem is the condition of the soul. And that's, of course, something I later discovered was a common thread in the Eastern Church Fathers, you know, people like Chrysostom saying, I have no need of a place called heaven when I can become heaven. Right. Paradise being the condition of the soul. And Basil saying the same thing about Adam. Right. He was in paradise because he was in communion with God and then he was immediately out of Eden when he sinned because he broke communion with God. And that's that's when he found himself in a different place. Anyway, that was what sort of hurled me into this journey of really investigating a lot of a lot of questions about specifically, do I have free will? Is there God? What is God like? Maybe God is a tyrant who, you know, predestines people for heaven and hell. And maybe I'm on the wrong side of that list. And anyway, so I started really diving into a lot of religious and theological questions, as well as questions about just religion. Generally, was I sure that Christianity was the correct religion and all that sort of stuff? So anyway, my my delving into those questions started started a long path of sort of academic study. And that stretch from, you know, that bad acid trip happened in high school, like my junior year. And that propelled all the way into, you know, years of crisis about that into college, into art school, where I was when I was really wrestling with those things pretty deeply and starting to read philosophers and theologians. If I heard there was somebody speaking on a topic that was religious or philosophical, I'd go to the meeting and I'd sit there and I'd listen. And then I grilled them with questions afterwards because I wanted to find anybody who might have answers. And and and oftentimes, honestly, I was so I took the question so seriously that a lot of people who I talked to wondered, you know, is he neurotic? Is he crazy? Because he's taking this question far too seriously. Whereas I thought you clearly don't understand the gravity of what I'm asking if you don't take it seriously. Because I started to see, wow, like free will is a really serious thing. If I really have that and I have the capacity to shape myself or misshape myself in some sort of, you know, way that could ultimately become permanent. That's that's a that's a huge weight. If I survive death and my choices here affect what happens afterwards, that's a huge weight. If we're bound by a deity, right, who is a tyrant, that's I mean, we might not be able to do anything about it. But but that's that's a real problem. And so all of those things really pressed in on me and drove me. I would say crisis, you know, is the right word for where I was at in terms of trying to wrestle through those questions. Anyway, I talk about it obviously in the film, but I think the short version is, even though this has already been a long version, the short version is that I ended up becoming so preoccupied with those questions that I was really neglecting art. And so in my junior year of art school, I actually left art school and I transitioned to study philosophy. And I knew that, you know, philosophy was where I was starting. And and so I started reading people like Augustine Aquinas. And I started reading the folks who I started to discover through just study of their thought, the people who they had read. So I started reading Neoplatonist, Therese Atelians, and so on. And then eventually started delving into modern philosophy. Emanuel Kant, I had heard, was very formative on how people think today, but it wasn't just that he was formative. Supposedly, he's created some problem for doing metaphysical thinking, which apparently was what I was doing. And so I, you know, I engaged him. I didn't agree with him at all, even though I've written a lot on Kant's, but, you know, he was somebody to be dealt with. I went backwards to Leibniz, who he read. Anyway, I was reading really, I didn't have a research program necessarily in the formal sense of, well, I'm interested in Kant, so I'm reading Kant's and then I'm going backwards. I was just following my questions wherever they led. And so start with the usual suspects in terms of ancient philosophy and ancient Christianity and work your way up to the Medieval's and into the modern questions and so on. And follow it wherever it would go. I would say that kind of how I was thinking about things eventually once things started to coalesce in my mind. And this pre orthodoxy was, you know, the scientific method, you have theories, right, and theory, of course, is just a guess. Right, theory is that we have different data points and the working theory is a way of making those data points cohere. And I was doing something similar in the sense that I was looking at all the different data points I could see. Right, so I was convinced that the soul, you know, does survive death. So that's a data point. I was convinced that there is a human condition and that the fact that world religions in general all try to look for ways of addressing that human condition is irrelevant data points. For me, it was relevant data point that Jesus of Nazareth seems to offer some type of exclusivity that wasn't common in other world religions that became its own data points. As well as certain things I've mentioned in the film, the fact that I found I entertained the idea that, you know, well, what if Jesus is just a deceiver or a sorcerer or something like that. I explored those sorts of things. And my conclusion was it didn't seem that he was, you know, just a normal guy because even his opponents never suggested that he was, you know, just a normal guy. Even his opponents believed he was a wonder worker. He had to be a sorcerer or a demoniac or something like that. There was a recognition of something special about the person of Christ, something supernatural about the person of Christ. But then that's where for me another data point was, well, then in that case, if we have the options of he's a wonder worker who's, you know, demoniac or he's the son of God as he claims, you have to look at the fruit of what it bears. And looking at the lives of the saints, I said that does not seem to be the fruit of demons. That seems to be the fruit of something good. And so that's where I moved, you know, return to my Christian roots. But at the same time, my moral intuitions, I came to the conclusion I had to be free in order to for moral culpability to make sense. And so I was an advocate of free will. I took the problem of evil very seriously. But the problem of evil was not a point of seriousness in the sense of atheism because I saw atheism as undercutting the argument. My understanding of the problem of evil required some sort of transcendent morality that there really is good and evil, whereas if we're just blind, you know, random material, there is no such thing as good and evil. There's pleasant and unpleasant. But there's not good and evil in that sense. And so the argument itself created sort of two data points. On the one hand, created a data point about the goodness of God and the existence of evil that needed to be reconciled, the problem there. And then the second data point, though, was however it's reconciled, you can't get rid of the foundations of transcendent morality, which is why I remain a theist. And so anyway, all of those things eventually started pushing me down, coalescing around a certain way of interpreting a world and where I ended up landing was actually process philosophy. So process philosophy, espoused by Alfred North Whitehead, my favorite theologian. I think he's a philosopher, not a theologian, but Charles Hartshorn was like one of my favorite folks. His book, which would tell you something about how untraditional, non-traditional my theology was, was omnipotence and other theological mistakes. Which I really just liked for the title, but I mean, I also thought it was brilliant because I thought Charles Hartshorn was brilliant. But all of that was partially because even though I had looked backwards at people like Aquinas and Augustine with optimism, that ended up there ended up being a major disconnect there. I thought there were major problems in terms of free will, in terms of God-world interactions. And so that ultimately pushed me away from that and away from historical Christianity toward this sort of innovative process, you know, sort of philosophical Christianity. So I had really this sort of syncretistic, odd, philosophical, self-constructed worldview, a religion sort of of my own making, that really still didn't have any practice. So this was not something to be practiced in church. I wasn't a sacramentalist. Why would I go to church? And, you know, and I believed in Jesus, which was instilled in me as, you know, a pretty good starting point for being self-identified as Christian because I didn't have a concept of a visible church or affiliation with a visible church as necessary to being a self-identified Christian. So as I returned to my Christian roots, I returned to it and again this very sort of I guess I moved from being a nun to a done, I guess you could say, right. Or really kind of a never was, but you know, we'll call it a from a nun to a done. But then what happened was this, I mean, so this, this search that I described really it sort of went from degree to degree to degree because that's just, that was the context in which I was doing the searching. So it went from, you know, studying philosophy to getting a degree in church history and systematics and then on into PhD studies. And it was during my PhD studies that I took a class from a patrologist, right, a patristic scholar, an expert on, you know, church fathers, and focused, it was focused on from Nicaea to Constantinople. And that, that, that little stretch there, right, the Council of Nicaea to Constantinople, we were reading all primary sources, patristic sources. And they were all Eastern sources because of the prominence of the Eastern fathers in those discussions. And so I mean, I don't know how well versed your viewers are in East West, but what I mean by Eastern fathers is, of course, the Roman Empire divided East and West and The West is the Latin speaking half of the Roman Empire and the East is the Greek and Syriac and other things. But so anyway, they were all in that Eastern fathers, right. And so even though I was pretty well versed by this point in Latin theology, right, I spent a lot of time with Medieval and and the sort of And the antecedent work of Augustine to those Medieval and then even post reformation scholasticism, which I was studying under Richard Mueller at the time. Who's probably one of the foremost experts in the world on 16th 17th century scholasticism. Even though I was pretty well versed in all of that, when I read the Eastern fathers, I was very disoriented by it because I recognize the stark contrast between how they understood Christianity generally And Western Christianity and it was actually initially it was just a general curiosity of, I don't know, what's the difference between the Eastern fathers and the Western fathers. And then the more I understood them, the more I found it somewhat compelling what they were saying in some ways, it seemed to be offering All of the different things, it seemed to me that the Eastern fathers were trying to understand what they were saying. And then the more I understood them, the more I found it somewhat compelling what they were saying. And so I was very disoriented by it. And then the more I understood them, the more I found it somewhat compelling what they were saying in some ways, it seemed to be offering All of the different things in many ways. If I return to this sort of data point way of thinking about, you know, a working hypothesis. It seemed that their, their Alternative hypothesis that accounted for all the data points I was accounting for but offered more than what I had offered. In addition to offering a connection with historical Christianity and the practice of religion and Things like that. So anyway, that's what compelled me to actually at some point reach out to An Orthodox priest visit an Orthodox church start conversations directly with the Orthodox and eventually that sort of was The end, the end result of all that was that I ended up actually becoming Eastern Orthodox so I trust that suffices as a That was, that was absolutely terrific. I took now you'll see I'll send you the notes. So, so that was a that was an excellent, I think, wonderful overview of a certain aspect of your life. Now you've also got these other interesting elements that I think probably a lot of people watching this conversation will be interested in Where so you're in high school, you have this bad acid trip. And by the way, you know, and depending on where this conversation goes and how many other conversations we want to have the psychedelic question is a very big deal. I got into this whole YouTube thing via Trying to figure out what was going on around Jordan Peterson very quickly. I had people contacting me talking about their Experiences with psychedelic drugs. I grew up, I grew up Christian Reformed have never done. I've never smoked pot, much less inhaled. I I've never done any psychedelics. So I have all these people coming to me tell and it's like, so I've had to get a little bit of an An education on this stuff. So, so that the the aspect of psychedelics will be something that will that a lot of the people who listen to my channel will be interested in But the but so you but it was interesting after high school, you went to art school. That was your first stop and then by your at that point that point you're realizing you're neglecting your art and you're fixated on philosophy. And and that sets up a whole I mean, what does your, what does your life look like in all of that and has art ever come back around now currently you're a lecturer in philosophy in Kentucky. Yeah, University of Kentucky. Yeah, so I'm. Yeah, so What does my life look like during that time and then how does that play. How does it converge. Yeah, you wound up. I mean, Missouri centered that sort of as Lutherans go that's kind of Christian Reformed. There's similarities there. My wife actually grew up part Lutheran and part fundamentalist Baptist, but that's a whole other crazy story that I don't use so much. My wife's story on my channel because it's her story to tell not mine. So I have some understanding of of Lutheran's So, so, so yeah so so flesh out some of that story too because that's also interesting. Yeah, so I mean during to like during art school, you know, initially, I ironically it was it was all the spiritual stuff that pushed me away from hallucinogens. So I had, you know, I used to be an avid consumer of them. They were a big part of my life and they were big part of my art to You know, I would. It was a normal thing for me to use them to either see a work of art that I had done a fresh or in a new perspective. Or to break down inhibitions that I realized were present and working in the way I thought about two dimensionality and, you know, open up new doors. But once I got to art school and I was really obsessing about philosophy that started falling away. And in some ways, I would say that what happened was, yeah, it was over time I started neglecting in my art because I mean art school is very intense. I'm guessing that some people probably think, oh, art school. That's like not real school or Relative to more intense. I have a lot of artists that listen to my channel and I have no idea why, but they'll they'll eat this up. So keep going. Well, my experience was that art school was a lot harder than, you know, your usual university. So, you know, because at art school it's it's extremely, extremely intense full version where you know if you take a three credit hour class. This was at the Maryland Institute College of Art where I went You would be in class for six hours that week and you'd be in class for those six hours all at once. Right. So it would be an intensive. So I would be in class for six hours. You would be in class for six hours that week and you'd be in class for those six hours all at once. Right. So it would be an intensive six hour period. And then they'd send you home with homework and you know if you're taking five classes. You know, and a 15 credit hour load. That means you're spending 30 hours just in class. And then you have homework for all those classes. I mean, there were oftentimes where I would go in the longest I went with nonstop working and no sleep was 72 hours. Art school, which had its negative effects as well. And it's But you know it was it was extremely, extremely difficult and rigorous. And so the problem is trying to juggle that level of rigor. While trying to have this, you know, I wouldn't call it a side hustle, but it's functionally kind of like that right where you You've thrown yourself into something that really isn't supposed to be what you're doing right now because you're supposed to give all your attention over here. Was extremely difficult. And if for and I think what I started to see is I started seeing my Performance in terms of art, not in terms of skill sets, but in terms of being able to actually produce the, you know, the quantity I had to produce for art school. It started, you know, to diminish and even I started sneaking like I'd go to our art history class and have like some philosophical volume stuffed under my shirt that I sit there and I read While I'm Listening to an art lecture. So, At some point, it became pretty clear where my interests really my interest really were so And so that's why the first chance I had for an exit route, you know, was able to open a conversation with my parents who are I think we're a little shocked by you want to go study philosophy. That's weird. I that's that's that's where I took that Because, but now that said, I mean, it was an interesting thing to be at art school because our artists and creatives, you know, they're very open to having these sorts of conversations about the world and creativity. So I had a lot of fantastic conversations with my parents. And the conversations obviously changed the dynamics of them change very much. Once I got into a formal academic environment. Now I think the differences I expected going from art school into a normal university That I would have a similar type of immersion right oh I'm going to study philosophy. So I'm going to be It's going to be like the school of Athens or something like we're going to have a bunch of philosophers who are as invested in this as I am. And there's some Socratic figure there who's, you know, we're working this out together and we're dedicating in, you know, innumerable hours to it. And I found, you know, deeply disappointing that we Classes and so many of my peers don't really care about these questions at, you know, the level I do. But thankfully, what I found is there were a couple of professors in particular, who I think recognized That I had a vested interest in this topic that was different than the the than my peers and and also I think they they recognize thank God for they recognize the good mind under my very unpolished exterior. Where did you go to school, then where were you going to school. So I went I transferred to Trinity in Deerfield. To study there and partially that was because in all my different reading I encountered You know here and there are a couple of the folks I had read I had noticed You know, you know intersection. There's an intersection between process philosophy and the open theist movement that was happening in the evangelical world. And so I'd read Clark Pinnock at some point in there and I realized, oh, Clark Pinnock teaches at Trinity and then I encountered certain other people, you know, certain systematicians or apologists and I started seeing Trinity. I started seeing graduates attorney. I thought, oh, and then I realized that's only 30 minutes from where I grew up. And so that was actually one of the things were coming home. I came home and initially just spent a semester working for my dad's construction company and then transferred over to Trinity. With the expectation that this being a university, I can study philosophy and then in a fluid fashion move into church history and systematics and basically all these things that I'm studying, I can look at. Now I think, you know, the other thing that was probably helpful for me was to realize I now know, looking back, I didn't realize that I the level of sort of my disregard for the boundary lines of historical Orthodox Christianity would not have gone over well at the Divinity School. Had I started there and I wouldn't have found the sort of freedom that that I did going to the college. So at the college, though, if anybody looks at my publications, you'll notice that I've done a lot of co authored publications with Chris Firestone. So Dr. Firestone, Chris, was originally my professor, right. And so he was a Kant scholar. And he was a bit of an, you know, I think, an outlier or an oddity at the college, a relatively recent hire, young guy, open to all sorts of, you know, still academically enthusiastic and all that. And so, so, but I think similar to me, I was very, you know, unpolished academically. I was terrible student growing up. As I said, I was high for most of high school on different things. And really, I sort of in many ways, I'd say I functioned through high school similar to If you had an elite athlete who doesn't care about academics because they're confident they're going to get a scholarship based on their athletics. I kind of was the artistic equivalent of that where it was like, I don't need to focus on my academics. My art's going to get me where I need to go. Which it did, right. Maryland Institute is top three art school in the country. So it did and got me there on scholarship. That was all positive, but the fact of the matter was I completely neglected everything else academically Until I was interested in it. And then I was diving in, you know, deep. But the problem was I had no training whatsoever. I had I had sort of checked out of all the sort of academic stuff that I had. So thankfully though Chris Firestone, I think is a similar sort of guy. He grew up on the south side of Chicago. And, you know, he was equally unpolished as I was he became a math major and then sort of backed his way into philosophy out of interest in that. And so I think he recognized there was sort of a kindred spirit there and in the sense that it was kind of like a culture that was kind of a interest in that. And so I think he recognized there was sort of a kindred spirit there in the sense of he he's familiar with finding these sort of scrappy outliers who are not really your ideal academic student and then mentoring them and things like that. So thankfully I ran into him and there were a couple of other professors there who were also very important in my formation. And you know and really what they created for me which was what I needed was an environment where yeah I kind of did what we were supposed to do in class but that wasn't really why I was there. I was there because I was asking these questions and people like Chris opened up the door for me to really pursue whatever path of inquiry I wanted to pursue and we'll make it sort of work with whatever class you're in or we'll create an independent study so you can do that. And so Chris sort of opened up the academic boundary lines where he could just sort of be a mentor and guide me through studying whatever I wanted to study even though I wasn't a good traditional student. And it was really only later that I started I still neglected grades because I wasn't doing this for a career. And that's the thing I if somebody wanted to mentor me toward getting a professorship they would have done something different. They said you need to buckle down you need to get you know these grades you've got to study for the GRE. Chris didn't do any of that because I think he recognized that's not who Jacobs is. And so I became very unconventional in the way I did those sorts of things and even like Chris always leaned into that. I mean he encouraged me to submit I remember submit a conference proposal like a paper proposal for an academic conference a professional academic conference American Academy of Religion. But I was an undergrad. But nonetheless Chris said I think you could do it I think you could hold your own. Now I realize it's completely insane to an undergrad but Chris did and I was naive enough to say sure. And so I did and I got in and I'm there at this panel discussion John Stackhouse I don't know if you've ever heard of him he's a Christian college. He was my respondent to me as an undergrad. He's my respondent I'm on this panel this big ballroom all these people here and I'm thinking like what am I doing here. But then I you know sort of caught you know I got anyway that's that's that sort of became quintessential for the journey is that I was like well I started presenting at all these different conferences I started publishing all that sort of stuff. My book I've caught I co-authored with Chris before I even finished my PhD. And so I have a very unconventional academic road in that way because it was never really driven by career building it was driven by questions and it was done in dialogue with professors who were treating me somewhat as mentors but more like a peer who's asking questions than they were like just an undergrad student in their class who's trying to pass the class or something like that. And I think that was very helpful and very formative and so even when I went to TED's right Trinity Evangelical Divinity School and I realized I had to keep my head down a little bit given my views there. Thankfully it's still on the same campus and I still was mentored by people like Chris and Mark Loingstedt and others. So and then eventually I left there to go to Calvin and Calvin Seminary the doctoral program there is what I discovered was that the you know at the master's level where they're training pastors it's important that we stick to like the you know we toe the line with our tradition whereas at the doctoral level it's much more open in the sense of you know it's an academic program that's what I found. So I was in there not everybody was reformed by far and everything was really sort of historical approach in the sense that you know the boundary lines were much looser. I mean so I mean obviously that's fascinating because I remember when they were having the conversation whether or not to start a doctoral program because in seminaries the big thing was obviously the D-min and Calvin Seminary goes and does a doctoral program and not a D because D-min programs they're the cash cow of seminaries because our pastors want a little bit more credibility and so you know blah blah blah blah. Yeah that's that fascinates me because that's a very nobody has told me anything about the the seminary doctorate program was kind of a mysterious thing happening over there and its relationship to the that what you just said just really fascinating for me probably nobody else and not a lot of Christian people listen to me but that's that's that's fascinating. So you found your time at CTS well Mueller of course was you know he was brought on as a you know heavyweight scholar someone who you know really have credentials to give that program some some credibility but you found your you found your time there helpful. Yeah it was truthfully the best academic experience I had period. Really? Yeah unquestionably so I went there largely because of the legacy of people like Plantinga and Woltersdorf right the analytic philosophy of religion stuff that came out of Calvin is obviously renowned in the philosophical world so I always had a high regard for Calvin and so that was what initially caused me to look at the program and then I met Tom McCall who's another analytic philosopher who came out of the Calvin PhD program and he sang its praises you know he was at Ted's as a professor and so I thought well okay well if he thinks that highly of it and so on and then they gave me a very good you know scholarship so I knew that I could afford it right because it was it came with a full ride in the stipend and so it was the best offer I had on the table of all the different doctoral programs I approached so I that's where I ended up going in and I found it was what was fascinating about it and what I really liked is it was much closer to what I was hoping for when I described what is school of Athens was because they only let in three to six people each year and so and that's intentional so that your classes are never more than you know around five people at a time and it's because they're done in these in this way where it is very sort of free-flowing discussion everyone's read the content people are arguing discussing and and it's really training you for academic publication so big emphasis is on research and methodology and because it's on a quarter system or was I don't know if they've changed that since but was on a quarter system you would end up you know three times a year you'd go you'd be able to you were able to study only two topics at a time which meant you could delve much deeper into this topic because it's much easier to manage only two areas of focus right at a time and so that was something that was really appealing and the end game for each class was always that you were being trained for proposing a research topic in that sort of broader field you were studying for that class and producing what's essentially a publishable essay on the back end for the class so you're producing you know six publishable papers every academic year which is pretty good output and so anyway I found it I found it to be extraordinarily helpful and Richard was great I mean Richard is a brilliant guy certainly one of definitely you know sort of top three most brilliant scholars I've ever met and really I really enjoy he's also he's a funny guy too but anyway so I think that was just overall was a fantastic experience and it fit very well with my sort of independent research sort of approach I could find the sort of topics that I wanted to research I could delve deep into those topics I could end up you know pouring all that research into writing something publishable which is basically that's what I was already doing in my sort of pre-Calvin independent way of doing things is everything was about doing a deep dive in an area of research until I get to a point where I feel like I've done enough research I've come to a conclusion I can write a publishable essay something like that so I thought it was fantastic and it produces really tremendous scholars I know now I know it's been going through changes because Richard's now retired and things like that and I haven't kept up too much on the state of the program at this point but when I was there it was top-notch I mean it was fantastic well that's that's terrific to hear yeah I went to CTS I was there in the 80s the late 80s I was going to go to Fuller and then I was I'd take a fifth year at Calvin College to get on my Greek in and that's when I met the woman who would become my wife and I knew if I came to California that they probably couldn't maintain the relationship so I switched to Calvin and I actually bumped into Carl F. Henry in the dining hall one Sunday morning I saw this old I'd see this old man in the dining hall by himself I felt bad for him so I went and sat with him and asked him who he was and he said what are you doing I said well I'm probably gonna go to Calvin seminary he says that's a good seminary to go to because they're kind of a classic seminary and I like my father and my grandfather all went to Calvin seminary and got them divs and became pastors now were you were you married at the time that that you came to Calvin how about when did you meet your wife how did you don't have to go into great detail but so I met my wife in in college I did do a so I'll offer briefly how I met my wife which was I had I sort of picked her out of the crowd and asked a bunch of people about her made a couple of failed efforts to introduce myself to her I remember the one that was really sort of formative was when I went to a buddy of mine talking to her he's in a conversation with her so I'm thinking oh this is my chance I go over I start a conversation with him he says oh hey do you know and and unfortunately he didn't do that you know he's talking with her I come over hey man and he like does this full 180 turns his back to her starts talking to me and she says oh well you know okay starts talking to somebody else leaves and I think what tell what are you doing man I didn't come over to talk to you I see you all the time anyway I started chatting with him and eventually he said you know I was like how do I approach this girl he said man why does it have to be so complicated with chicks man said why can't you just draw a line in the sand and say I like you if you like me then cross that line and I said uh I said uh you know that's a good idea that's what I'm gonna do so I went and I got a piece of chalk and I stopped her and I said hey you don't know me I don't know you but I've seen you around we know some of the same people they say you're pretty great so I'd like to get to know you you'd like to get to know me and then I drew a line on the sidewalk I said then cross that line and she paused and looked around because she thought it was a joke she's like there's got to be somebody like laughing in the bushes and she said okay uh sure I'd be happy to get to know you so she stepped across the line and I said huh wow I said I uh I didn't expect that I haven't thought this far ahead and so uh I said uh well let me think about what comes next and uh you know and uh when I do I'll find you and I left and I walk it's terrible anyway uh if you if you watch the movie I did before becoming truly human um killing po there's a scene in there that's based on that so I that's that's actually I think that's in the trivia on IMDB about about that movie so anyway that's the college comedy I did anyway um but yeah so I met her I ended up marrying her um right out of college um and so uh and she was very much an evangelical right so she and and I think an evangelical who didn't really realize how far out and heretical my ideas were um and most people even after the chalk thing right like that should have told you all you needed to know guys not right in the head uh but but um but and so I think she just she just wanted a good church where you know she could have community and things like that and I typically followed along and was the sort of reluctant uh participant who would sit in on things and was anti-social and all that sort of stuff and really and oftentimes couldn't take it right you know she knew that she knew she could just tell I'm not very good at hiding it when I'm just like completely don't want to be someplace or I'm off put by something uh and I got us kicked out of a couple of churches because like I there was one pastor who you know as I told him you know I I argued for process philosophy and denied certain classical divine attributes and he's like you're you know you're here you're an actual heretic you're an actual heretic I found usually people are just indifferent and you know but you actually believe the wrong things and you know better that's right that's right so um so I had you know on more than one occasion uh we were yeah we were basically I crossed certain lines with and so I over time realized I can't talk about certain things anyway so that was I think that was always a strain on our relationship because I think she was she was much happier to be you know any number of churches would make her happy and I just and for me it was always something to be tolerated and it was very difficult um and uh and what and when I and so when I finally encountered orthodox and we had kids along the way right we've now got five kids but when I was in doctoral program what were we up to we were we were up to two and then we had our third while we were at calvin um and so at some point in there when I discovered orthodoxy and had had enough conversations and done enough research and said I think I want to actually become orthodox I went to her and I told her and her response was like what's this cult you want to join I don't know what is this and like really quite seriously thought like I didn't know if we got do we need to get a divorce right you know things like that and um and so uh the priest who was uh catechizing me you know I was catechumen basically you know not yet received into the church but in some sort of standing as somebody who has professed a desire to join the church um he basically said I asked him I was like what do I do do I become orthodox do I wait for my wife what and he told me uh wait for your wife which was the last thing truthfully that's not what I wanted him to say because I thought this is the first time I've wanted to go to church like ever so um so I finally find you know a place where somehow there's a religious practice that goes with the beliefs I've formed and this is like coalescing into what would be a real lifestyle and things like that where you know all the the ideas and lifestyle and all that converge and I want that and um and instead he's telling me like no wait for your wife and I thought oh that's not what I want to hear um but I said okay you know because uh you know because he was my priest right so um as a exercise of obedience I said okay if that's what you say father you know basically in in my mind it was if I want to be in communion with the orthodox church being obedient to him is the closest thing I could by not being orthodox ironically is the closest I can get right now to being orthodox right and so I'm in proper standing with them in that sense and so I waited and took seven years and those seven years involved um it was I mean at first it was discussion right me trying to you know tell my wife what I've you know what I've discovered which didn't work out at all really I'm shocked yeah I know uh didn't she grow up evangelical wasn't she under the headship of her husband that's right that's right this should have been you know easy no brainer but unfortunately she had a brain so that was uh but uh uh so no she um and well and I asked I lamented to my priest she doesn't want to listen to me I don't know what to do and he said well she's like said well I said I wouldn't want to debate you either he's like what this poor girl you think she wants to she wants to sit there and debate you over things that she's unequipped it and I said okay so anyway so I sort of left it I just sort of left it you know to God and I'll pray and I'll do my thing as best I can and and over time you know she became orthodox uh you know in her own thinking and oftentimes in ways that I couldn't have orchestrated or anticipated right I remember there was this one moment when icons are oftentimes a hang up for people who are not orthodox uh and are evangelical right it seems like idols and idol worship and things like that and um and she came to me one day and said well um I don't want to go to the orthodox church with you because I was going periodically and she would every now and then decide okay maybe I'll I'll come with just to check it out uh that took several years at first she hated it and I don't want to ever put an orthodox church um but after several years she she started saying well periodically maybe I'll show up with you and um and she came to me one day and said I don't want to go to the orthodox church with you and I said okay um what's up and she said uh well I had a dream last night and in the dream uh I feel like I came to understand why the orthodox venerate icons and I feel like but I don't feel like I could personally do it but I also feel like to not honor the icon would be to dishonor it and so I'd rather just not put myself in that situation now what she didn't realize is to not honor the icon is dishonored as straight out of john damascus and his defense of the veneration of icons and so I those were the sorts of things where I said okay I'll just sort of accept that um and and just things are happening I'll just let them go on so anyway I mean it took like I said it took seven years um for her to get to a place and I remember the the moment when I'd just taken a job at another protestant school because I was teaching at protestant schools at the time and I knew as soon as we become orthodox that's going to be a problem for these schools having me teach there and so I remember I'd just taken a position in another protestant school I wouldn't say which one but she she came to me after we were we'd been sitting there with a couple of former student of mine who became orthodox and his wife would also become orthodox and they were talking to us about how they'd really like us to become orthodox because they'd like us to be their their son's godparents I said oh yeah and heather said well she said uh you know I really am kind of okay with becoming orthodox but you know until nathan finds a job that you know we we know he we can keep while he's orthodox like we're not going to become orthodox and she said as she said that that sounded like that's the worst reason I could possibly come up with to not be orthodox right like if I really think um that's where we should be are we in some ways being disobedient to god by like not becoming orthodox so she comes to me and tells me that I said well I wish you would have told me that before I just took this job at a protestant school so anyway that was the first moment where I remember we were in this position of you know over the next couple of years of both being in an agreement that we should become orthodox now but holding off for purely practical reasons and then our lives started to completely implode and fall apart and I think I don't think those two things are unrelated and so uh so and sort of but thankfully um you know I see the hand of providence and how uh things have grown out of that and that really gets to I guess um the part where you're talking about about what I'm doing right now and how the art side and the philosophy side have converged um that was when uh David Bradshaw who at the time was the chair of the philosophy department at University of Kentucky um he was he had become aware of my work I was aware of his work and we had corresponded um purely in an academic for academic reasons you know he was doing eastern patristic metaphysics and ancient metaphysics and I was doing the same uh at the time I transitioned off to con to ancient metaphysics publishing a lot on the eastern fathers and um I went to him and I said David you know here's what's going on I've got it I've got to find an exit route out of the evangelical world and um just reaching out to you and and he he said oh I had no idea you were interested in orthodoxy really why do you I mean are there people who publish on the eastern fathers that had had really have no interest in orthodoxy but uh thankfully uh so David actually suggested why don't you come to University of Kentucky and I went there and I was a lecturer uh of philosophy there as this sort of interim stage um looking at longer term positions and there was a couple of schools I was looking at but what really sort of came out of nowhere was that I was approached by the Antiochian Archdiocese of Eastern Orthodox Church and uh this group um again this interesting providential convergence where this group of people had said well we're going to have this meeting in Grand Rapids and actually you know uh the folks weren't based in Grand Rapids one was from Indiana a couple were from you know like California but for whatever reason they decided they could converge Grand Rapids all things converge in Grand Rapids yeah well in January and I just agreed that I would teach an interim class during j-term at Calvin College and I said well you'll never believe it I'm going to be in Grand Rapids during that time in January so anyway so we had this meeting and they said like well we want to you know a lot of people who become interested in orthodoxy are just affected you know uh you know Protestants or Catholics and and we're more interested in people who fit this group called the nuns right not so that you know we're not interested but you know that's where we would rather not focus there in terms of outreach rather focus on the folks who have wandered away from religion generally and so they made a pitch for you know some sort of like could you do some videos that are like some teaching videos or something like that and I explained why I thought that was a terrible idea first of all because I'm not a videographer like I don't I do I make movies right I have movie crews working I don't I don't I don't even have my own equipment right like we don't I don't do that sort of thing I hire your daughter's earbuds yeah that's right right because clearly I would have a very fancy like boom mic over my head right now if I was a videographer okay I'm not so anyway first of all I said well I'm the wrong guy to talk to if that's what you want because that's not what I do second of all just speaking as a former nun I think I would have zero interest in what you're describing and so uh so anyway I mean long story short I pitched a film experimental film idea an experimental in the sense that I couldn't think of another film that does it right I was just like so I don't know if this will be good or it'll be bad or only indifferent but this is what I would do and I said I think you need to do three things one you need to humanize the nuns and just spend some time listening to them and let them tell their story without any amount of judgment or response or setting them up for the you know you know apologetic you know uppercut or whatever you know you got to you just got to let them be human beings who are on a spiritual journey with real questions and real stories and and I said and then the second thing you do is I think you should open up conversation and sort of prime the pump for thinking about big topics but the fact of the matter is you put a non-religious person with a religious person that you know the guard goes up so the best way to do that is to have the unaffiliated folks talk with the unaffiliated folks their peers right who are in who they're going to find resonance with but also dissonance because they're not going to all agree I said and then if you think orthodoxy has something to offer the nuns which I do and obviously in my talks I talked about ways advantages it has in terms of mapping on top of a lot of the spiritual instincts of the nuns I said you're going to have to find somebody who embodies that right somebody who's gone through that journey now when I was pitching this I did not know I was pitching that I would start but after we started going through and I pitched this thing and they approved it and I started thinking where on earth are we going to find this person and who would be this and so on eventually with some fear and trembling decided to say like okay I'll be this this person and that was partially pragmatic also just because it was a low-budget project right they were not throwing gobs and cops of cash at this so you know we needed to stay in one location and I needed to know who I was working with right all these sorts of things so thankfully though they approved it and I put my job search on hold which was fine in my mind because the two positions two universities I was talking to about a position they were actually talking about not the coming academic year but the one after that so I thought that's perfect keep the conversation going there take this year off from teaching at uk and just like make movie right like no problem and so that's what I did and then much to my surprise they said well we don't know how to distribute it and you know advertise it and things like that so could you do that extend it six months so they extended my contract another six months and then and then basically somewhere in there what happened was I sat down with the metropolitan to show him the film after it was done and that was terrifying because first of all it was first time I had ever met a metropolitan and in case people don't know like you have like you have like bishops over and then you have like archbishops and then you have metropolitans which are over like you know a country for example so like the metropolitan and aoken metropolitan is over in north america right which not country but you know that you know north america as a whole so I think is I at my understanding is this jurisdiction includes Canada but anyway so I'd never met a metropolitan I'd never gone to you know a die you know an arch diocese like the actual building stepped inside of one and so here I am going to go in and say well your evidence here's what I spent your money on what do you think and so that was terrifying but thankfully he loved it and much to my surprise said I'd like to see you continue in film and not go back to teaching and I said well I'll think about it but I've got five kids and so I kicked around all sorts of different ways of doing that and but you know the long short story short was I ended up thankfully through some of the promotion of the film meeting certain um let's say mission-minded investors right who had a vested interest in seeing me do it do more film and and what I was really pitching was films that are much more viable in terms of secular wide release so I mean becoming truly human is pretty direct in terms of we're looking at nuns we're talking about religion here's my story I became orthodox right like whereas whereas I was talking about the possibilities of doing films that um are not so direct as that you know they still reflect an orthodox worldview underneath but they're ultimately you know secular wide release movies and um anyway thankfully what I found was that uh there were some people who who were fascinated orthodox folks who were fascinated with that idea who wanted to get involved from a business perspective and seeing if they could make that happen and that's what I'm doing right now so and um and in terms of you know who I'm working with is not actually it's not like I'm working with uh orthodox people some of my investors business side are orthodox people but I'm working with uh you know Mike Flaherty right now who is the co-founder of Walden media uh Walden did the Narnia movies and Salon and Holes he's not with Walden anymore left uh I think in 2017 to start Epiphany Story Labs um but uh so working with Epiphany Story Labs and uh and some other folks uh that we've got on the project but folks who aren't orthodox but they love the projects uh they they love uh they like me as a director you know they they want to work with me on these projects so um that's kind of this is where I suppose to sort of wrap that part up is to say uh some of the ways I sometimes put it is that uh as somebody who was trained in art and loved art um but then eventually discovered philosophy and ideas right initially through crisis and then just because I love it and I think the questions matter and so on I always found myself as somebody who felt like I had sort of two halves of myself that could never be reconciled together you know when I teach I thrive I love teaching I love lecturing I love publishing writing but then it feels like the artistic side is sort of wilting and dying on the vine so then if I go and I draw and I paint and you know I do these sorts of artistic works you know that part will sort of thrive but then it feels like I'm neglecting this academic side and really only in film and specifically doing films that are related to the world of ideas do I begin to see these two parts of myself converge together and that's where I think all the different components of my personality my love for collaboration with people I do enjoy business art ideas and trying to do films that have a depth of worldview to them are also you know really works of art that that is you know that's the first thing that's really made sense of my journey and and that's thank god that's what I'm doing right now so so this is so are you going to continue to teach is that a part-time thing or are you going to do film full-time well as of right now I do I have I'll occasionally pick up a class you know like I think the last one I thought was world religions so I'll periodically pick up a class just to stay sharp in that area yeah but honestly this making movies right now what I'm doing right now is so all consuming in terms of time I don't have time to teach plus my schedule becomes very very unpredictable you know I suddenly hop on a flight and go to boston you know two days from now and and and if I were teaching you know I'd have to cancel my classes and you don't necessarily have that sort of flexibility as a professor so I continue to publish and I continue to speak although I will say that my speaking now even though my publishing is still you know referee journals and things like that my speaking has lead a little more public intellectual like the stuff you saw and anything which I actually incidentally I enjoy academic talks are typically 20 minutes and they're you know preludes to things you're going to publish anyway whereas public intellectual stuff like lectures ancient faith I actually really enjoy that and think that's a better use of sort of a speaking platform but in terms of teaching I mean right now yeah I mean I have my affiliation as a visiting scholar of philosophy with the you know with University of Kentucky but I have not been teaching lately because I just don't have time to do it obviously if the film thing crashes and burns I'll be looking to return to it but my honest hope in an ideal world would be that this succeeds enough that I can just keep on doing more and more projects like this but because my business partners they really value the academic side of me and I bring to the projects in terms of worldviews and ideas and things like that for them it's they're interested in seeing the stay sharp in terms of you know being active in terms of publishing doing podcasts like this where there's long-form conversations doing public intellectual sort of conversations like like the ancient faith stuff that I did and so because our because my projects are somewhat unique just in the sense that I'm unique as a filmmaker that means that you know part of the long-term vision is in some ways to keep an academic component going to it well that probably won't involve a lot of teaching you know if it were to be there it would have to be that there's like a university that wants to keep me affiliated because they think the affiliation is of benefit to them and I periodically teach like two-week modular or something like that but I don't think I don't think this current trajectory allows for me to really be teaching full-time or you know over the course of the semester or things like that okay is there a film out there that people might recognize that you would say this is the kind of thing I want to do it's a tough one because here's what I here's what I'd say to that I think you have plenty of films that are you know thoughtful sort of thoughtful films like let's say tree of life right but then you but but the problem is those also are not commercially viable they're think pieces that are very you know and even even an example like life itself which I know you watched which thank you for doing that it's a great film worth watching even that one it's commercially viable but it's still in the you know drama category where it's going to have a much more limited audience than the the truly commercially viable movies so I would point to something like life itself as a good example of the type of tenor I'm trying to hit in terms of true secular wide release commercial viability that's it's just a traditional movie that follows very traditional beats but it's thoughtful and dealing in you know sort of multi-layered worldview issues but the projects that I'm currently working on are meant to be much more commercially viable than a project like that so I'm trying to utilize genres that are you know in my mind oftentimes films it's like well people who want to do thoughtful films either do ava guard or they do or they do you know some sort of art house film or they do a drama if they're going for mainstream but then you have all the sort of commercially viable stuff like comedy and horror and action and things like that and those aren't thoughtful movies and you sort of separate those like that whereas what I'm trying to do is do movies that are trying to accomplish the sort of thing that's typically relegated to this group of you know art house and you know drama and things like that but do them within the boundaries of the more commercially viable genres so that's what I would say is probably a little unique to what I'm trying to accomplish. It's a cool vision I really want to see you succeed because I'd really love to see that. Yeah well the first project should be if all stays on schedule it will be done and ready for release by October 2020. Oh awesome. Yeah so the project I mean the current project which I can't speak to in detail but it's in development right now and I'm pressing ahead with the goal to having it ready by then. Super. I there are so many I said you know think about two hours or at about an hour and 20 now and I do want to give you a chance to ask me anything you might want to ask but I just finished reading Frank Schaefer's Crazy for God. Okay. Have you ever read it? I haven't. No no. You should read it. Okay. Definitely read it. I've been have you ever you know who Phil Vischer is? Phil Vischer no. Okay you should also Phil Vischer he's the guy who founded Veggie Tales. Oh yeah yeah sure. And he wrote a book because he of course lost the intellectual property of the Veggie Tales in bankruptcy court. Oh. He had never gotten good legal advice. So you should definitely read that little book it's a terrific little book that Phil Vischer wrote and then also Crazy for God because part of what's interesting in your story is this you know so Frank Schaefer of course grew up in this really unique moment of Le Brie and all that was involved in there you know eventually became orthodox. He I know by saying that I love that book there's a number of people out there who are not going to love that I say I love that book because there are a lot of people who are angry at Frank Schaefer for a number of things. You can criticize him for but this to me it intersects in a lot of interesting ways with your story especially in the fact of the piece of your story where you talked about how you had to go to church and you had to keep quiet because quite frankly that breaks my heart and it breaks my heart because I know it's true and and you know you're you're comfortably in a space now where you don't have to keep quiet because quite obviously your beliefs are in alignment with your ecclesiastical situation right but the I mean part of what part of what in my own crazy journey with the whole Jordan Peterson thing I started this YouTube channel and I had people writing to me and I am pastoring a dying aging congregation that is in a place that the Christian Reformed Church doesn't much care about and so I had all of these people interested in talking about Jordan Peterson and so a bunch of them who are who don't go to church anywhere just said you know what we should do a meetup so I just used meetup.com and and said basically come here on Sunday and around a weekend night a weekday night and we'll talk and we'll just have conversation it was hard for me not to open with prayer because that's what Christian reform people do and we just have conversations and the first time we did it I said well we'll start at seven and then about nine o'clock because I've run small groups as a pastor at nine o'clock I'll kind of close we'll do some housekeeping and call it into it but people can stay around if they want to and it was 1 30 in the morning when the phone rang at church and I knew exactly who was calling because it was my wife and I knew exactly what she was going to say it was are you okay what is going on because you know at that point I learned okay for now on I need to have my meetups and I kick them out at a certain hour we're not at all night bar here at the church but one of the things that I realized and I mean that in the fuller sense of the word was that I had always wanted the church to be a place where people could come and and share what's on their heart and stay heretical on most of the people who come don't go to church right but I so lament the fact that the church has become an evangelical churches of all places because they're supposed to be the ones who don't care about the rules in order for you know whatever that churches be places where people can come just to talk out loud explore ideas work through things find find conversation partners who could be credible and helpful and I am I am so I am so I feel so blessed by what you said about Calvin Calvin seminary's PhD program because I you know for me the church is a place for people to come and talk and be and build relationships and so you know I hearing your story and knowing knowing the truth that I find it horrendous that in many churches people people have to just shut up and in your case just had to shut up and deal with it and then even for the sake of you know employment or what have you I find that to be I find that to be a terribly sad thing because I want so much more for the church yeah I agree yeah I mean that's this is where to to my I mean I would say that there is I see I I see certain people like Chris Firestone and I could name others who were influential on my journey the fact that there was there was a lack of concern about whether or not my views were aligning with some sort of evangelical dogma was really important to me trusting them and I really had no idea what Chris thought about certain things I just knew that he was honestly engaging in the exercise of discussion discussing questions and that too was really pivotal to me trusting him and and I found that even in doing becoming truly human that's one of the things I found in the pre-screenings with people is that a lot of folks had asked me after they saw the film so you know well you know so what did you know how did you meet those people and you know have you continued up the relationship with them beyond that and so on so what and the answer is really no I haven't continued the relationship without you know I mean it wasn't really it was a relationship predicated on interviewing them for a possible appearance in a documentary I wasn't building relationships with them you know outside of that but also one of the things that was an unexpected sort of byproduct of that was because I didn't want to taint the conversation with making them aware that I'm orthodox right well that's what that's what I had mentioned as soon as as soon as the religiously unaffiliated folks are talking know they're talking to a religiously affiliated person by default they're just going to have a defense mechanism go up and it's going to shut the conversation down and so whenever they would ask well you know so what do you think about these things I would say ah it doesn't really matter we're not here to talk about me we're here to talk about you and so all they knew was that I was the director of this film I mean they knew all the components they knew that there was going to be this third story in there of this orthodox you know sort of nun turned orthodox but they had no idea that was me and what I was fascinated by was was that the more they had a sense that I was asking these questions and really wanted to know more about them and was just you know sort of honestly navigating the territory of where they came from and where they're at and I didn't have an agenda where I was looking to just sort of like okay now it's my opportunity and here's the opening I can jump in right yeah here's my opportunity to pause right once they realized that that wasn't forthcoming you know there was this ease that set in as well as ironically a certain amount of gratitude which was a shock to me because I again I didn't see it coming but it was the the gratitude of oh I rarely ever get to talk to anybody about these things and so I'm so grateful to have the opportunity to process out loud you know where I came from and the questions that I've had and where I'm at right now because I don't know the last time I actually articulated any of that and so gratitude was this odd byproduct in my mind because all I'm doing is asking them about you know but nonetheless it was amazing to discover that that's so rare to actually just ask a person about themselves and listen to them genuinely and at a level that's more than superficial right we're talking about much deeper things and have no agenda forthcoming beyond just finding out about them is so rare that it is this sort of revolutionary you know thing for them and their experience I think it probably says something to how many people interact in our culture when it comes to worldview issues generally well and I think how how poorly the church is doing so one of the things that happened with my channel was I so I started I started made a video something like three things the pastor wonders about jordan peterson and just put that out then I started getting letters and and actually a friend um guy shows up in church the next sunday with this poster and says I've never been to church before in my life here I am it's like okay what have I started and and and then people start writing me emails and calling me and wanting to talk with me and then I start I start having enough of these conversations that I start realizing that the conversations are repeating so I said well I started asking people if I could record them and they'd say yes and so then we record them like we're doing today and then I send it back to them and say I want you to watch this and if you would be okay with me putting this on my channel I want you to let me know and they would and this started a whole thing of of just talking to people and to me part of it was just pastoral work which I have always known that people people need listeners but part of it was um you know then the response to this I just had one of my friends say you know some of those conversations are boring and I said yes this is Hollywood where we sweep everything and in a nice tour package you're going to come to a dramatic climax so on and so forth but the the hunger in the world for for people to just have someone listen to them I for five years I had a homeless mentally ill man who who I couldn't get him to go anywhere else he parked right against my office door so you know like Lazarus I had to step over him to just come to work every day and much of our time he would he would come and he'd just sit in my chair and he just needed to talk and and and so then people come to me and I said well I can't you're my pastor I'm not your pastor you need to have a real pastor which means you need to be there needs to be a real church with real people this little video thing this is this is good for some things but this is not this is not real life here and and but the the the thing that breaks my heart is that so many people can't find a real pastor and I love the part of your story where where your your priest told you you know made you wait seven years that didn't I didn't catch that from the film but that's because a lot of people are going to hear seven years and it's like shoot marriages don't last seven years but you and and I love that because he you know I think he he forced you you you learn to submit to the church and you learn to submit to your wife to her needs and and that is oh that's you know there's so much gospel in there we can't ignore it so and I I really do hope that I really I you know what what do I want some people ask me what do I want from all of this I just watched Bishop Barron talk to Jordan Peterson or listen to that it's out on the podcast now and and Jordan Peterson asked Bishop Barron well what do you want and Bishop Barron says I want people to know faith in Jesus Christ and being folded in the Roman Catholic Church of course right right and and I and and I you know I really do hope that your films continue to touch people and to introduce them into hard questions I mean your journey is many years by the time you settled into church yeah yeah let's see if I if I calculate out gully I think I would say the journey started in about 1995 I mean journey of the sense of starting to go into existential crisis and probably I discover orthodoxy somewhere around oh probably 2002 is when I first encounter orthodoxy so it's seven years of of grappling with things okay uh encountering orthodoxy researching it probably over the next year you know and then you know and then becoming persuaded and then having to wait seven years so you're probably talking like 15 years of what in well and then on top of that my wife you know I mentioned that we we waited right we had this whole thing of like well now I just took a job so probably 17 years so 17 years from going into crisis mode and saying huh I really have some serious questions that I think need to be answered to actually settling someplace because God is a little like Laban you know it's like as well as one of the things that I I started to discover very clearly was that I mean I mentioned in the film that orthodoxy is very much a lifestyle right it's it's a there's a lot of you follow a liturgical calendar and there's instructions about how you're supposed to fast and pray and and to really start to embody that in some sort of way where it makes sense and it's really become part of you is its own process right so in many ways I felt like just becoming orthodox it's not as if becoming orthodox like oh I've arrived now I rest right or something like that it was almost like setting your foot on a totally new journey that is still going on you know right now because even though maybe my theological understanding of its doctrines is pretty advanced that doesn't mean my actual ability to embody its practices are really in vets and unfortunately I think that's oftentimes one of the confusions that people had it's why I fatically said at the beginning and at the end of the film I am not a saint I'm not some like spiritual exemplar like don't get this like you want to find you want to find out your spiritual exemplar go to like Mount Athos in Greece and like find an elder or something like that but like not me definitely not me and and and I think unfortunately there's a tendency in you know our western context to conflate knowledge with maturity you know so that if somebody knows a lot of stuff they're the person you want to look to and I'm good if you know you're looking for somebody who's you know an encyclopedia of information that's so good like you know that's great yeah ask me some theological questions I'll give you the answers the answers right to those questions about orthodoxy if you know in an analytic fashion but don't confuse actually understanding the articulation of this doctrine with actually growing spiritually and I think that's that's a conflation that often happens and is uh yeah that's that's yeah so anyway well I've taken plenty of your time I don't know if you have any questions or anything you wanted to talk about before we before we close this up well I would be curious if we could talk again because I really enjoy talking with you Paul I would love to talk with you again too and I think um I will I will send this to you and you can look at it and if you want to alter it or anything you could you could do that or just just give me the green light and I'll post it on my channel and you'd be just one of the they call themselves randos sometimes they send me pictures you know it's one of the randos I talk with so yeah well sounds good well I'd be happy to talk be one of the randos you talk with so well thank you so much and I I very much appreciate you taking the time to do this and I I so enjoyed your story and I I very much enjoyed your film and I'll you know if we post this I'll put links to it on there so people can find it but yeah deeply grateful for this okay thanks Paul and let's talk again soon okay real good thanks a lot okay bye