https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A1r-yzKCSI0

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to make a short video about the relationship between the pub and estuary. When I was in the UK, one of my new friends were talking about estuary and she said to me, she said, you know, it used to be that right next door to the church there was the pub. And it spoke to a high trust culture. Because after you'd be there at the worship service, you would go next door, and you would start doing a little drinking and your tongue would get a little liberated. And you would say exactly what you thought. Perhaps what you thought about the preacher, what you thought about the sermon, what you thought about the church, what you thought about the other people in the church. And I thought, huh. Now in America that's very different because obviously in America, obviously it's not maybe obvious to many of you, but there in America, many, a lot of the church traditions that still remain vigorous tended to be teetotalism. The Methodists and many Baptists were against alcohol. And a lot of the European churches that were transplanted over were not teetotal churches, but as I said with respect to Mark Knoll's thesis about the how Christianity moved over the Appalachians and out over into the frontier and into the West. They carried the Bible, but they didn't carry the church institutions. And so that really, starting in January, we'll have estuary at nine o'clock in the morning here at Living Stones. Now obviously in church there's coffee after church where people get to talk, and that fellowship in the church is a deeply important part of the living, breathing church community. So I just decided to just do a little Googling of pubs and churches. Found this one article in the Catholic Network. In other words, that whole area was filled with churches and filled with pubs, and the church and the pubs sort of worked together. And I always talk about estuaries being church adjacent, and I had no idea it would be church adjacent just like the pub was adjacent to the church. Something to think about. Let me know what you think.