https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sQV0phhaegE

 The Stoa is a digital campfire where we cohere in dialogue about what matters most at the knife's edge of what's happening now. Welcome to the Stoa. I am Peter Lindberg, the steward of the Stoa, and the Stoa is a place for us to cohere in dialogue about what matters most at the knife's edge of this very moment. Today we're going to get some culture war on with Paul VanderKlay. For those of you who don't know, Paul is a pastor at Living Stone's Christian Reform Church in Sacramento, California. He runs a popular YouTube channel having conversations with the likes of Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Begeot, and John Fervake. This is going to be a standard Q&A conversation of the Stoa. I think I see some new faces. Paul and I will have a brief conversation. He'll share his thoughts on the title of today's talk. If you have any questions, throw them in the chat box. I'll call you to unmute yourself. If you want me to read it on your behalf, let me know because this will eventually go on YouTube. We have about 50 people RSVP, but half of that is here so we might have more people trickling in. That being said, do I have anything else I want to say? No, I don't. Paul, how's it going today? I'm doing well. I thought before we dive into the theme of today, maybe you can kind of for people who are just coming in who don't know nothing about you, like who are you? What is your maybe worldview and what maybe some themes that have been coming up on your YouTube channel and what's at the edge of your thinking? My name is Paul VanderKlay. I'm a minister in the Christian Reformed Church of North America, a denomination that was established by, it's basically Dutch Reformed. There are about two-fifths of the Christian Reformed Churches in Canada and the rest in the United States. I have been a pastor here in Sacramento for 23 years before then. I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic. I, for the most part, have sort of done my job quietly in my little corner of the world. About three years ago, I became acquainted with Jordan Peterson's work and I was fascinated by his work and I was equally fascinated by the following that he was developing. When he started the biblical series, I thought this is something worth jumping into. By that point, he had about 300,000 subscribers and it was already kind of a big thing to jump into, so I thought, well, I'll just add my two bits to the conversation on YouTube. I hadn't really done much on YouTube, but thought I'll play with it and probably find some conversation partners. Like many who were excited about the work of Jordan Peterson, I was having difficulty finding other people who were watching dozens of hours of him and I wanted to talk about it with someone, so I thought, well, if I do a YouTube channel, I'll probably be able to talk with five or ten other people who are interested who somehow find my channel, but I was unprepared for what would happen, which was a lot of other people found my channel and I had way more conversation partners than I ever had before. And so I started making, I started doing conversations with people I wanted to talk with who were talking about this and these were just random people who would contact me and want to have a conversation, so I started posting them on YouTube because I found the conversations were starting to repeat and then discovered that there was an appetite for those as well. So I did some commentary videos, what I pretty much today call monologue videos. It's basically my processing what John Verbecky calls the meaning crisis. I just finished this afternoon a conversation with Kale Zeldin who was raised Roman Catholic and just recently wrote a penetrating article about sense making. He's been listening to IDW characters and so I've found this a good way to try to process what I think is the end of modernity. Now modernity has been dying for a hundred years already, but these things die slowly and perhaps where I fit into this space is Jonathan Peugeot is an Eastern Orthodox icon carver. I'm a Protestant and John Verbecky is a non-theist and I continue to believe that Christianity is a viable option for people who are looking to escape from the meaning crisis and find sense making. Yet I think the church has continued to change throughout its 2000 years and will continue to do so. The scary thing is that sometimes the church goes down dead ends and you never quite know if you're pursuing a dead end until 50 or 100 or 200 years after you've done it. So I talk out loud on the internet and some people listen and talk back and that's what I do. Besides being a pastor of a church. Right, right and I said beforehand that I was some obviously stoic but secretly a Christian, not so secret and I'm like an Orthodox Christian actually. So I got my prayer rope right here so me and Jonathan Peugeot have a fellow company there. So I'm curious why the Protestant path and I think I read your bio that was something that you you fell into, you were baptized into. No, I'm third generation minister in the Christian Form Church. So this is my tribe, this is my family. A lot of people listen to my videos and are rooting for me to change traditions but I have no plans on it. The Protestant angle, I brought that up in my conversation recently with Jonathan and John. I'm not promoting Protestant in it but the Protestant Reformation I think in many ways is both at the root of the dawning of modernity and unresolved issues in the Protestant Reformation I think are driving some of the causes of its demise and so everyone in this current crisis have things that they need to work through. Usually because of their own tradition. If it's a very ancient tradition like the Orthodox, well there's the Roman Catholics have a lot to work through right now and Protestants do as well. In many ways the different traditions work at different speeds. The Orthodox are very slow speed, very ancient. Roman Catholic a little bit faster, they're a little bit newer. Protestants are like squirrels all over the place, stowing nuts in different trees and often forgetting where they are. And so for the title of today's talk was Being a Christian in Culture War 2.0. That's something I've written about. Peter Picochon had a different take on it. So I'm curious if you have any general thoughts on that and yeah maybe just any general thoughts and I'll kind of have some follow up. I think culture wars are good places for Christians and the reason why I'm saying that is because Christianity's birth narrative happened in the midst of a very fierce culture war. The Jewish people are an amazing group of people who have resisted, fiercely resisted assimilation and we're doing so in the midst of heavy pressure from Rome and Hellenistic culture. And into that culture war where just a few years ago, the rise of the Jewish people in the midst of a culture war where just about everybody hated each other. They could all, Romans and anti-Romans could agree that the world was better without Jesus and so they killed him. And in some ways, the rise of Jordan Peterson was directly a result of the culture war because you can find them on YouTube, but the man and the moment found each other with Jordan Peterson. And I think Jesus is, well he's the master and he's the example because of how he lived in the midst of a culture war. The Romans just didn't quite understand him. The zealots were probably deeply frustrated with him and the Pharisees who should have been closest to him in that culture war eventually had a hand in putting him to death. But after his death, resurrection and ascension, many of those Pharisees became Christians of a sort. So I think even though Christians will complain about culture wars because they're hard on us and they're tremendously uncomfortable, I think Christianity is uniquely suited to a culture war environment because it does the one thing that culture war can't make sense of. It loves its enemies and whenever you have a war, that's the first thing to go because both your allies and your enemies will say, this is the one rule that must not be violated. You must maintain your tribe. And so how do you do that in the heat of the culture war battle and maybe how do you do that generally and how do you do that personally? Well Jesus, the heart of Jesus' command is love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself. Now the neighbor goes all the way up to and includes your enemies and in the sermon on the mount, which is supposed to be Jesus' quintessential distillation of his message, people to this day cannot agree on what the theme of that message is, but right in the middle of it Jesus makes the observation that God the Father brings rain and sun upon the righteous and the righteous and the unrighteous and then Jesus says be perfect, do like him. And so you if you if in the midst of a culture war you simply display weakness which means you're just you're just the embodiment of niceness and all shucks can't we all get along. That doesn't really work. It's loving someone you disagree with and sometimes someone you disagree with greatly. Now in this context we immediately think of some political rival in the culture war, but for many of us the people that we love are also the people that potentially we might hate. They might have been a bad parent, they might have been an unfaithful spouse, they might be a rebellious child, they might be a traitor to some ideological tribe that you care deeply about and are committed to. So how do you love that person and not lose yourself? And I think it's that sort of thing that we see from Jesus because if you read the Gospels he's no pushover, he doesn't have a problem denouncing things, whitewashed tombs, he calls some of his adversaries and again a lot of these adversaries are the ones closest to him in terms of beliefs, yet this is the same man that at his execution asks praise for the forgiveness of his executioners while his body is dripping with the mocking spittle of his enemies. That is a powerful thing and that is an enormous challenge which you're looking for a meaning crisis, well if you try to walk that road you will find meaning. That's a pretty cool reframe that the culture war itself is an opportunity to practice one's Christianity. Yeah I think so. Look at the origin story, take a look at the culture war that Jesus was in the midst of and then read what he does carefully. Both, well really the side that he's closest to really wants to pigeonhole him. So Jesus engage in our culture war. When I was, so I was you know raised in the Christian Reformed Church, raised in a preacher's, raised in a parsonage, you know the son of a preacher, went to Calvin College and Calvin College's ethos was not so much you know really try to contain the covenant faithful but when you get to college start thinking for yourself and so I started reading the Bible really for the first time for myself and I was immediately frustrated by all the stories about oh why are they so hung up on what he does on the Sabbath and all these purity laws. Well if you take a look at that culture war all of these were the kinds of the kinds of symbolic virtue signals that one did to position themselves on one side of the war or the other and you find Jesus you know in some way sometimes intentionally doing the impure thing. You read a story where he he heals somebody on the Sabbath and it's like well you couldn't have seen that guy that day before or the day after or you couldn't have done it quietly in a corner you had to do it right there in the synagogue with everybody watching just to tick them off and you know the one story where the friends of a paralytic drop him down into the middle of a crowd in a home and he says your sins are forgiven. He could have said take up your mat and walk and everybody would have said well that's the script. He immediately goes for the sins and it's like he he he knows exactly how to poke them but he doesn't do it in a culture war way and he he is an enigma to everyone including his disciples but yet for 2 000 years we can't seem to look away. So if you want to know how to live in a culture war look at Jesus. The only caution I'll give you is that if you do what he did you'll probably get what he got which is dead. So if you don't believe in the second part of the story which is resurrection the first part might not make a lot of sense. Getting hung on the cross is the ultimate Christian practice. So I have a few more questions but we've got a lot of stuff in the chat happening. Let's see here. Okay David Jacobs you have a question if you can unmute yourself and ask the poll. I guess I'll just read it. I wrote it down. So I was fascinated to come on to this talk about the culture wars because I am been watching it very carefully for the last four or five years and I'm wondering how you explain the vilification and the demonization of the enemy by right-wing evangelicals and the politically conservative Christian nationalists. I know I'm throwing a lot of words out there. You pick the one you like the best. That's fine Dave. Dave is a member of our local Sacramento meetup so it's fun to get his question. How do I explain that? Christians aren't always very good at being Christian and they're just not. That's been the story right from the start. You know one sixth of his disciples betray him. Only one of those two was restored and if you read the New Testament closely there is a fierce debate about what it meant to be a Christian. And if you look at the story of the apostle Paul, you look at Stephen, the adversity against Christians were bad. Well amongst Christians it was terrible too. I'm a Protestant and so I believe that Christians are saved by grace. Now I know that is often read as a dodge but I being a Christian know that I'm often bad at it and so I'm thankful for a doctrine that says that my Lord is patient with me and whatever good I do in his name on his behalf is done out of gratitude. So and I think not to pick on people let's say to the right of me politically but you know what we've seen over the last few years is those on the left know how to treat their out group poorly too. So I think that's a human thing and ideally following Jesus will in increasing measure lead us to extend grace to an ungracious world. Cool. Dan Feldman you had a question. Yes I had a question. Doesn't the dualism inherent to patriarchal monotheistic religion such as Christianity fuel the meaning crisis itself? If you accept the terms patriarchal depending on how you define it I would argue that at least the meaning crisis as presented by let's say John Verbeke and even if we take it as far back as we can let's say to the 11th century Christianity was still around 1100 years before then. I think a lot of the meaning crisis that we're dealing with now is a product of modernity and a product of a lot of systems that suggest that I have hours and hours of video on this stuff I have hours and hours of video on this stuff that suggest that we are not what we think we are whether that is in a psychological frame that there are things underneath us that are pulling the strings that our conscious self in this manifest image are unaware of or if we look at that in an evolutionary biological frame where I think I'm acting this way but it is all the tribalism of my ape ancestors that is actually manifesting itself out in these other ways. So I wouldn't say that you can place the meaning crisis as we've been talking about at least in the Verbeke channels on the to the feet of Christianity unless you also place that unless you also place the scientific revolution at its feet and I would also argue that the deconstruction of the patriarchy and almost all of the progressive ideas that we've seen in the last few hundred years also find their genesis in Christianity because in much of human history out groups were simply enslaved and killed why does the victim of the victim of societal oppression gain status in our narratives and I would think that Nietzsche spoke presciently about it by saying well it's that Christianity that somehow made everyone equal and you have this Jesus that dies for people who think wrong so that would be my answer to that. Can I ask a follow-up to that question Peter? Just one thing. Okay just one. I think the issue is I think you focused on the patriarchal part of my comment and for me the more prescient word there is dualism and I from my perspective is that having a god be somehow separate somehow separate or and also from my understanding I'm not a Christian or anything for that matter. Probably a non-theist perhaps. That the disconnection from nature that I think is inherent in Christianity is kind of that core of that of that dualistic division. That's a great point and a great question. If you listen to Brett Weinstein, David Sloan Wilson, I think they make the compelling argument that human beings are not simply biological creatures but fairly early on a culture strain developed in us that it's simply you simply can't understand a human being without those two tracks both the let's say the material genetic track and the culture track. I don't think humanity is going to get away from dualisms because of our two-track nature because that culture track has become so deeply embedded and entwined in the genetic track that if you were to I mean science fiction plays with this sometimes if you were to take a sperm and an egg and try to develop it completely apart from any human contact first you couldn't do it because you'd have to find a place divorced from it. I don't think what you would arrive at is what we would call a human being and I think that that culture track is by virtue of it being thought-based immaterial logos based. I don't think we're going to ever get away from dualisms as human beings if you buy the evolutionary biologist argument about what human beings are. I can tell Dan has another follow-up but do you want to sneak it in then? I'll give you one more. I guess my point is that like for example with Taoism for example there's the yin yang the Taoists clearly saw poles but they spoke of them as in dynamic a mutual dependency between them and I think that in much of Western civilization and I think Christianity played a big role in this that the mutual dependence was not emphasized. I agree that there's always going to be an up and a down and this sort of thing just like the Taoists do but they emphasize this dynamic balance and interplay between the two that can never be escaped and I think in Western culture we tend to you know with Descartes we decapitate, we separate, we dissect, we vivisect and I think that's something that makes us a bit different in that sense. I think what you're pointing to is a lot of the conversation that I've been having with John Vervecky and Jonathan Pageot because and I actually think so one of the things that I've I've after watching Jordan Peterson and Sam Adams debate I think part of what happened to the implicit definition of God was that God got bifurcated and so our assumptions about Christianity have sort of and I think again the Protestant Reformation has a lot to do with this because with the move away from sacraments with Luther faith became a very psychological thing and God became a very other thing whereas if you say look at the angels cry in Isaiah 6, holy holy holy is the Lord God Almighty that's you know that's about as that's as high as you can go the whole earth is full of his glory and so I think part of what we see in the Hebrew scriptures is that ironically Christianity develops as many have said somewhere between Jerusalem and Athens but the Jerusalem side is the side that says of earth this is our home and so these issues these issues have been debated broadly throughout Christianity for a very long time and you can still find them today I think in fact many conservative Christians in the West are functional Gnostics when you hear them say things like well to be a Christian means going to heaven when you die well Christians in terms of the idea about the intermediate state do believe they'll be with the Lord when they die but in Christianity our final status is resurrected is bodily resurrection so it's also ironic that with a modern skepticism about the resurrection of the body I think that sort of distorts Christianity away from the cry in Genesis 1 of God saying of our embodied creation in the flesh it is good it is very good so but you make a great point I withdraw all right thank you very much limited to two follow-ups for this session okay we got Laura Laura's next hi uh let's see if I can pull up my question again um so um in loving your enemies how do you balance holding firm to your beliefs and remaining open to the possibility that your enemy might have a truth to offer you and how does a Christian move past a sense of righteousness of belief when necessary it seems like um many tribes in the culture war seem to struggle with this I think it's I think there's a reason we all struggle with it because it's really hard I first of all I think with Jesus we see he manages to do this but one of the amazing things that we see about Jesus and you can you can see it in the Old Testament as well in Genesis 18 where Jesus seems open to the influence of others and you would say well if the son of God incarnate comes down surely he should be talking all the time and he wouldn't need ears but that's clearly not the portrait we see with Jesus so I think it takes the development of wisdom and this is one of the real contributions I see John Vervecky making to the conversation in and and and Peter with the stow as well because I've heard these themes coming out of this conversation as well that we must cultivate wisdom and Christians don't have a corner on wisdom if you read the book of Proverbs carefully in the writings in the Old Testament you'll notice that many of the Proverbs come from non-Hebrew sources the book of Job which may very well be the oldest book in the Bible many people believe many scholars believe that the book of Job as we currently have it as an adaptation of other wisdom literature prior to that even the stories such as Genesis 1 and 2 I think are are in conversation with Egyptian and Babylonian creation stories as well so if the Bible can listen to others and if Jesus can listen to others and if God the Father stands before Abraham which is the older of the two because you know very pious people said no Abraham must stand before God but if God can stand before Abraham and Abraham can plead the cause for Sodom and God will listen and negotiate with him well it should we shouldn't be so full of ourselves to as to be above God so no Christians have a hard time with this because human beings have a hard time with this because especially when we get angry and culture wars tend to do that that anger fills us with a feeling of righteousness and then we tend to do most of our damage so it's a great question any uh follow-up Laura you're on mute no that was great thank you awesome uh Aaron you're up next hey Paul uh great to talk to you I'm friends with Mark Hoffman down in Alameda and we were oh wonderful we were looking forward to having you back in March I think it was but it's great to finally have a chance to ask you a question um I think of platforms like the stoa as being a kind of church it's kind of a weird decentralized place where people meet up to sort of build community and engage in rituals and sense making and uh you're engaging in this too with your online platform on YouTube do you see Christianity as moving more into this kind of strange online decentralized space having kind of online churches where people come together from all over into little clusters like we're in right now and do you see yourself as kind of being a pastor in this world right now do you have like an online church do you think of your platform as being sort of an online Christian church I've recently started two new efforts in my channel and I'm calling them living stones online because so many people can't go to church physically and so we're going to try to do what we can to continue our community online but the second effort I call estuary which I think when I listen to Peter's introduction to the stoa this is a very estuary like space and what I mean by estuary is that if you have a walled garden which in some sense the church is and it reigns in your walled garden if you don't bless the rest of the world with your water now you're going to establish a reservoir and so sacramento is right at the edge of the the great California delta and you're at the other end of it and so I think Christianity has always been in this space it just hasn't done it well all the time in in the in the book of acts in Ephesus Paul rented a hall the apostle Paul rented a call hall called the hall of tyrannus and the book of acts describes him as regularly meeting there and discussing the philosophies and the ideas of his day he also did this on mars hill in Athens I think medieval monasteries did a similar thing by you know why do we have the the monastic movement preserved the pagan writings of the ancient world why would monasteries do such a thing why didn't they not only not burn the books but copy them you know so the church has the church has done this I think throughout its time but the church always has two things to deal with and in my tradition we call them common grace on one hand which says god speaks through creation and he speaks through others but also you know special revelation and so the church has to somehow maintain both the understanding of an of an antithesis but also the understanding of of common grace so I'm hoping that my whatever efforts I can contribute to creating an estuary like space will can I think it makes churches better to to talk and to listen we were the old as the old adage says we're given one mouth and two ears and churches sometimes major on the mouth and forget they have ears thank you Andrew you had a question I'm I've copied and pasted it for you if you can unmute yourself yeah good day Paul and Peter how you going um yeah my my question was really just your thoughts on the shift if you think there has been one in the new atheism in the last decade or so this is a bit of a smaller focus question than the ones we've had but um somebody like a Sam Harris and I don't know Peter Bogotian and people like that you mentioned from time to time on your channel um if I think back 10 years they probably were more of an opponent someone to contend with but um in recent times um they've sort of been on the same side I guess um so I'm just wondering what your thoughts on what you know what happened there you know what what took place and uh just interested in what you've got to say there a very astute listener of my channel that I've had a number of conversations with he's a cardiologist up in Idaho uh noted to me that you begin to hear from people often when their assumed power in society is slipping and we've seen that from Christians for a very long time all throughout modernity but his observation was that in some ways new atheism reached its peak as they began to feel the pinch of modernity receding the irony of that recession is that new atheists are increasingly finding themselves allied with Christians who are making assertions about some fixed aspects such as human nature I think new atheists in some ways have a more difficult time because this losing this type of losing feels new to them I mean for for many years Sam Harris would go on stage and he developed quite a following because as some of the people who listen to me have said every time Sam Harris would sort of mock and expose Christians you know Christians didn't have an answer well I had a conversation with James Lindsay on my channel a year or so ago and I wasn't really aware of sort of the split of the church of atheism between I would say classical liberal atheism and atheism plus and so that has happened and yeah it's produced some surprising things one day on Twitter I saw Peter Boghossian tweet recommend my podcast to his following and I thought this is a strange turn of events where a man who writes a manual for creating atheists starts recommending my podcast either I've somehow lost my way as a Christian minister or the world is changing and so I'm more than happy to have productive honest conversations with new atheists and obviously we have disagreement but you know here I think John Vervecky is a real example of someone with whom you can have differences but have a really productive honest conversation and so I you know again if Christians are called to love their neighbors all the way up to and including their enemies well with if new atheists are suddenly warming up to Christians I've got no problem with talking with them too cool Joe you had a question that would be a good follow-up I copied and pasted in the chat for you Joe you there I have a mouthful of Chipotle can you ask for me please okay thank you it'd be fun listening to it but you know I will I will not question like to ask okay so what does Paul of Enderclay make of human rights as a secular replacement for all people being made in the image of God Holland makes the argument that is just as faithful an idea as those found in the Bible and I'm inclined to agree I think Holland is right Nicholas Waltersdorf who's a philosopher was one of my professors at Calvin College has made a similar argument for years I think it's I don't know I don't know where else you find respect for low status outsider human beings beyond what you find in the Imago Dei or the image of God as we find in Scripture now that being said the people of God have not always lived that way but it is I think anthropology has borne this out I was reading I was reading a book about the Navajo noting how Navajo language just like just about every other language of the world they had two categories the people and everyone else Jew and Gentile, Citizen and Barbarian this is completely common to humanity and now suddenly and you can you can see it in Jesus and you see the Apostle Paul bringing it out completely that here you have a God over all the earth and all the peoples of the earth belong to him not just a particular ethnic group so yeah I think human rights is directly downstream from Christianity I think because of how secularity unfolded there was a need to to place it in this imagined religion free zone but I think those distinctions and definitions are also breaking down as modernity recedes so yeah I agree so I think this is Manus I copied and pasted your question in the chat if you're going to meet yourself yeah Paul what is the most prevalent criticism against Christianity in the culture war from your understanding and what is your response to it in light of Christianity having a you know legitimacy in helping to alleviate the culture war I think the dominant modernist strongest dominant modernist argument against Christianity has been the problem with suffering after and and this the formulation of the problem with suffering or the problem of evil arose interestingly enough after the destruction of Lisbon because that sort of that was right at the beginning of the modern period it really shook the world before that calamities happened you can read it in the book of Job there's an ancient version of the problem of evil but after human beings began to have a vision of our capacity to manage the world in a better way than nature did once we had the kind of technology that began to have an impact on plague on famine human beings began to say hey if we can run the world minimizing plague and famine war we struggle with but if we can run the world minimizing plague and famine why do we imagine that there's a benevolent god up there managing the world aren't we better managers of the world than god nature is red in tooth and claw we seem to understand how to save a human life how to buffer our existence from flood and famine and would have said plague but this gets into the postmodern complaint which is well maybe we're not quite as good at this as we thought we were but i think that's the most powerful argument and and i very much understand when people say i have difficulty believing in a god because there's just too much chaos and suffering in the world and i don't imagine a good god would allow all of this to happen good god would allow all of this to happen i think philosophers like alvin plantinga have answered the question well but pastorally emotionally if you're suffering it's a powerful question all right any follow-up on us yeah just in terms of the the response i mean um i feel like you touched on the first part of that but i'm not sure i connected with the second part of the question which is um you know what would your response to be to it in in the culture war so it's someone would say all right this is the problem we have with the idea of christianity this good god like look at all the suffering um you know why why should we listen to christians like what christians have to say in this in the context of the culture war like what would our response be i think i think the dominant response of christians has to be their lives you know there's a great um you know george orwell had a great response to joseph stalin who was you know as we know now in the in the 1930s starved the ukraine and belarus in the name of the utopian vision he was pursuing and well if you want to make an omelet you have to break some eggs and george orwell said show me the omelet and i think that's the challenge because the the power that we have the power that we have assigned to ourselves has filled us with ambition and enthusiasm but it seems we often overreach and so i think the reason i think the best answer that the christian church can give are the lives of its people and again if you go back to my first answer to david questions christians often fail and so that the real the real command that christianity marches under is jesus command at the beginning of the book of acts you will receive power from the holy spirit and you will be my witnesses so the degree to which christians bear witness to jesus is usually the degree to which others find his answers compelling cool uh paul you just had a question if you're gonna meet yourself uh let me get on the right camera here um yeah so um hi paul um i was raised as a pastor's kid in a conservative baptist church in a small town um in oregon um so in that context hard right politics and religion were very intertwined um it's very hard to separate them um i was a pretty self-aware kid but um as i've become you know 25 years since leaving that that context um become a lot more you know scientifically socially um globally conscious um and have left the faith in that process and for me it's it's hard it's hard to separate those two progressions um does that make sense so far oh yeah yeah um so what are some other frameworks that uh and i'm i assume i'm not the only one i what are other frameworks of ways to think about that um that progression of you know i i've gone from this place of being certain of everything i know to this place of not knowing agnosticism if you will but um but in all other areas of my life um and it's again it's very hard for me to psychologically separate those i'm curious your thoughts on that yeah i i there are a lot of people that i talk to who have stories like yours it was interesting to me that jordan peterson seemed to uh trigger in a lot of folks with stories like yours a reconsideration of christianity i grew up in a home which was you know conservative in terms of christian belief you know the resurrection the virgin birth the resurrection of jesus the second coming all of those things but wasn't politically conservative so i think a lot of people because these things were together they kind of associated it and it become it'd be it'd become a whole and so a lot of people have sort of deconstructed that and and left other parts of it so you know yesterday i did a or today actually i posted a conversation with a guy named jesse whose story was very similar he deconstructed um he's since 50 he's since found his way back i think traditions every tradition needs walls but traditions that rely too much on the impenetrability of their walls and i'm speaking about walls metaphorically here in terms of mental structures tend to be weak when encountering other strong traditions and i think this has happened to a lot of people and i i think as adults we have to exercise stewardship over our beliefs and look for the truth and work through those issues and probably be equally serious about deconstructing new beliefs as old and so well there's a lot of folks with stories like yours and that's happening in the christian church all over the place and so i would just encourage i'm glad you're here in the stoia and encourage you to continue to pursue conversations with people who are wrestling with similar things so if peter if i could have one follow-up yeah um yeah i think you hit on all the all the the right issues and the things i'm i'm dealing with and it's really only been in the last six to 12 months i'd say within the last 12 months that my dad and i have even had you know transparent conversations about this it's mostly just been the elephant in the room which again i know i'm not unique there um what are what are some you know again practical ways to open up that conversation space with him when you know it's clear it's a it's a major source of pain for him and i understand that and care about that yeah yeah i think kindness is important patience work hard on work hard on not being easily triggered and in all likelihood your father has to work on that too in my experience both of you probably want a restoration of your relationship it might not be easy because he's going to have to work through some of his own beliefs and i i think people sometimes try to short circuit this ironically by pursuing sort of a propositional approach which is what they've deconstructed from say dad if you'd only give up these beliefs well i don't think that's necessarily true again right at the heart of christianity is a man loving and dying for his enemies if jesus can do that for his enemies surely it's a christian goal to do that for our children with whom we have disagreements and with our parents so i'd say keep working at it and and you can't work you can't do his work for so just work on your triggers you know when he inevitably says something that triggers you learn to forgive and at that point as a christian pastor i'd say well if you're learning to forgive well you're you're listening to jesus because it was jesus who said you know jesus put such a high value on forgiveness so um you know my best wishes are for you and your father that that you can restore the relationship and and potentially have some productive meaningful conversations about why you've made the decisions that you have and he's also made decisions to stay with his faith and so odds are both of you can learn from each other all right uh let's bring us home with joe's question joe if you can ask your question and meet yourself uh this is uh joe pickens hi paul good to see you hi joe um so i was listening to uh actually i wasn't listening to the first part of paul's question just now because i was too busy formulating my own question but i caught the tail end of it and it seems somewhat relevant to my question which is um i see a necessity for christians many of whom are very close to me and who i care for deeply because that was the the protestant tradition that i was brought up in i see a necessity for them to take the plunge so to speak into post-modernity and to integrate modernity with post-modernity into a christianity if that's what they want um but there seems to be this huge dividing line within my own family and my community between those who have taken that plunge and those who have not um and i feel like i'm in this unique position and feel called in a way to reconcile those two tribes um just if nothing else just within my own family and my community and i was wondering if you can speak at all to that dynamic between those two tribes and if you have any experience with that it's never easy and how whatever good you wish for the other side uh human beings usually aren't capable of necessarily delivering on those things so i find again the central admonition of christianity to love to usually be the best pathway forward figure out the best way to love both sides love has an amazing power to afford credibility to the person who is giving themselves for the other these things take a long time a long time and so be patient i also believe this work is difficult if you don't have a vivid faith in the sovereignty of god to to accomplish difficult and hard things in our midst in response to our needs and requests and so i recommend that as well it sounds um and there are so there are some ironies in this generally speaking not always many traditionalists have a theology that affords this type of sovereignty and power given to god uh people who are more progressive and contemporary often more skeptical don't have that resource to fall back on to give them encouragement so much of life is learning to suffer it really is and i find a a a strong vivid belief in god's goodness and sovereignty and presence when we ask him to be a tremendous help to bearing under heavy loads and so if you're going to if you're going to endeavor to do a difficult thing figure out the kinds of resources you need to endure the kinds of suffering that that difficult thing will require of you i don't know if that makes any sense no it is helpful thank you i especially liked the uh what you said about loving each side as best that i possibly can and that giving a credibility to uh i mean it's just you know being the person that's at the center of christianity sort of turns out to be the solution to a lot of answers yeah that's that's that's really the program but and and it's astoundingly scalable can work in a public culture war and it can work in a family fight can work in a marriage can work in a parent child relationship yeah and i think that's a great point i think that's a great point awesome uh yeah we uh so we're reaching our time that we're we have today um i thought that was a really awesome session paul i really really enjoyed that uh any um any closing thoughts for us well i i'm you know i've been talking about what i call estuary and it seems like you're doing you're doing a very similar thing here in the stoia you're having meaningful open-ended conversations across culture war lines so uh blessed are the peacemakers so more power to you thank you sir um i'd love to have you back on at the stoia um if everyone in this chat would like to continue with this conversation you can go to the discord uh if you haven't signed up already just go to the the rule section give it a thumb thumbs up and you get access to the videos and you just jump on a video chat uh if people want to continue this conversation to plug a few events uh so we have dave snowden uh the the founder and the discoverer of the kenevan framework and the chief scientist officer of cognitive edge he's like the sense making like superstar and he's he's the um sense maker in residence of the store for the month of september the first session is tomorrow that's naturalizing sense making you can check that out and then uh paul we have a street epistemologist coming in next week using street epistemology during culture war 2.0 uh so interesting should be interesting we can set up an exchange maybe between you and anthony meg nebasko that's that's monday september whatever september 8 is i don't know what that is at 6 p.m eastern time you can rsp there and if you like all these activities at the stoia you can support us on patreon at the link below all right everyone much love and thank you again paul for coming out today my pleasure thanks for having me