https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QL5SUlqkgx0

 Hi, this is Paul and this is part of my Rough Draft for Sunday series where I walk through the current status of my Sunday sermon. This week the sermon has been slow in coming. There are weeks like that. Usually I try and get my sermon mostly done by Friday and then Sunday morning I brush it up and see how it goes Sunday morning. Last week we talked and you can find it on YouTube, both the version I preached and the version I did on my Rough Draft. Last week I talked about living as if you believed in the resurrection and we talked about this sad story of the legal fight over this boy and his father who wrote this book about him going to heaven. We talked about what really is a disconnect. I see this disconnect not just in minds of people that are far from the church but even in people who are in the church and even in the kinds of lessons that clergy are teaching them. The assumption is that the Bible is a book of instructions that tells you the right things and the wrong things and if you do enough good things then you go to heaven when you die and if you do enough bad things you go to hell and that's the end of the story. Last week we talked about the fact that that's not really the story of the Bible at all. If you actually have that story in mind the Bible is very confusing because so little of the Bible seems to talk about that story directly. The story of the Bible actually talks about is the story the Bible is actually talking about which is a different story and one of the best summaries of it can be found in the Lord's Prayer where Jesus says, Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be your name. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. This is the grand story of the Bible and it culminates in Revelation 21 when there's a new heavens and a new earth and those raised in Christ will reign with him over the renewed creation. That is in a nutshell the story of the Bible. Then you might ask, well what is the resurrection doing in the middle of the Bible? That's a very good question and it's a question worth pondering and if you as we're doing now in this period between Easter and Pentecost if you take some time to look at these post-resurrection stories it gets even stranger and as we're going to look at the post-resurrection story one of them in John today and what you'll notice is that certain elements repeat in these stories and they're not necessarily the elements we would imagine. If most of us were scripting the resurrection we would have Jesus coming out of his tomb and immediately his publicist or his agent would step forward and say, okay we're going to fill your calendar now Jesus. We're going to go see Pontius Pilate and say, aha look at me now and we're going to go see Herod and say, ha Herod look at me now and then we're going to march all the way to Rome and we're going to scare Caesar and we're going to take power and we're going to attract all of the eyeballs of all of the people as much as we can. That would be how we do it in the modern world. That's not what Jesus did. In fact Jesus does something very different and so just the shape of what Jesus does after the resurrection gives us pause and we wonder what's going on here because after the resurrection we hear Jesus talking about well one of the things that we see is that he's paying attention to individuals. You would think again in the ancient world that you would you know you don't have YouTube you don't have the internet you don't have television you don't have radio. You would think Jesus would be massing large crowds and presenting himself and have a big line up so that everybody can put their fingers in his hands and say okay that's really him. In fact there are some very large crowd events we're going to talk about one when we get to Matthew and what we find in the record of that event is pretty much what we would imagine some believed and some doubted. This is what it means to be a human being. But what we find in these resurrection stories is that Jesus pays attention to deep to individuals. He keeps talking about the forgiveness of sin which says what's that about. And then the Holy Spirit keeps coming up. So let's let's jump in. Now I know that this I have often had people say to me things like you know even if Jesus rose from the dead two thousand years ago so what what's the big deal. You know say some miracle happened someplace. Well that's partly a failure to understand where the resurrection of Jesus fits into the fits into the big picture. But it also fails to understand what the what the record is that what actually changed the world is not Jesus going and standing in front of Pilate or standing in front of Herod or standing in front of Caesar or grabbing a big crowd and everybody you know put their fingers in his and the wounds in his hands. That's not what changes the world. What changed the world were a few people who who really began who really believe this and the impact just on a very few lives which triggered like a virus like a domino that that change just began to move and sweep. And in fact if you're living in North America today you are you have your life has been so dramatically impacted by everything that was set in motion by these events that you can hardly think about it. The assumptions of your world human rights this the popularization of this of this idea from the Old Testament which is the Imago Dei or the image of God that that that people regardless of their capacity need to be respected as human beings. The scientific revolution which assumes and presumes a predictable ordered world regard how Jesus inverted the hierarchy and says things like the greatest among you is the servant of all. These are these are such dramatic up endings of every other system in the world. And in fact this is the story is so deeply within us. You can go and watch almost all of the most popular movies have an element of the Christian story of of sacrificial death unjust death and resurrection that it is simply a part of our world that that we simply can't deny it. And this little map that I had running just shows how this thing just simply has spread out since since 30 30 A.D. to 2015 A.D. Now the post resurrection stories are interesting. Now we know that the original ending to Mark was lost. There's a lot of discussion as to the the the pro the the appendix to Mark which are the later editions of the endings whether those maybe had some access to other sources we don't know. But you have Luke that we've talked about the last few weeks of the women at the tomb the road to Emmaus the meeting of the disciples. And now we're getting into John. And what we see in John is that again as all the God all these gospels do they're always refocusing the story for surmant for sermonic reasons. And and what John does with the women at the tomb that could condense just to Mary Magdalene. And it leads to this. If you look at the structure of John there's usually two scenes in each of these other bigger scenes. And and it it winds up being Mary clinging to Jesus. And Jesus saying don't cling to me until I have ascended to my you know I've ascended to my father till I've gone to my father. Well what's going on with this. Well one of the things that we should see is that in all of the post resurrection accounts and if you read them if you read through Luke and I you know read through the thing in one sitting read through John in one sitting. And then even if you jump to 1st Corinthians 15 where Paul gives his his experiential trail of witnesses to the resurrection it seems that what Jesus did after the resurrection was come to individuals. Now this is again this surprises us. Now he did he did make public appearances and he did in a number of ways show his materiality. This was obviously important to him. But what really seemed important to him was to appear to certain individuals and and sometimes appeared and and deal with them as individuals which is really interesting. And this kind of on one hand this kind of turns over our assumptions about what Jesus should have done. But at the same time says something very powerful about what Jesus how Jesus thinks people work. Now pay attention to this in this John story. So again they have the Mary Magdalene thing and now in the evening of the first day this is very similar to Luke. When the disciples were together with the doors locked for fear of the Jewish leaders Jesus came and stood among them and said peace be with you. This is exactly what's in the gospel of Luke. After he said this he showed them his hands and his side. This is just what's in the gospel of Luke. And the disciples were overjoyed when they saw Jesus. Now Luke pays more attention to kind of the they're kind of they're kind of dumbstruck and they can't figure this out. John kind of jumps right to the joy. But now again the second part of John is very it's of course the wording isn't the same as Luke. So we think that Luke probably got this from a different source. But notice how much commonality there is in the elements. Again Jesus said peace be with you as the father has sent me I'm sending you. That's a very big theme in John's gospel. And with that he breathed on them and said receive the Holy Spirit. Now now Luke is going to talk about that a little bit later and then Luke also is going to write the book of Acts and so he's going to have the day of Pentecost to deal with the Holy Spirit. But John gets it in here. He breathes on them and says receive the Holy Spirit. We're going to talk about that in a little bit. If you forgive anyone their sins their sins are forgiven. If you didn't if you do not forgive them they are not forgiven. Now now you'll notice in Luke you have the repentance for the forgiveness of sins. That pretty much sits well with us. But what he says in John probably bothers you. It probably says huh. I don't know if I'm comfortable leaving that kind of power in the hands of people. Now often I will recommend if people are trying to get to know the Bible and trying to understand the Bible this YouTube channel called The Bible Project and they they've done these kind of drawing boards of every book in the Bible and if you if you're going to read a book of the Bible I would recommend going to The Bible Project and watching one of their videos. Now they're not infallible. I don't necessarily agree with all of their perspectives but I am in awe at how well they an enormously difficult thing and be able to focus it in a very intelligible and a communicable fashion. And so now they're doing a bunch of word studies on their on their channel and one of the word studies that I think is really worth seeing is is is kata which is sin or ha ha ha ha martyra which is the Greek word so hata the Hebrew word ha martyra the Greek word and they do a nice job of kind of piecing this together and getting getting a sense of the word now. Now sin is in a sense the broadest word for sin. There's iniquity there's transgression but it's it's in a sense the broadest of the words and as they the root meaning is missing the mark or failing to achieve a goal and the video does a good job of running through that. And so what is the goal of creation. Now in the video they emphasize image bearing and that is certainly one of them. There are actually I don't think we can talk about the goal of creation without getting multifaceted pretty quickly. One of the contenders is very much glory. Glory is the goal of creation. Peace or shalom well-being is the goal of creation and obviously because of sin because of our failure we miss the mark and we are not experiencing the goal of creation as we are living because of how we are living and because of the choices we are making. Now you might say well what does that have to do with the resurrection isn't the resurrection Jesus coming out of the grave that doesn't seem to have anything to do with missing the mark. We might think about some things the apostle Paul says in terms of the wages of sin is death. A phrase like that says that the conclusion or the outcome for missing the mark the outcome for failure is death and on one level you might say well that's quite obvious if you fail to design a brake system for a car the outcome of that will be death. If you fail to take care of your infant child the outcome of that will be death. If you fail to take care of your own body as you should the outcome of that will be death. The wages of sin are death and then Paul contrasts that with Christ and eternal life and so right away this issue about sin is very much germane to the resurrection and that very much turns our eyes in the right direction. Well what's the relationship between sin then and the resurrection? The resurrection well the wages of Jesus living a sinless life was his death at the hands of the religious authorities and the political authorities and this week I did a different video on should your pastor tell you how to vote. You might watch that and I filled out some of the first century culture war. So the other word I want to take a look at is forgiveness because now again words in languages have context and a couple of weeks ago I did a YouTube conversation with a friend of mine David Snapper who wrote an entire course on forgiveness and pastorally we usually see forgiveness as release and afiemi is the Greek word for forgiveness and release is a very release or loose is a very good translation of that and in a pastoral context Dave Snapper had his bucket and said you know whenever we get hurt we fill our that leaves a hole in us like a bucket and we fill it with other things so that we're not empty and so in order to experience forgiveness you've got to take the stuff out of your bucket and you're going to have to fill it with essentially you're going to have to fill it with Christ. Now that sounds incredibly abstract and I'm not going to go into that but my point here is that we tend to think of forgiveness in relational and emotional terms and it's very appropriate to think about forgiveness in relational emotional terms because that's a deep level that we experience it at but here's the thing about human beings if you harbor unforgiveness in your heart it will lead to stress and that might lead to illness your diabetes will get worse your asthma will get worse your physiological unforgiveness can kill you over time the wages of unforgiveness is death now if the path to forgiveness is life and this is true at an emotional and relational level might it also not be true at an existential level because this word forgiveness this word forgiveness really means release and and not just of emotional things but of all kinds of things and and what Jesus says so if you broaden out sin to understand failure and broaden out forgiveness into more layers to understand it as release or to loosen what on earth is Jesus saying to his disciples what power is he giving them now again we've got questions about this power but these are exactly the same questions we have about the resurrection that we okay so we want to keep diminishing the resurrection in terms of a metaphor that talks about well this is new starts and second chances and and rebirths and new beginnings but what if the resurrection is true at every level we can know and even levels we can't know and that then would make sense of this business of forgiveness sin being very broad as failure and forgiveness being release and loosening for example if you if you look at Jesus sermon in Luke 4 where Jesus is preaching on Isaiah 61 he he announces release I should I should check that hang on okay I just put right put this slide right in there I wanted to jump over to to Luke 4 and look at Jesus sermon in Nazareth on Isaiah 61 the Spirit of the Lord is on me because he noticed the presence of the Holy Spirit because he's anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor he has sent me to proclaim freedom from the freedom for the prisoners and recovery of sight to the blind and has set the oppressed free now now if you look at it in Greek it's to it's to set the Greek is always a little bit different it's to it's to send out the having been broken ones in release and that word release is the same root as as forgiveness and so you can see that what he's giving to the disciples here is is the same mission that he has had and he is giving them the authority and the power to enact this Isaiah 61 this Isaiah 61 mission to the disciples and then you would say well well what's that have to do with the resurrection well in a sense now they are to embody Jesus life in what they do and and this is the word becoming flesh and I've used this before this is it's not just an emotional release it's not just a relational release that here in the resurrection you're getting the renewal of all things you're getting creation 2.0 you're getting flesh 2.0 and the word becomes flesh and I love this little illustration of Felix the cat he looks through the keyhole he can't get in to do the rescue he has an idea that's an exclamation point he takes the exclamation point puts it in the door and goes through this is this is the kind of transformation that we're seeing here in the resurrection and then the mention of the Holy Spirit and he breathed on them and said receive the Holy Spirit now now what's interesting again about this word which is in in Greek in the New Testament you look in the translation of the Old Testament into Greek which New Testament writers often used and often quoted this word gets used in some really enticing context in the Old Testament this is the same word where God breathes into this this man of clay that he makes and and Hadam becomes a living nephesh he becomes a living being we are the stuff of earth and the breath of God and and Elijah breathes life into the widow's son and and she then and he then becomes you know he comes alive again and this is the same wind that that when God gives Ezekiel a vision of of dry bones and says Ezekiel can these bones live and then the wind breathes on the bones and they rise up and these dead bones become a mighty army this is the vision of the Holy Spirit and this is the vision that is all compacted into this story and in many ways the disciples are just hearing this stuff and it's all compacted in there but but what does it mean and in that moment they they cannot possibly imagine how all of human history is about to change because Jesus is going about meeting with these tiny groups of individual I don't think human history would have changed if Jesus has showed up to Pilate I don't think human history would have changed if Jesus has showed up to Herod I don't think human history would have changed if Jesus has showed up to to Caesar that's not how history works because Caesar and Pilate and Herod would all have been nested within their structures and they would not have changed but what Jesus does with these people these common people these people of no account these unimportant people the resurrection the forgiveness of sins the Holy Spirit starts a process that is continuing to this day to to transform and change all of human history now what I love about the whole the when I was reading this and I was thinking about how Jesus just came to individuals that came to people one by one snuck up on him unsuspecting they weren't even paying attention he he sort of ambushes them I was thinking about how the Heideberg catechism talks and how so often the Heideberg catechism talks about me and and and how this is important to me and so I I did a little search did a little search on the Heideberg catechism and and question 20 really gets added in terms of the Holy Spirit what do you believe concerning the Holy Spirit first he as well as father and son is eternal God second he has he has been given to me personally not all of us together although there's that not between us which is a point that I like to make often but yes that too but also the Holy Spirit comes to me personally and says I'm going to use you I'm going to transform you I am going to use you the Spirit of the Lord is upon me and he has brought me to announce good news to the poor recovery of sight to the blind to to send out the having been the having been broken into forgiveness into release to loose the having been broken ones into this world and that is exactly how the gospel moves what do you believe concerning the Holy Spirit first that he as well as the father and the son is eternal God second that he has been given to me personally so that by true faith he makes me share in Christ and all of his blessings comforts me and remains with me forever in other words the vision here is that what begins with Jesus in the resurrection comes to us in the Holy Spirit and the Holy Spirit remains with us through death into resurrection into new life and and I also want to point out here comforts me you know when I was teaching my class on parenting through adulthood I I'd reflect on so often the lives of the lives of suffering people and I think about Dave Snapper's bucket and taking hurts and having that create holes in us and we fill up those holes and we fill up those holes with distraction and we fill up those holes with with alcohol and and with video games and with movies and with romantic relationships and with children and with jobs and with cars and with stuff and not all those things are bad but we fill them up and and and so then what it takes to actually heal is to stop is to stop filling our lives up with these things and and and let our lives be filled with the Holy Spirit because so often what it takes to actually forgive someone in the conventional sense is a capacity to endure the pain and and so in other words if you're actually going to be useful to your neighbor or your son or your daughter or your spouse in terms of helping them in practical ways in this world and that might just mean listening to them because there are a few harder things than to sit and listen to people what does it take to actually listen to someone it takes to sit there and to endure pain to to be able to keep your mouth shut to be able to to listen to them quietly to understand them to take one of the favorite sayings that remains with me after college we had a chaplain named Dale Cooper and he would do these worship services on campus for us college students and one of the things that stuck in my head so often was pain shared is pain divided well what does that mean it means when I when I come next to you when I listen to you when I when I try to be of service to you when I pour my life out to you you take some of that pain and you give it to me and I carry it with you well what does it what does it take for me to carry your pain I've got pain of my own it takes comfort and so the Holy Spirit comes with us and gives us the comfort to be able to bear the burdens of one another the spirit of the Lord is upon me he's called me to to announce good news to the poor to to to send out the having been broken in release in forgiveness to loosen them the resurrection is already at work in the world the resurrection is God taking an interest in me the resurrected Jesus doesn't just broadcast like even I'm doing here on YouTube the resurrected Jesus sneaks up on us and reveals himself to us and we're shocked and amazed and dumbfounded and in doubt this is what he does it's release from hamar tia it's release from failure emotional relational material a thought and and his disciples are given authority to do this just like Jesus in that sermon this is the work of the Holy Spirit three persons of the Trinity at work in this together the God of creation is the God of renewal now the story doesn't end here in fact I usually do my misery deliverance gratitude at the end of the sermon and this is the end of the sermon but I'm going to include the text in some of this because I think actually the rest of this story and John illustrates misery deliverance gratitude now Thomas also known as Didymus he was apparently a twin probably one of the 12 was not with the disciples when Jesus came just like we aren't so the other disciples told him we've seen the Lord they were they were already functioning as witnesses but he doesn't believe him well why doesn't he believe him yeah for very good reasons he doesn't believe him dead people don't come back to life creation doesn't seem to get renewed and restored in creation 2.0 which will not see decay we've seen the Lord he said hey knock it off knock it off unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were put my hands into a side I will not believe and I bet you there are a lot of people listening to this that say exactly that and and I bet you just like we would imagine well let's line Jesus up and have everybody put you know just make a big line everybody touch touch the hands hand in the side that sounds a little icky but you know hey I'm not what do we know a week later why does John mention a week because it's a Sunday again why do why do Christians worship on Sunday this is resurrection day a week later his disciples were in the house again and Thomas was with them though the doors were locked Jesus came and stood among them peace be with you again this is the standard Jewish greeting then he said to Thomas put your finger here see my hands reach out your hand and put it in my side stop doubting and believe why does he say that well he wants to release Thomas he wants to release him just like blind to see just like the lame to walk just like the deaf to hear because spiritually that's exactly how we are we are blind we are deaf we are lame we are doubting and he says Thomas stop doubting believe that is going to set you free set you free from what set you free from care set you free from worry now I mentioned last week we barely believe the resurrection we are full of doubt but what does Thomas do Thomas said to him my lord and my god now this is a first century Jew he has for hundreds of years he and his people have been have been getting their monotheism catechism lessons down straight he worships Jesus as God this is the beginning of the church then Jesus told them because you have seen me you have believed blessed are though this is a beatitude blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed blessed are they happy are they Jesus performed many other signs in the presence of his disciples which are not recorded in the book in this book but these are written that you that you that no it's plural but remember how he sneaks up on individuals is this a group thing yes but it's a personal thing that you may believe that Jesus is the anointed one the son of God and that by leave it by believing you may have life in his name that you may have release that you may be set free set free from your anxiety over the age of decay set free from the ways that this world and the devil bind you and keep you in submission set free in the same way that Jesus was free you might say well I don't I don't know if I want that freedom I don't know I don't know if I want to announce freedom and then like in Nazareth have everyone want to kill me well yeah that's true that that does go along with this but this is the freedom because bondage comes in many forms stop doubting and believe now you might say well I can't and in fact I talked about this last week I talked about this often you can't just sit down one day and say okay I'm gonna believe because our beliefs are not a function of our will our wills actually you know they're in a very interesting relationship and so in a sense you have to want to do it you have to want to believe say well I don't want to believe well okay well you don't want to believe why are you listening to this I don't know keep listening please but you don't want to believe cool you have to act as if it's true you have to fake it till you make it you've got to lean into it and live into it because again with the rider and the elephant this is this is how it works you have to surround yourself with it you have to train the elephant you have to do like Thomas and worship why is it why should I have to worship for many many people worship is the strangest thing they don't understand it because they say hey if you tell me I should go out there and help somebody who's in need I can do that I say great you know in a physical way embody the release of the prisoner and and send out those who have been broken into freedom absolutely do that absolutely do that what's that going to train your elephant that material solutions are really helpful for material problems they are but if you work with people long enough you'll begin to discover that our problems are not only material but relational emotional but relational and emotional and in just about every other level we are not that simple go find a poor person give them a ton of money come back years later maybe the money helped them maybe the money didn't we are far more complex than that well what is worship then worship is how we train the elephant worship is how we begin to believe worship is how and and not just me in my little lifetime but generationally worship is how we live into this reality worship is the way that the church delivers as it has throughout centuries a level of comfort a level of benevolence a level of giving now churches are messed up because they're full of people I get that and and I know many of you have issues with that and and you're not going to have an argument with me my church is messed up as a Christian I am messed up that there are there are ways that I am a really lousy Christian and I'm not going to tell you right here because it's none of your business but you'll have to take my word for it and some of you who know me know how lousy a Christian I can be and I know even worse but what worship does is begin to train the elephant and we begin to believe and we begin to live it and we begin kind of like Felix to start living into this new reality that the word becomes flesh in us