https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qF7m6aXvy0U

 Hi, this is Paul. Yesterday I did the first part of What is Believing? and we began with where we talked about Jordan Peterson, John Vervecky, a video by Paul Maxwell, and I'm going to continue it today. And we began with this, well, pretty well known answer by Jordan Peterson about whether, why doesn't he say yes or no with respect to believing in God. On one level, as a number of people pointed out in the comment section, which I've pointed out in previous videos, at an epistemological level, when Peterson says, I act as if that what we do is a better indicator of this thing that we believe than what comes out of our mouth. That is true at an epistemological level. On the other hand, there's this other aspect of humanity where the words that we use are important. And of course, Peterson would back this up. Peterson is famous for talking about how he chooses his words very carefully to speak the truth or at least don't lie, so on and so forth. So words are important. And we're wrestling with this word belief, which is in fact the subtitle of his, Peterson's most important book, Maps of Meaning, Architecture of Belief. And so what is believing? What does that really entail and how do we go about this? So we began with this very famous interview that Jordan Peterson did on PBS with Margaret Hoover on Firing Line. And then I went through the first half of Paul Maxwell's really wonderful little summary of all of philosophy in 27 and a half minutes. And it's a fun video. And I really congratulate Paul for pulling that video off. Now, of course, in 27 minutes, you're not going to say everything that can be said about philosophy, but he gives a nice little structure whereby you can, with six words, you can sort of get a sense of what philosophy is. And his six words are metaphysics, epistemology, axiology, the pre-modern philosophers, the modern philosophers, and the post-modern philosophers. And actually in this video, I'm going to play the second half of Paul's video. And I also contrasted David Nassar, who is a Christian, and I made the point that Christians usually act in a very pre-modern way when they talk about what they believe because they begin with metaphysics. I believe in God. In fact, I'm looking forward to Jordan Peterson getting into Exodus to hear how he wants to treat the burning bush episode when God says, I am, I will be what I will be. I am what I am. And so is this understood epistemologically? I will be what I will be. Is this understood ontologically, metaphysically? It's, you know, that is a huge passage in Christianity and Judaism, and it's, I'm really looking forward to see how Jordan treats it. But Jordan acts as a modern in that he begins with epistemology, and that's what Paul Maxwell noted. He begins with epistemology because modernity is uncertain about metaphysics. And we're uncertain about metaphysics because of the whole stream of philosophy, how that's all rolled out. Christians don't tend to be that concerned with it. They usually begin with metaphysics and then epistemology and then axiology as Paul said. And David Nassar asked Jordan Peterson, are we just preaching to ourselves? And really the operative word there is just because actually preaching to ourselves, especially when you get into the context of a church, is a very powerful thing. And this gets into Jonathan Haidt's observation of riders on elephants. We are very communal creatures. We are shaped by the people around us. We are keyed into, and Peterson makes this point often, we are keyed into status differentials and hierarchies. And if believing something will, if saying we believe something will push us up on the hierarchy, we'll do it. If identifying as a certain thing pushes us up on the hierarchy, we'll do it. We're really tuned into this kind of thing. And we are biologically tuned for this kind of thing, which means that in terms of the Big Five personalities being disagreeable is a great thing. Our local Jordan Peterson meetup at Living Stones is full of disagreeable people and we have a great amount of fun together. And it's mostly men who have learned how to actually get along with one another while being disagreeable. That's probably the dominant trait of our local meetup. And then we got into John Verbecky's Meaning Crisis, episode number 13, where he's dealing with Stephen Bachelors after Buddhism and a bunch of those books. I'd never heard of him. I'd never read those books. Actually, I saw in the comments section Job, who's my friend from the Netherlands, I've done a bunch of videos with, really recommended some of Bachelors books. So I'll probably take a look at them. And I know some of you will be, why should a Christian minister look at Buddhist books? Well, because I live in Northern California and I've got good friends who would, they are predominantly secular people, but they use Buddhism as a way to get some things out of life that they want to get out of life. And you say, well, you're a pastor, shouldn't you convert them? Well, I'm also Calvinist pastor, I can't convert anybody. It's the job of the Holy Spirit to convert people. I'll do my best to bear witness to them and would I like for them to join the Christian faith? Absolutely. But that doesn't mean I'm not going to read books on Buddhism and such. I frankly think as a pastor who is also a missionary and an evangelist, I think that's very much part of my job to learn about other people and their beliefs and their belief systems. But what we're exploring here is not simply different religions. Again, this is why I really appreciate John Vervecki's videos. We're trying to figure out what we mean when we say, I believe in something. And again, all the way back to Peterson's interview, and he said this many times in different places, we're not quite sure what we mean when we say we believe something. And so you've got the question of what do we mean by I believe and what do we mean by God? And if you've been following my videos for long enough, you know, we've talked a lot about that. And again, if you're a Christian, and you say, well, I'm very settled on what I believe by God. Well, great. I frankly am too at the age of 55. But it's also a part of Christian doctrine that God is always beyond our comprehension. And so to the degree that I can learn more about God and love God with my mind, that's also part of my Christian calling and duty. So I am going to continue to explore this. So that's a little background into this. So I want to jump back into John Vervecki's video. He had just, well, maybe I'll go back a little bit and play some of it. Hang on, I got to set this up. So he proposes instead what we need to do. Okay, so right there, you can see he's got Buddhism within a tradition outside of the tradition. And I talked in the last video about this line of words, and I'm going to go back and look at this video about this language of belief and how actually within traditions, and I'd say within competing traditions and even within warring traditions, the wars are fought over words and beliefs. The great schism between the Latin church and the Greek church that happened in, that split the Orthodox church from the Roman Catholic church. One church historian said they had a tizzy over a diphthong. It was over a word in terms of how to understand this word. And theologians, the great wars over, the confessional wars in the Protestant period are fought over words. You've got the five points of Calvinism and you've got the Arminian positions and you've got all these theological battles are fought with words. And that's important. I mean these words are important. And then the question is what are these words and how do we use these words and why do we use these words to track things that, well the only way we can hope to represent them often is with, well I wouldn't say the only way, ideally we represent them with our actions and that gets again into Jordan Peterson's observation, but one of the most convenient ways that we can actually productively work together on conflicts, theological conflicts, religious disagreements is with words. But the words fall short and that's part of the point that John Vervecky and Stephen Batchelor are making as they're looking at, well you've got the perspective within the tradition which is subjective, you've got the perspective outside the tradition and both of these get caught on these beliefs and when we say beliefs here we're meaning that they're attached to words. These are ideas that we have and even again, I should have thought I should have looked him up while, because I couldn't think of his name yesterday. Of course I did on medieval, on the period of the Reformation. Christian theology has always understood that on one hand the faith is the set of doctrines, the creeds, the Apostles Creed, the Nicene Creed, the Athanasian Creed in my denominational context, the Belgic Confession, the Heidelberg Catechism, the Canons of Dor. Sometimes we call that the faith. It's not often called that in the New Testament actually but that's a legitimate way of describing the faith. It's a way of representing the faith. But Christians have always known that, get this all the way in the book of James, faith is in action. You and the book of James says, you know, okay show me your faith by your words, I'll show you my faith by my action. So you've got these two realms and so in a sense you've got nouns and verbs that you're dealing with but even the connection between the nouns and the faith is dicey and Vervecky has just gone through that. You can watch, I'll put the link to his whole video in here and I treated the part of the video that I'm not showing here in the first part of this but now he's going to deal with Buddhism and I think it's kind of handy for Christians to actually watch someone else deal with another faith that way because by virtue of the fact that we're deeply committed and invested in our faith there's all kinds of things we're going to get triggered by and hung up on as someone talks about it. So having him talk about something else is actually pretty handy. So let's have him continue here. Is we need to look at Buddhism ultimately existentially. Now you remember existentially has to do with these modes. He also invokes in along with others the distinction between the being mode and the having mode and he proposes that Buddhism is remembering the being mode and I've already talked about that in a previous video. So he says look traditionally what the Buddha said and now we're returning to what the Buddha said is in order to try and get more of what his enlightenment was about. Traditionally what the Buddha said is presented as the four noble truths and these are four statements or propositions that are usually presented to our ears as claims to be believed. And then this again would be something analogous to our creeds. What makes you a Buddhist is if you believe them. If you and I put in a different word here if you subscribe to them in the in the Christian Reformed Church for years we had a thing called the form of subscription. And so here you had your doctrines and you'd sign your name when you would start your term as an office bearer in a local church. If you would go to a classes meeting if you would go to synod you would you would show your commitment to the community by subscribing to these documents. Now the form of subscription had a number of clauses in it which were left a little bit of wiggle room or fudge area things such as we subscribe to the doctrines themselves not necessarily that these doctrines are best articulated by these particular documents. And right there you have a very interesting you set up with that language a very a very interesting relationship between that saying that there's a there's actually a doctrine out there and sort of like a math there's a there's a doctrine out there that is represented by this document. But but even though you're not a Christian you're a Buddhist you're a Buddhist you're not represented by this document. But but even the document that establishes the doctrine can't quite represent it the best. So you might have in your mind some other words that expect to express express the doctrine better than the document even if historically the church that subscribed to the doctrine came out of that document. Now this is a very interesting dynamic but it's right there in the mechanism of the Christian Reformed Church you will find it in other denominations it's the idea that we subscribe to a doctrine that these are maybe the best words that we had for example there are there are lines in the Belgian Confession about detestable Anabaptists. Now Julian who many of you know from a couple of my interviews and he's in the comments section usually Julian is a Hutterite a Hutterite is an Anabaptist and I do not think that Julian is detestable and this is one of the particular things that in our denominations history we got clear that although the Belgian Confession calls the Anabaptist detestable that was out of a certain perspective in the low countries at a certain point in history and there's a lot of history behind the relationships between the Roman Catholics and the Reformed and the Lutherans and the Anabaptists and that led Guido de Brey to call them detestable but when I signed the form of subscription now I am not subscribed to the idea that Anabaptists are detestable we say that the line about detestable Anabaptists is in fact a sort of a historical accident and it's separate from the doctrine that I'm subscribing to by putting my name behind that document. Now some of you will say that's why I belong to a church that doesn't have doctrines and I would say you belong to a church that has implicit doctrines that you don't even have words for but the difficulty is how do you actually work on your beliefs without both this question of having words out there in a document that say it and also having identity that is established by signing on to a document that says I believe this. And so that's the game that we have been playing. And what John Verbecky is doing is saying okay well in the context of Buddhism let's look at the Four Noble Truths and if you almost Wikipedia will show you the Four Noble Truths. I mean this is just again this is the objective academic study of religion they will talk about the Four Noble Truths and I think I've got some books down here. Do I have Houston Smith's World Religions book? I don't know if she has it in here but you can find this and so all life is suffering. Well let's talk about that. With this of course is that it is taking place at this very level that Bachelor argues we need to get beyond. It's not of course that people don't believe things within Buddhism is that what we've been talking about here these processes of transformation are taking place at the level of perspectival knowing, at the level of transforming of states of consciousness and at the participatory level transforming the fundamental machinery of the self of the agent arena relationship and the modes of existence. So we need to understand these Four Noble Truths as things that could help afford the kind of transformations we've been talking about. Now right there I'm going to play that again because it's a really important sentence. So we need to understand these Four Noble Truths as things that could help afford the kind of transformations we've been talking about. This is in many ways the job of preachers. Here's these truths in this book and we want to enable this to transform the people of the congregation. So preaching is and it's really hard. And many of us will complain and in the comments section there's regular commentary on people's experience in churches that they've gone to a church and they find the people dead. Now they don't believe there's actually corpses in the church but they don't find the faith living in the place. And this is something that Christians talk about all the time. Well the gospel seems to be alive in that place or the gospel seems to be alive in that person or I can see Christ through them. This is the same dynamic of taking say the words of the Apostles Creed and well, logos becoming flesh, incarnation. And you see it's in a sense the reverse of what the Bible is. This gets into, I'll have Pete Enns book handy here, Pete Enns first book which I thought which is probably my favorite of Peter Enns books. Peter Enns is a whole other topic of conversation for me. But the Bible is called the word of God and Jesus is called the word of God. And it's really interesting to think through those relationships because a lot of debate in Christianity about this book. What is this book? And I made the point before that this book is kind of a, it has a, I get into trouble with all these words. It has kind of a shamanistic capacity when Christians do their devotions. What's happening is that the, ideally what's happening is that, and I can put it into Christian terms, by the work of the Holy Spirit reading this book changes us. Well how does it change us? It's a psychotechnology. It forces us to look at the world through a different lens. John Calvin calls the Bible glasses that we wear to see the world differently. And that's what John Calvin said. And so part of the reason a practice of Christian devotion and discipline is that we sit down and we read our Bible and we meditate on it and we have the Bible change us and we have the Bible change how we see the world. And you'll notice and I've got a conversation with David that I'll be posting in a few days, either late this week or early next week, where he and a number of other people have mentioned this in their practice, their Christian spiritual practice. They are copying the Bible. And you might say, well what kind of a crazy idea is that? I've got how many dozens of Bibles in this room do we really need one more? But actually what he's doing when he's copying the Bible, it's a psychotechnology. It slows him down. And David will talk about how copying John 5, which is a particularly, most of you, if I say John 3, you'll recognize it. John 4, woman at the well. John 6, eat my body and blood. John 10, I am the good shepherd. John 11, Lazarus. John 13, washing the feet of his disciples. John 15, abide with me. I mean on and on and on and on and on. John 1, the word made flesh, logos, all these famous chapters of the Gospel of John. John 5, it's not mentioned, but there's some really interesting passages in there and a lot of repetition and he's copying it all and he's well it's changing him as he's doing it. And again it's this process of the logos becomes flesh, but that's in a sense the process that has to happen when preachers preach and when we do Bible study and we open the Bible and we read it that the words become flesh, but these words that were written thousands of years ago in radically different languages and cultures where we are that somehow they become flesh in the church. The point about these is not to believe them, the point about them is to get them to help you reenact the Buddha's enlightenment. So translating this to Christian terms, the point of them is not to merely subscribe to them, the point of them is that the logos becomes flesh and that this enlightenment as he's talking about in a Buddhist context, in a Christian context that our lives are transformed. And again in Christian theology we talk about this, there's, in Missiology too, there's nothing more powerful than a transformed life actually evangelistically. That's how we work. If you're not doing that, if you cannot enact enlightenment, then you are not getting the Four Noble Truths. Now again if you remember where I stopped with the Nasser conversation, there's this point in Christianity where Christ is the one who's saving and Peterson, that's a place that Peterson is sort of hung up on and rightly so, the Christian church has been hung up on this for at least 500 years, and it all has everything to do with agency. When is God acting and when am I acting? And again I'll use this idea that I borrow from Dorothy Sayers who C.S. Lewis got it from her, you know, when is Tolkien acting and when is Frodo acting? Now you wouldn't say that Tolkien and Frodo are the same because Tolkien is distributed throughout the story, and the analogy isn't exactly perfect because we certainly have more agency than the character of Frodo in the story, but the analogy is illuminating because it's illuminating, and C.S. Lewis talks about this a little bit in Mere Christianity because to figure out how God acts and how we act, well this is in many ways the focus of the story of Joseph, and Joseph says to his brothers who after Jacob's death are fearful that Joseph will now take revenge upon them, you meant it for evil, well what? Beating him into an inch of his life, leaving him for dead, and then deciding that murder, the only problem with murder is that there's no money in it so they might as well sell him to their cousins into slavery in Egypt, and so if anybody had a right to take some revenge it was Joseph, and Joseph says to his brothers at the end of the book of Genesis, which is a very important passage that looks back through the whole story of Genesis, you meant it for evil, but God meant it for good. What does that mean that God beat up Joseph, left him for dead, fooled their father with a bloody coat and with a bloody robe, and then sold their own brother into slavery? Did God do that? No. But where is God in this? And we don't know how to talk about this. And this again is one of these places that language is a tool that we use to get clear on things, and that's why Peterson is exactly right, if you really want to get clear on something, write it out or try to talk it out, which is what I'm doing here, but it's a tool, and it's all this very hard. He proposes therefore that we should not call them the Four Noble Truths, enlightenment, then you are not getting the Four Noble Truths. He proposes therefore that we should not call them the Four Noble Truths, we should call them the Four Ennobling Truths. I then propose to him in person that we... See, and what's interesting, and I haven't read Bachelor, so I may have this totally wrong, but Four Ennobling Truths, notice how it's almost, in biblical studies you have this thing called the Divine Passive. When something just happens, sometimes it's a biblical writer's way of saying, God did it. The Four Ennobling Truths is almost the Divine Passive, that will these truths somehow transform you, and well then the question is, well where's the agent in that? And when we're talking agency, we might, since we all got into this because of some pronouns, we might say, who's the agent in that? We shouldn't even call them truths anymore, because truth is a property of propositions. Actually, I said what you should call them is the Four Ennobling Provocations. You're trying to provoke people into change. And again, I mean there's a lot of carryover in terms of preaching with something like this, because you're trying to provoke people into change, and so this sentence, this First Noble Truth that he's about to go into, this is supposed to provoke you, this is supposed to disturb you, this is supposed to begin a process of transformation by which at the end of it you will be a different person. Well what do I mean by that? Now we're talking identity again, if you go back to the other video, and we're going to talk about identity a lot more later when we get into the Gospel Coalition and Tim Keller. But something about this sentence changes you. And again, getting back to David, whose video I'll post in a little while, something about copying the book of John changes him. It's provoking, and I really like that word. So let me try and go through the Four Noble Truths, but restating them as for ennobling, enabling, that means affording self-transcendence, provocations. By doing that, I think we can get back to, if that's the right verb, what the Buddha was conveying about what's going on. Now getting back to is something that we're going to talk about quite a bit when we get over to Owen Barfield, because there's this funny word that we use all the time, consciousness. And I should probably do a Words That Fudge on that word, because do we actually know what we're talking about when we use that word? We kind of do, and it's sort of illuminating about the way we use language. So here we have this experience we call consciousness, and I have it, and I look around at other people, and they seem to be having it too. And when we get into Rupert Sheldrake and some of those things, and panpsychism, does this little earbud holder, does this have consciousness? Well, probably not, Rupert Sheldrake makes the point. Well, the sun has how much electricity going on, and if we say that consciousness is somehow the byproduct of electricity, well, does the sun have consciousness? Does the sun have agency then? Is it proper to use that language with it? Can we go back to, because when we're talking about the Buddha, where, well, let's see, this stuff is hard. So you're talking about a specific character in history, Siddhartha Gautama, but when you use the word Buddha, you're talking about also a class, in a sense, of characters, or a group of characters. Now, when Peterson was at Liberty University and he talked about someone having a father, and that father needs to be, you know, he needs to transcend that A to be the father, you know, kind of through a Jungian transformation, there's a move like that, and Jesus, I'll often ask my son in school class, we say Jesus Christ, is Christ Jesus' last name? No, it isn't. Christ is a title, it means anointed one. You can read the Heideberg catechism all about it. Christ is a title, it means anointed one. Well, what does that mean? What does it mean for someone to be anointed? And then the Apostle Paul in the New Testament talks about us being in Christ. What does that mean? And very quickly, Christ takes on a, there's the historical person, Jesus of Nazareth, and then there's Christ, and what's the relationship between those two words? What are they pointing to? And then the enlightenment. What kind of transformation is being brought about by the awakening experience? And what is it alleviating? Okay, so let's go through these one by one. Okay, so I'll present the standard way of representing both, and then the reformulation in order to deal with Bachelors, I think, astute criticism, and in order to interconnect with all the argumentation we have been developing throughout this video series. So the first one is typically stated as all is suffering, all of life is suffering. Now, that's, first of all, if that were the statement to be believed, it's false. Because suffering is a comparative term, and comparative terms can't be extended to everything. We like saying everything is tall. It doesn't make any sense. Things are only tall relative to other things being shorter. Now, what's interesting here, and I haven't really thought this through, you know, when you look at, say, Paul Maxwell's metaphysics, epistemology, axiology, and you listen to John Verbecky's treatment of this First Noble Truth, you almost have the sense that pre-moderns began with metaphysics, moderns begin with epistemology, post-moderns begin with axiology. And John's observation here that the suffering is almost an axiological term. So, first of all, it doesn't really mean all is. It's something more like all is threatened by. Well, what's the all? Does it mean everything in existence? Should we interpret it metaphysically? Well, I mentioned last time that we should be careful about giving metaphysical interpretations to what people bring out of these awakening experiences. And the Buddha himself was famously reticent to give any metaphysical interpretations to his statements. So let's try and follow that. In order to get at that, let's note what this word means. Okay? Suffering. Because, again, we've tended to allow a word to go through a process of trivialization and reduction, and we've lost part of the meaning. Okay, so right here, it's going to be important when we look at Barfield a little bit later, words have souls. Words change over time in their context. And we know this. And we know this pretty definitely. That's not really a question. And so, when we talk about suffering and someone a thousand years ago talked about suffering, what are these words actually connecting to if we use kind of a correspondence idea of language, which words really aren't the best connectors, but because they work within an economy of meaning that connects them with things. But that's where we're getting at. Let me give you, first of all, an analogy. Okay, so the original meaning of this word is insane. Mad. He writes the word mad on the board for those of you just listening. It has come to be synonymous with angry. I'm mad at Agnes. It doesn't mean I'm insane. Right? It means that I'm angry at Agnes. How did that happen? Well, one of the ideas is anger is a state that can render you, if it becomes extreme, extreme anger can render you temporarily insane and therefore temporarily mad. Anger is a cause, a pertinent cause of madness. Okay, so, suffering, people usually hear pain, distress when they hear the word suffering. That person is suffering. But that's not actually what the word means. To suffer means to undergo. It means to lose agency. So you can actually suffer joy. This I found terribly fascinating. I'm not quite, I'm going to have to think about this quite a bit more, but you'll see where it goes for me in a little bit. You can have so much joy that you sort of have lost control of yourself. You can have so much pleasure. It is not oxymoronic to say I'm suffering pleasure. It means I'm having so much pleasure that I've sort of lost control of the situation. Right? Now pain is a very powerful way of losing agency. Now, to a degree what we're doing here is we're really elevating agency up a value hierarchy. And that's very contemporary for us. It's very modern for us. That is in fact in a sense what I do whenever I say if you have an impersonal realm, the agent becomes king because the agent colonizes. And so suffering is loss of agency. I find this a tremendously interesting and I think potentially fruitful association. Why? First of all, it's highly disruptive. And secondly, pain is associated usually with damage and damage is a state in which we're often losing agency. So, right? Don't hear just pain. The Buddha is not saying everything's painful. That's ridiculous because if everything was painful, nothing would be painful. Even all of your experiences can be painful. Doesn't mean anything particular because many of your experiences can't be painful in and of themselves. Right? Because again, this isn't an absolute kind of claim. Instead, pay attention to this connection rather than this one. He circled suffering and loss of agency instead of pain. Last video gave a parable of this suffering. It's the monkey that grabs the pitch and then tries to free itself and then the other hand gets stuck in both paws and head and then it gets killed. There's nothing in there of pain. Most of the Buddha's metaphors are not pain metaphors. They're entrapment metaphors. Being fettered, losing your freedom, losing your agency. Now, this too in terms of freedom is really important and Christians have been talking about this quite a bit because there's the two sides of freedom. There's positive and negative. One is freedom from and the other is freedom to. Freedom from restraint, constraint, freedom from imprisonment, freedom from regulation, freedom from prohibition. That's freedom from. Freedom to play a great piece on the piano. Freedom to run a marathon in a certain amount of time, to run a mile in a certain amount of time. Freedom to speak eloquently. What we notice is that freedom to requires an investment in agency whereas freedom from usually demands less agency on the part of others pointing my way. That's why the Buddha doesn't describe enlightenment in terms of relief but he would famously say, just like wherever you dip into the ocean it has one taste, the taste of salt. No matter where you dip into my teaching it has one taste, the taste of freedom. So what he seems to be saying is that all of your life is threatened with the possibility of losing your freedom. So let's go from all is suffering to a provocation. Realize that all of your life is threatened with a loss of freedom, a loss of agency. And there's a word for this kind of loss that's often translated as suffering which is dukkha. Dukkha again does not mean pain. What does dukkha mean? Well the etymology is imagine you have a wheel and it's off center on its axis. So the axle is not properly going through the center of the wheel and as the wheel is turning it's destroying itself. So there's a self-destructiveness. Or you have, your arm is out of disjointed like when Shakespeare has Hamlet says the time is out of joint. It's out of joint and as you're moving your arm it's destroying itself. I wonder listening to him the degree to which this can be associated with decay which those of you who, this is long before I got into Jordan Peterson, one of the things that I talked about is the Bible tells time in two different ages. There's the present evil age. I call it the age of decay. Now what happens in the resurrection, we're getting on to Easter, is that Jesus is raised with a body without decay and you can read that in 1 Corinthians 15, you can read about that in Romans 8. The world is subject to decay. This very much gets into Greek thought that here in this world everything is subject to decay. Everything breaks down. Institutions break down. Our bodies break down. Things break down. This is similar in some ways to entropy. Everything decays and Jesus is raised with a body that is not subject to decay and that's crucial for understanding what Paul has to say about the resurrected Christ and what Paul has to say about our resurrection, that we will be raised to have bodies, spiritual bodies and what he means by that is not immaterial bodies but rather this gets into matter, form, all of this stuff that we've been talking about with Verbecky's stuff too and Aristotle and philosophy but we're raised no longer subject to decay. That means that our loves, all, C.S. Lewis says all love is destroyed by death or betrayal. Well, in the age to come, love is eternal. You can hear that in terms of you find an association with platonic forms in there because for Plato the form is without decay. So every love in this world, you can see this a little bit in the Lord of the Rings with Aragorn and the elf, his elf wife. Elves don't decay like humans. Humans decay, elves don't. Elves go off into this other land where the undying land and there's this interaction between those two ideas in the Lord of the Rings. And so we're raised, all love decays except the idea of love does not decay. It's kind of a platonic form idea. So this idea of suffering, if it's understood the way John is understanding, I hear it very much in terms of all life decays. And this is obviously an observation and a realization that can come through observation which is very old and very persistent. And I think actually a lot of the Christian story is understood as, see up in heaven things don't decay, down on earth things decay, and the Bible is the story as an axial age, the story of the reconciliation of heaven and earth. And whereas in fact heaven conquers earth in the book of Revelation and everything is thrown to the sea of fire and is destroyed in that way. So. So it means like an empty gap that's sort of dirty so that as things are moving within it they're destroying themselves. So the idea of something that's engaged in a process of self-destruction, which of course is one of the powerful ways you can lose your agency is through self-destructive processes, is what's going on here. So realize that all of your life is threatened, very really threatened, existentially threatened by a capacity for self-destructive behavior. Self-deceptive self-destructive behavior. So now you see what he's doing is situated very firmly within the axial tradition. So what does he mean here? How can we try and understand this a little bit better? So this is work based on some stuff I've published with Leo Ferraro and then I'll talk about some additional and important new work by Mark Lewis. I want to try and trace a kind of pattern in your cognitive processing that can vary. Watch the rest of the video, it's all quite cool. And he gets into addiction, which is interesting because if you've watched the previous video Peterson and Nassar getting into this question of addiction. And so it's very interesting for us to wrestle with this idea of what is addiction and because obviously as human beings, so okay let's talk broads, when we talk with Peterson, Sam Harris, Steven Pinker, we celebrate the accomplishments of the enlightenment. And one of the things that the enlightenment did was give us human beings tremendous power over nature to the degree that we are no longer as subject to the ravages of disease, famine, maybe war. Our agency is all over war. Our agency is all over war in the way that it isn't quite all over disease and famine. And we can argue about that, but since the enlightenment, since really the last hundred years, tremendous advances against disease and famine. Addiction, however, like war, is us. This is something, and with the increase of our power, we discover that many, a lot of the power we have more difficulty coming to terms with is our own power. And addiction is self-destruction becoming powerless by our own power. So if we have the power to create really engaging computer games and simulations, do we have the power to not resist them? And why is it that the person, let's say who's playing computer games all the time, feels like they are maximizing their agency, they are living in a flow state, but the other people watching them look at that as a negative addiction, that they are in fact losing their life by sitting motionless with their eyes to a screen and their hands on some controller? That's a very interesting question. So, but let's move on, let's move on from John's video, and again his video is out there and you can watch the whole thing. And I want to turn to someone that you probably wouldn't expect me to turn, which is the Gospel Coalition. The Gospel Coalition was a group of, it was formed by a group of friends who were also reformed pastors and theologians. Really the three cornerstones of this movement are Tim Keller, John Piper, and Don Carson. Now Carson is a New Testament scholar. Tim Keller and John Piper are both pastors, okay? So they're not predominantly scholars, but they got together and formed this thing called the Gospel Coalition, which has really ridden the wave of what was called the Young, Restless, and Reformed movement in evangelicalism. And the Young, Restless, and Reformed movement over the last 15, 20 years, I think part of it is in response to the Seeker movement, and that's a lot of church inside talk. Seeker movement typified by Willow Creek, Bill Hybels, Saddleback, Rick Warren, this whole wave of churches that had big sound, theatrical lighting, movie theater, or auditorium architecture, and the emphasis was on the sermon, and the sermon again being a central transformational piece, but the rest of the liturgy, and you might say, well is that liturgy? Yeah, it's liturgy. The rest of the liturgy with the, and Willow Creek's with the jazz music, or maybe Hill's song, the power to in a sense, what happened really in that mode of evangelicalism and the Seeker mode was that contemporary music and theatrics and homiletics really, combined with classic Christian homiletics to produce a really a transformational experience whereby people would be changed in the chairs, and we could understand this in a sense because when you walked into, okay, Notre Dame just burned, but before it burned, if you walked into Notre Dame, you would say, the architecture and all that was put into Notre Dame and any cathedral was a way of transforming us, and you would feel its power. Now in the Seeker movement, you had liturgy, you had contemporary music, so you lessened the learning curve, you basically appropriated all of the learning that people were doing listening to pop radio or jazz music, so you appropriated those learning curves, and you took Christian words and you implanted them in some of this other musical genre, and you then took the very powerful psychotechnologies that rock concerts have employed, so there's communal technologies going on there, and you employed all of that to bring people to make a profession of belief and to articulate that profession of belief in words and to come to what was actually predates the Seeker movement, things like the Sinner's Prayer or the Roman Road or the Four Spiritual Laws, and those of you who are familiar with Evangelical Christianity know what I'm talking about, those of you who are less familiar with Evangelical Christianity, don't worry about it, but these are all ways to get people to change their identity. Now when you've got a big movement like that, you've got a certain degree of certain amount of disagreeable people in the population that are going to walk into a place like that, and they're going to see the always beautiful people on stage, just like on the evening TV news, beautiful singers, talented musicians, theater lighting, good coffee in the, and I have a whole wall of tapes from Bill Hybels that will tell you how to do this, make sure the bathrooms are clean, make sure the coffee is good, make sure the parking is available, you just, you employ all of these things that business and marketing have used in the commercial space, and you bring it all into the church, and you bring them into an experience, and you bring this all, and you bring them to a place where they will make a profession of belief with their lips. I believe in Jesus. I believe that Jesus died to save me from my sins. I am a new creation, and this gets into David Nassar's, you know, budding into AA doctrine, which said, I am an alcoholic even if I haven't had a drop to drink in 30 years. I am still an alcoholic. That's part of my identity. So Christians, all of this employed to bring you to a point. Now a certain number of Christians went into this and said, I think I'm being manipulated. Well, when you go into a mall, see my video a few times before about James K. Smith, when you go into a mall, you're being manipulated. In fact, when you're going to Notre Dame, you're being manipulated. People, whether consciously or unconsciously, whether implicitly or explicitly, when you design a building, you are shaping an experience of intended viewers. We do this all the time. When you landscape, you do it. When you put up a sign that has letters on, you do it. When you create a logo for a corporate brand or a color, you have an apple with a little bite out of it. Oh my, what does that mean? What story is he telling in that apple with a little bite out of it? The cult of Mac. All of this stuff is liturgy and communicating and all of this is going on. Now the Gospel Coalition in many ways appropriated a lot of stuff from a very powerful Christian movement called Puritanism. And many of you have heard about it. Weren't those the people that, well the pilgrims, they were kind of extreme Puritans. And they went to America to found their city on a hill. Yeah. City on a hill. It's a phrase with a very long story behind it. So they went to America to found their city on the hill and as things heated up in Europe, the more Puritans came over and began to dominate the Massachusetts Bay Colony and were incredibly formative in the creation of American culture. Now what happened as a response to the Seeker Movement, you have the Young Restless and Reformed Movement in Christianity that actually began to gobble up. Tim Keller is a Presbyterian Church in America pastor. That's more classical Presbyterian, conservative Presbyterian Reformed. They baptize babies. John Piper is one of these Reformed Baptist groups. They don't baptize babies. They practice believer baptism but they have similar doctrinal statements that come out of Calvinism. Now I put Mark Driscoll on there because Mark Driscoll, John Piper, before Mark Driscoll's fall, John Piper was never quite at ease with Mark Driscoll and I think John Piper wouldn't have put the words on it but John Piper would say, Mark Driscoll doesn't look as stable as Tim Keller let's say. And I don't mean that psychologically or emotionally. I mean that in terms of the forms, the old forms and practices of the religious subculture and the ways that if something is old and still here, it manifests a stability and internal coherence that doesn't self-destruct in the way that John Vervecky was talking about. And they founded a group called the Gospel Coalition. Now you can find lots of videos online about the Gospel Coalition and there are lots of people that were a part of it. This guy, Kevin DeYoung, very prominent pastor, was a pastor in Lansing, Michigan, was a pastor of the Reformed Church of America, a sister denomination to the Christian Reformed Church, left that denomination. I don't remember if he went PCA or what but here he's asked in 2014 what is the new Calvinism? And well, let's hear what he has to say. So Kevin, what is the new Calvinism? What is the new Calvinism? It's a resurgence of Reformed theology, mainly in soteriology, the five points, although not everything. See now, almost everything he's saying in here is insider talk. And so many of you listening to this won't ring true for any of you. This is all stuff within Christians and here you've got Al Mohler, who's the president of a Southern Baptist seminary and this has been one of the big stories in Christian subculture where the Reformed movement has been colonizing Baptists and Al Mohler has been a big player in this. Everyone in the new Calvinism would adhere to all five points but mainly it's a new sense, especially among young people, I think that God's sovereignty is biblical. Lincoln Duncan, another important figure in this movement. Massively important that God loved us before we loved him, that he's the one who does the deciding work in our salvation. Now most of what you hear Kevin DeYoung say are beliefs, just like John Verbecky was talking about. And beliefs, and he's framing this between Christian subcultures that different within, all within this, all within the church in North America, certain Christians are taking on a new identity separate from other Christians based on all of this belief language. I tend to think that DeYoung is, I understand why he's saying the words he's saying here, but what he's trying to do is articulate other stuff, transformations that have been going on beneath the surface, underground, and he's trying to articulate them and represent them in words. But I actually don't think that the, whereas it's very true that people come up through and you can plot their transformations by their acceptance of these words. That's how you can plot the change. But as Verbecky is trying to suss us out, what is that change? Something has happened, something significant enough in these people's lives has forced, has brought them to probably disassociate from one community, one church, reassociate with another church, or in fact leverage one's agency, like Al Mohler who's a seminary president, to begin moving the language of a subculture from one established sets of beliefs to another set of beliefs. And so something real is happening there. And I don't actually think it's the best way to tag these things and track these things is with the doctrine. I think it has much more to do with, I think you can learn much more by watching the celebrity preachers and noting the identity psychotechnologies that they are employing. And I think you could actually hear some of this in the language of David Nasser. Because I think what's been happening is in fact so influential that it's even going beyond the language labeled boundaries of let's say the gospel coalition and continuing to bleed out into the rest of evangelicalism. And that basically is how transformations take place in communities. So to do that I want to go to one of the three main founders of this and the guy that I studied for quite a while, similar to what I'm doing now with Jordan Peterson, because I noted that Tim Keller, he's the pastor, he was, he's retired now, he was the pastor of Redeemer Presbyterian Church in New York City and he was a guy who came to New York City, a very secular place, and within the scope of about 20 years started a church that grew to about 5,000 members in Manhattan, New York City, and helped launch a church planting movement that has been planting churches in urban areas all around the developed world. Now that's a significant thing because again, people keep asking me, well why did you start studying Jordan Peterson? And the reason I started studying Jordan Peterson was because I noted that in the wake of Jordan Peterson, what was a one way street, people started coming back from it. And I said, there's something important. Well, same with Tim Keller. Well, it was a one way street, the secularization process, in a place like New York City, Tim Keller was changing by listening to, by preaching, and I think in some ways similar to Jordan Peterson, people who identified as secular, now we're using, we're expressing, bearing witness to a transformation of their hearts and lives into a religious framework. And well, as a pastor, why should you study that? What, in Sacramento, California? That is what I should be studying. I mean, what else should I be studying but these people that can help secular people become religious people? That's my job. So, and so I studied Tim Keller because Tim Keller was doing it. Well, how do you know he was doing it? He had a church of 5,000 people in New York City and listen to the testimonies again, similar to Jordan Peterson. I think on a smaller scale, but yeah, significant and then what he helped found, Piper was in Minneapolis to me, that wasn't as interesting because Minneapolis is, you're kind of in the Lutheran belt there up in Minneapolis. John Piper did some really interesting things with his, some really clever twists and his Christian hedonism and I know a lot of people don't like them because of their conservative leanings on this and that, but here's the thing, if you're too picky about, if you're too picky about the distasteful things, the things that you find distasteful in other people's politics or religion, well then all you're going to wind up looking at is your own self in the mirror. So you've got to go out and look at people who disagree with you in small and large ways if you, in fact, continue to want to learn and be productive in your learning. In this talk that Tim Keller gave, I think in 2015, he's, and I've listened to a lot of talks like this by Tim Keller, he's telling people how to transform people in their seats. This is the provocation that John Vervecky is pointing to and in fact, Tim Keller has been, as has Jordan Peterson, have been enormously successful in changing people in their seats and Tim Keller kind of came up before YouTube with a lot of MP3s. I've listened to hundreds of hours of Tim Keller on MP3 and so, you know, he's a Christian minister so it's not like he's, you know, keeping his secrets to himself, he's trying to share his secrets with guys like me. This is Tim Keller colonizing me and saying, this is how you too, now pay attention here because the word is important, the Gospel Coalition. What happened in the Gospel Coalition movement is that this word gospel, which has been around a long time, began to take on a very specific sense and Keller and Piper and others were incredibly disciplined in articulating what this word means and how it changes. But now as I play this video of Tim Keller, I want you to pay attention to identity and real. Alright, so let's listen to Tim. Now, again, when he says they need to be directed towards God, that's exactly the language that David Nasser and Liberty University were using with Jordan Peterson. But what David Nasser and Liberty University didn't do is what Tim Keller is about to do now, which is, and what that means, well why does Tim Keller always go on what that means? Because Tim Keller was a pastor in New York City and he understood very well that if you start by saying they need to be directed towards God and all the secular people of New York City are going to say, I have no idea what that means. And so, and what that means and he's going to put it in other words because he is trying to provoke a transformation. That's what preachers are supposed to do. Where have you heard that before? Breveke just said it. Peterson just said it. Peterson says it all the time. And you saw Tim Keller wince. There's a tell because he knows he's talking to a confessional audience, an audience that is working to get people to the point of saying the sinner's prayer, to say the magic words, to say the holy words, to have them do that. And that's not unimportant, okay, because that's going to be important in terms of this. We don't have identity without these communal things because our identities are always located within communities and so words are important things that tie us to that and words are the ways that we can identify community. They're one of the only tools that we can actually track all this stuff, but they have limits and that's what all of these people are saying. Essentially, it's not your beliefs, at least not the beliefs you subscribe to that actually makes you what you are. It's what your heart trusts in, what your heart loves the most. Now again, we're just swapping one words for another and some of you say, well, I don't know that the second group of words what your heart subscribes to. Well, now we're going to actually reach back and those of you who know who James K. Smith is, philosopher at Calvin College, I mentioned him in previous videos, his book Designing the Kingdom, but we're going all the way back to Augustine and via Augustine we're going all the way back to, you know, stuff is old, it's been around, that's why it's good to study old things. You are at least not the beliefs you subscribe to that actually makes you what you are. It's what your heart trusts in, what your heart loves the most. You can say, I believe in God, God is this and God is this and God is this and yet your heart is basically based in your career. We all know how that works. Your heart is actually trusting in God. He smiles there because he often makes a point that this is one of the defining sins of pastors because we establish, and this is what they mean by gospel, we establish our status on our performance in the world. So if I have a big church, I feel good about myself. If a lot of people subscribe to my YouTube channel, I feel good about myself. If a lot of people write me emails, I feel good about myself. And in fact, my status defines who I am. And what Keller is going to do is say, there's something else over here that defines you much more and actually that is God. And now we get into the psychotechnology of the gospel coalition. Jonathan Edwards, who was a great Augustinian, therefore said that if you're going to be thoroughly biblical, you must not pit knowledge and feeling against each other. That if you say, I know I should be generous with my money, but I'm just not doing it, he would say, well, there's a sense in which you know what you should do, but you're not doing it, but there's another sense in which you don't really know what you should do. Let me give you an example. This isn't, excuse me, I'm better than I was yesterday, but not as better as I'd like it to be. When I was a pastor in Virginia many years ago, I had a young girl in my church and she was about 15 years old, I guess, and she was discouraged, she was depressed often. And the family was a prominent family in the church and I tried to help the family with her. At one point she came into my study and we were talking and being a young minister I was a little bit naive and I said, well, you know, she was downcast. And she said, well, you know, you're a Christian, aren't you? Oh yes, I'm a Christian. Christians have many blessings, don't they? And I said, well, I'm a Christian, too. And so we counted the blessings a little bit, you know, about the great things that as a Christian she could count on and she knew was, you know, was happening there and all those great things in her life. But at one point I said, so you're still depressed? And she said, I tried to encourage her, but here's what she said, almost literally. I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven, I'm going to heaven Now here's what Jonathan Edwards would say. He would say she had the opinion that God loved her but she had no real knowledge that God loved her. Because the love of boys was more real to her heart than the love of God or she wouldn't have been depressed. And so in one sense you could say what she just needed to be told, well what did she need to be told? See what Edwards would say is she needed to be shown the love of God in such a way that it began to get more real to her heart and it began to balance out how popular she was or unpopular she was. Notice the language of real, okay? It's more real to you. Now we're into the Axial Age stuff. What is the real world? What really are we talking about? Some years ago, one more before I talk about how to do it. Some years ago, well I won't mention it, I had a relative who never would wear a seatbelt. And every time I talked to him he would get in the car and he wouldn't wear a seatbelt and we all would nag him about wearing a seatbelt. Alright, he'd put his seatbelt on. And one day we went to see him and got in the car and he put his seatbelt on right away. And we said, what happened to you? And he said, well, I went to a friend of mine, a couple weeks ago I went to see a friend of mine in the hospital. He was in a car crash and he went through the windshield and he had like 200 stitches in his face. And for some strange reason ever since then I've been having no problem, you know, buckling up. And I talked to him a little bit about that. What was interesting going on was I said, well, did you get new information? You know, what changed you? I mean, did you not know that people go through the windshield? And what happened was an abstract proposition became connected to an actual sensory experience, that is something he saw. And there's some place where Jonathan Edwards, the whole idea behind Preaching to the Heart, at some point where Jonathan Edwards says it's only when you attach, it's only when you actually attach an abstract truth to some kind of sensory experience that you've had, or at least the memory of a sensory experience that you have. I'm going to show you how to do this in a second. That something that you know is true becomes real to you. And the point of Preaching to the Heart is to take abstract truth and to make it real to people's heart so that they are changed. A lot of us would like it if people took notes from our sermons or our talks and then went out into the world and started to change their life. But what I'm telling you is, and Jonathan Edwards never spoke that much about preaching, but in one of his books, Thoughts on Revival, he actually says about preaching that preaching does not change you by giving people information that then they go out and practice as much as it changes you through the impression it's made during the sermon. What he means is this. If that girl is sitting under preaching, that 16-year-old girl, who's, by the way, probably in her 50s now. But anyway, that 16-year-old girl is sitting under preaching and the love of God through Jesus Christ in a sermon becomes so vividly real to her and starts to affect her. We're talking about the affections and it starts to penetrate to the heart. This is all language within a subculture, okay? I completely understand. Some of you are listening to that and some of you are getting triggered, which is why I play the Buddhist stuff first because this stuff will trigger you. The Buddhist stuff won't trigger you. But we're talking about similar things and even if you look at the subtleties of language, sitting under preaching and we cannot represent these things without words. Language is the best way we can do it and we're trying to represent transfer. Let's use language from a different room over here because if I could use, if I use my Christian language, I trigger a bunch of you. I'll use Vervecky's language. Transformations of consciousness. That's what we're talking about. You say, well, I thought you were talking about personal conversions. Yep. Transformations of consciousness. Personal conversion. Well, I know some of you are worried, oh, Vanderkley's getting syncretistic. He's, he's, he's, I'm not walking over that line at all. I'm changing the language. Ah, but the language marks the boundaries. Yes, it does. Yes, it does. Which means you have to be very careful about which ones, okay? So, and you also have to understand what belief in God, what we're talking about with those words. And, you know, again, how did I get onto this whole crazy Jordan Peterson thing that I've been, you know, brought me to the ends of the earth in the case of Australia? Because I noticed that people were being transformed. And you may say, well, pastor, well, yeah, yeah, well, listen, have you listened to the conversations? People are being transformed in a Christian way. And he says, I don't like to say whether or not I believe in God. How, how, how, how, how is a guy who says that doing things that lead people to be transformed in a Christian way? Well, that's the question. Go back to Jordan Peterson's March question and answer. What, what question should reporters be asking him? What the hell is going on? That's the question. Before I studied Jordan Peterson, I studied Tim Keller, studied him for the same reason, because I saw, I saw Tim Keller transforming people in the seats. Before I studied Tim Keller, I studied Bill Hybels, not quite as intensively, because I'd go to Willow Creek and see people are getting transformed right there in the seats. And transformed for the better. And, well, pastor, you're just playing your tribal game. Because I would hear people tell the kind of story that Tim York told and look up his, his talk with me and the kind of people that Job, the kind of stories that Job tells, look up his talks with me. I mean, I'm putting them all out there so you can see the transformations and the people themselves are saying it's for the better. Well, what do you mean it's for the better? I'm not depressed anymore. I, my life is happier. Well, I thought you're supposed to move them to heaven. Yeah, now we're going to get into a much longer conversation about what I think Christianity actually is. And the relationship between heaven and earth. And the reconciliation of heaven and earth. And she starts to say, why am I all that upset about whether this or that stupid boy like me or not? When I've got this kind of love. See, when that sort of thing starts happening in her heart, she's being changed on the spot. She's being changed during the sermon. She's being changed because the, because the preaching has reached her heart. And so now you have to listen to the before this to understand what he means by heart, because he's reaching back into a long biblical tradition. And when he uses that, he's using it as a shortcut term. Okay. And I don't expect you to necessarily understand what he's talking about. If you really want to understand, watch the whole video. And there's plenty that you can debate in terms of the use of that word. But that's how it's working in the context of the talk. So as Alec Mottier said, I started the talk this way. What Alec Mottier is trying to say, it's not enough for you to take a text and say, okay, I need to show that this text teaches that Jesus Christ sacrificed for us. And loved us with a costly love. Okay. And that's the text. It's not enough just to say, I need to expound that accurately. I need to bring that home to people's hearts in such a way that it changes them in the seats. And so their hearts are affected by it. And the other things that are more real to their heart than the love of Jesus become, you know, Jesus, Jesus let's us to displace that. That word displace is really important because he harkens back to a Puritan who talked about the fact that when something, let's go back to addiction, when something like addiction is in our heart, in order for something to displace it, you need something more powerful to come and push it out. You heard Jordan Peterson say to David Nasser, it's often religious conversion that pushes out addiction. That's Jordan Peterson says, AA capitalized on it. You need something more powerful than you begin to say, well, what do you mean by power? Is it power in terms of physics, like a nuclear reactor or an eight cylinder engine? No, that's not the kind of physical power. It's another kind of power. Well, and people say, well, it's spiritual power. And I say, I'll watch those words that fudge. You're gonna I'm gonna want you to, you know, what do you mean by spiritual? Because in a sense, when you say spiritual power, you're almost begging the question in terms of what spirit really means. But but another power comes in and transforms it and provokes the change. And as a as a preacher who wants to be a better preacher, obviously a not terribly effective preacher, given the size of my flock. Well, I want to learn. And where are we going to learn from? I'm going to learn from people that are doing it. And so I pay attention to watch. I want to see I want to see who's getting transformed. Now, I see lots of powers that are transforming people. Alcohol can transform people's lives. And we all say, well, alcohol transformed his life for the worst. Heroin transformed their life for the worst. Video games transformed their life for the worst. Pornography transformed their life for the worst. What about these things that transform lives for the better? Well, how can we know better? Well, we navigate by the stars, right? And in the box of secularism, it's really hard to navigate because there there are we navigate by ends by telos. And the iron box of secularism makes that very, very difficult. Well, if you begin with metaphysics and then you go to epistemology and then you go to axiology, there's kinds of a natural progression that goes there. And it actually works. It works pretty well. But the whole thing is about real. Well, what is more real? And again, go back to the introduction to to I think it was 11 get into and continue the discussion of these higher states of consciousness. Higher states of consciousness. What do you mean by higher? But it's a transformed state of consciousness that that somehow when when our consciousness gets transformed, it yields a better life. And and let's give Sam Harris some do here because a little bit of A.B. testing, drunken on the couch all the time or able to relate to my children and go to work and have a productive marriage. Yeah, that's better. You know, Waster and living in my mother's basement covered with Cheetos dust playing video games all the time or actually building a career and having community and do it. Yep, that's better. And that comes through transformations of consciousness. And how how can those things? Well, a lot of it depends on that which is more real. But how do you define what's real and and physicalism that says, well, the most real thing is this thing right here. And I would say, no, the more real thing is that which colonizes the matter. It's that which forms the matter. OK, it's the formal causes far more real than the little plastic earbud holder. Remember, they're very problematic, but that they're at the core of many of the axial age world religions and foundational philosophies. This is the idea that people have an alternative state of consciousness that they regard as somehow more real than their everyday state of consciousness. And the little girl. Well, what was more real for the little girl? Well, that the other ninth graders and the boys, the ninth grade boys, it was real for her. She desired, you know, a narrative where there'll be a will there be a man and she'll become a wife and they'll be children and they'll be a house. And there'll be a car and there'll be a garden and there'll be grandchildren. Well, so identity and narrative. There it is. And that was very real to her. And and and and and Keller through Jonathan Edwards all the way back, you know, is saying, well, there's something more real to her. And in fact, the way it usually works is, well, maybe she'll get the guy eventually and then she'll get the house and then she'll get the child. And then all of that. And at some point, she'll say, is this all there is? There's something more real. Now we're back to Augustine, who said that the the the guy and the marriage and the child and the white picket fence and the home and the car and the retirement fund and the grandkids, all of the goodness that you tasted in there actually pointed to another world. And there was a source that these things drew from. And that source is. You've been telling the story for a very long time. That's problematic, precisely because we tend to judge realness by how well we get an overall coherence in our intelligibility, how we're making sense of things. But in these altered states that are very different from our everyday consciousness and therefore do not cohere with it, people do the alternative instead of rejecting it the way we reject dreaming, for example, because it doesn't cohere with our everyday experience. People reject the everyday experience as illusory. And they say that this state of consciousness somehow gives them an improved access to reality. And as you remember, as we've been going through the actual age revolution and the sense of wisdom and meaning that is attended upon it, this ability to transcend through illusion and get connected to what is more real is central to what wisdom means. And having some deep sense of connectedness to reality is also central to what it is to regard one's life as authentically meaningful. Now, we go back to the little girl. And one might say, well, somehow along the way, even this little 15-year-old girl, something impressed upon her the fact that she should probably sacrifice and find that man and pursue that family and commit to that man and put her life at risk in having those children and commit to giving those children as good a home. And on and on and on and on and on and on and all those things. Well, the formal cause that is actually creating this life, well, there's meaning in there. And even when she begins to actualize this dream that had been passed into her, Jordan Peterson asked for countless generations that had been built into her culture via Western civilization and all of this was actually built into her culture. And she's going to start to realize that there's still a need for civilization and all of this stuff, that there's still a longing for something. And then you get into some of C.S. Lewis's argument from desire where she's longing for an ideal husband and the guy she marries is going to fall short. And she's longing for an ideal home. And the home that she creates is going to fall short. And then the stories come in and you can begin to see how the matter of the wood in the home and the bookshelves and the plastics and the money, all there's something it's pursuing. And it's something she's never seen. But she has a hunger for it. And this is always all playing out. Now, I want to go back to our friend Paul Maxwell because we stopped at Hegel because we're going to move from with Hegel we begin the migration towards the bloody postmodernists and we're going to see some of where this goes. GWF Hegel, who came in the 19th century to critique Kant and his basic critique is that Kant's numeral phenomenal distinction doesn't actually solve the disagreement between Descartes and Hume, but actually fortifies the tension and is even more problematic for us. It traps people in the phenomenal and locks them out of any justified knowledge of the numeral world. Lacks him out of the numeral world. We can't get at metaphysics. We don't know what's behind the real world. And so Hegel is going to take his shot at it. In real world. So Hegel argued that ultimate reality makes itself known to the world through rationality. But the way it makes itself known is unique to Hegel. So Hegel argues that rationality ushers the numeral world into our world progressively through dialectic. What does that mean? This means what this means is that one generation of humankind may hold to a particular idea. That idea could be called a thesis about the way the world works. Then the next generation rebels and come up comes up with like an opposing idea. Right. And that idea is called the antithesis. So you have the thesis from the first generation, the antithesis from the second generation. Then the third generation rebels against the second generation and combines the strengths of both theses into a synthesis. So you've got thesis, antithesis, and then synthesis. Then the fourth generation rebels against the third generation, and the third generation synthesis becomes the new thesis. And the fourth generation proposes an antithesis. Then the fifth generation rebels against the fourth generation and proposes a new synthesis, and so on. Thesis, antithesis, synthesis. thesis, antithesis, synthesis, and that is called the dialectic. And so on and so forth, right? This is called in Hegel the rational dialectic. Pure reason in a sense is a future reality that is pulling us toward itself through the dialectic like a black hole. Reason is inevitable. The dialectic is pushing us forward, is propelling us to a place in time in history before us, in front of us, prospectively that will be perfectly reasonable. And the human race is becoming inevitably and unstoppably more reasonable. And it is through reason that the world will be saved and all individuals will on the last day think the same way and have the same perspective and hold the same opinions. Now notice the concept of salvation. Notice the eschatology. Notice the world will be saved when everything will be one. And of course Hegel thinks you can see the one. And the phenomenal worlds will be identical. However, we must resist the notion that we are perfectly reasonable today according to Hegel. And you can hear, you know, some Sam Harris in there, can't you? Because, you know, it's this rationalism that's going to fix it all up. ... then the new and the phenomenal worlds will be identical. However, we must resist the notion that we are perfectly reasonable today according to Hegel. Because to suggest that we are dogmatic... Sounds like total depravity. ... correct today is to fall into the trap of believing that no antithesis will come, that our beliefs will never be falsified, which is to fall into the error of the pre-moderns in Hegel's view. So Hegel thought Christianity is the most rational expression of the numeral realm today and for that reason ought to be believed so we should all be Christians, but we must hold in principle that it will be overcome and antithesized in the future and therefore ought to be held in an open hand. So Hegel thought that the human race was born in a religious state. That was the first thesis and was liberated from that state through objective ethical thinking and will one day be rescued from merely ethical thinking into a bliss of pure aesthetic enjoyment through the rational dialectic. So he's saying all the human race began in this religious state, moved to ethical, and is moving to religious... Sorry, is moving to aesthetic. So it goes from religious to ethical to aesthetic. Not only is that the biography of the human race, it is the biography of each man and the way that he enlightens himself, the way he liberates himself is to liberate himself from the religious through ethical thinking and to liberate himself through the ethical thinking into aesthetic thinking and the reason that the aesthetic no longer requires ethics is because when everybody thinks the same way, ethics won't be required. Reason will bring us all together and in this way, Hegel saw the world unfolding in three acts as the path every man ought to journey for himself. He is born stupid and religious and grows into an ethical state and through reason learns to achieve existential bliss and Hegel gave birth to two movements, his defenders and his detractors and his defenders believe that the world ought to move in a more homogenous direction in which all individuals eventually meld into a single perspective where everything is the same and individuality is not important and obviously Hegel is in this way the root of Marxism. Detracting from Hegel are those who thought that individuality was the essence of rationality and to be an individual was the irreducible element of being reasonable and in that sense, Hegel's detractors conceived Hegel as the opposite of rationality and this detraction was represented most famously by Soren Kierkegaard who argued that Hegel had the three acts of the world and of the human life exactly backwards in the exact opposite order. So Kierkegaard argued that aesthetic enjoyment is not the sophisticated highest tier of human existence but is rather the mental state of the infant kind of drooling blissful and aesthetic bliss. According to his own mind he's correct. Then man exits the aesthetic infantile stage of his life and enters the ethical and then he achieves the highest tier, the religious mode of existence, which is not the infantile stage as Hegel proposes but the most sophisticated stage is the religious mode of existence which is a man's authentic encounter with God as an individual and in which in that state, in the religious state, he recognizes that God has the right to do whatever he wants with him. It is only in this state of individuality which Kierkegaard calls authenticity that a man can be reasonable and ethical and properly celebrate the true beauty of the world as that to which he is not entitled and in this existential age one ethical entailment is that moral principles have been relativized and in the rejection of Kant through Hegelianism, Hume's dictum you can't get from is to ought, haunted the world and the human race pondered the potential consequences of a modernist view of the world that couldn't justify a universal conception of the good as Socrates had defended thousands of years earlier. So we move from pre-modernism which is a way of looking at the world that prioritizes metaphysics to modernism which is a way of looking at the world that prioritizes epistemology now to post-modernism and post-modernism front loads not the metaphysical epistemological but the axiological okay and post-modernism was rooted in Hegelian existentialism but was jolted into existence by the Holocaust and many philosophers such as Emmanuel Levinas and Martin Buber saw the Nazi party as representative of the inevitable consequence of the enlightenment. They saw they philosophize rather that modernism's inability to see metaphysical realities their disenchantment with the world allowed the Nazis to dehumanize the Jews because the Nazis were slave to a myth of rationality that was in reality a way of masking their attempt to gain political power. It is the entailment of losing sight of the numeral realm altogether which is a product of Kantianism. So philosophy had two options in the 21st century to prevent another Holocaust to go back to pre-modernism and give human beings dignity through acknowledging their metaphysical value such as the soul or abandon metaphysics entirely and front load axiology that is front load once now right there you see a lot of what's going on and I think Paul is right right there at that split ethical and in being's dignity through acknowledging their metaphysical value when you listen to Jordan Peterson when he talks about the spark of divine when he talked to Margaret Hoover right there the spark of the divine and all of that well go back to the go back to the axial age human beings have that we've got to double down on that but Peterson does that as a modernist okay or but who's he fighting bloody post-modernism it's right there right there's the divide such as the soul or abandoned metaphysics entirely and front load axiology that is front load once ethical responsibility to one's neighbor and to pursue global justice then epistemology simply becomes a tool in defending and fortifying that pursuit of justice and in this way post-modernism is always on the hunt for the agenda behind truth claims post-modernism sees any claim to objective truth as a veiled attempt to gain power over another human being by persuading them to submit to their way of seeing the world because again we in a world after Kant there's no such thing in the new as as the numinal all we have is perception therefore all we have to protect those around us is to front load the the human dignity of each person with no metaphysical basis to front load your ethical obligation to equity to perfect global equity or and then and then to make sense of the world after the fact and we must recognize here that post-modernism did not originate the claim that we do not have access to objective truth that was Kant who fortified the distinction between the numinal world and the phenomenal world and all that needed to occur for the relationship between those worlds to be broken is for some event to occur which casts enough suspicion on the transcendental that composited to distrust it to distrust the sausage maker and that event was the holocaust and once you're stuck in the phenomenal world with no trustworthy transcendental to mediate the numinal world to you and people are acting as if human dignity doesn't exist you're stuck with subjectivity and an ethical absolute and in this way the task of philosophy becomes the establishment of global justice not because people were eager to abandon truth but because through Descartes Hume and Kant people became blind to metaphysics and therefore blind to the necessary theological foundations which exist at the very bottom of every philosophical question there it is there it is and post-modernism is not an eager pursuit of relativism although maybe it has become that in some circles but a desperate scramble to minimize the ethical damages that secularism has wreaked on the world through an unchecked enlightenment modernism there's the fight of the idw and today we exist not so much in a post-modern age but in an age of competing modernities people don't know how to become enchanted with the metaphysical world again even though they want to there's the meaning crisis modernity and today that secularism has wreaked on the world through an unchecked enlightenment modernism and today we exist not so much in a post-modern age but in an age of competing modernities people don't know how to become enchanted with the metaphysical world again even though they want to people are grasping towards something more than materialism but they can't attain it because the structure of modernity requires them to begin with epistemology which dict or or even worse a post-modernity which requires them to to front load and begin with an unjustified axiology which dictates a principle of radical doubt which will never allow the justification of metaphysics ever so what direction should we go and paul bachwell is a christian so he's gonna tell you how can we come how can we become enchanted with the world again you know should we not all just become pre-socratics again and start from scratch and start claiming all is fire all is water certainly not as the judaeo-christian worldview emphasizes the only way to begin with metaphysics is not to speculate about the metaphysical world but to have the metaphysical world actually reach out to you and christians have historically called this metaphysical point of contact revelation god actually deigns to reach down into the material world and manifest himself and those of you who are listening right at that moment then he turns to the other language he turns to the religious language and you know it's very interesting the way peterson looks at religious language and and how often he notes that for certain numbers certain certain of his patients the only way they could find healing down below in terms of ab your little ab your little ab testing within the box of secularism is to go to theological language and you'd hear him do that with david nasser and with respect to alcoholism and so so so on one hand of course you're talking to a christian you listen to a christian pastor i've got my i've got my agenda i've got my presuppositions you know i'm not going to play i'm not going to play that i'm somehow objective in this i'm not but and david nasser says it works and peterson says well if it works um but and you'd hear tim keller switch over to this language and so well and i think again what i appreciate is that just because the language works doesn't mean that we shouldn't study it which is what vervecky's doing he's studying the language and he's he's he's sitting right there at that moment of crisis of the you know that i think paul maxwell nicely laid out and well what do we do can we go back to the axial age is that possible how do we how do we get out of this this off to you and christians have historically called this metaphysical point of contact revelation god actually deigns to reach down into the material world and manifest himself to those who will accept his self-witness and much more could be said about the relationship between philosophy and theology and the complex ways that philosophy is bearing upon our cultural moment but for the purpose of keeping the summary as short as possible the doctrine of revelation is as good a place as any to conclude this comprehensive survey of that survey of the into higher history of philosophy there you go i like that little video but yeah doctrine of revelation and so in a sense then we're right back there with sam harrison jordan peterson arguing about whether or not something can be revealed now it's i'm heading towards easter sunday easter is the biggest sermon of the year for a pastor christian pastor usually so all week long i'm thinking about my sermon i'm going to talk a lot about resurrection obviously but but big question about the revelate about resurrection is in fact in what way is is resurrection revelatory what does it reveal and and revelation our english word is usually what we use to translate the greek word apocalypse which means and kind of an unveiling pulling the curtain aside to see what is true what is the the metaphysical the the thing the thing which is colonizing and informing the matter jordan peterson and this is a is a classic modernist his coyness about his personal beliefs is the posture of the naked public square that has been that has been the default position from the mid 20th century where you you if you're in the public square you speak in science and reason and you might have you might have personal religious beliefs but you keep them over here and you know even i'm not criticizing when i say i mean dallas willard if you if you look at cs lewis i mean two prominent christian evangelists and apologists who taught in secular universities and their students all their students would always testify that in the context of the secular university they never pushed their christianity on them in fact they went out of their way to be fair to to to non-christian and and students of other religion to respect them and i think there are actually theological reasons and justifications for that so so this coyness in the public realm but but peterson in some ways has kind of taken a step over the line to become a preacher and so then that makes the coyness all the more remarkable but his axiology is based on a darwinian epistemology which puts him at odds with the truth correspondence modernist foundationalists such as someone like let's say sam harris and and then he says we need god in quotes for psychology now i want to bring in owen barfield there's a there's a wonderful book written by philip and carol zaleski called the fellowship the literary lives of the inklings jr tolkien owen barfield cs lewis charles williams most of you are probably most familiar with jr tolkien and cs lewis owen barfield well i'll just read this paragraph paragraph the radical idea that words carry such hidden cargo is elaborated in a second essay that barfield published two years later in the london mercury in december 1922 he began his piece ruin by quoting with approval ma pausance declaration that words have a soul i won't try reading french i didn't grow up in canada i've had zero french classes words have a soul what on earth does that mean first of all we're in this particular moment we're kind of at a loss of how to describe what a soul is and jordan peterson got that question i thought his answer was very interesting my definition of a soul is when you when you say you know way back when they tried to at the at the beginning of the physical age they you know they put a body on a sensitive scale and wait for it to die and see if you know see if the body lost matter could they weigh the soul that's kind of like asking can you weigh a story if if i am probably best conceived of as a even story isn't the best word for it but it's maybe the closest we've got if i am if i am a story my soul is probably the story okay and my my story inhabits this body and and it moves through time and it colonizes things it's i'm colonizing you now through through my video be colonized and and so i am a story and i am a soul and in in the i in christianity i believe that what my what happens in my resurrection is that god actually reforms the material universe and and in my resurrected body i i my my story is reincarnated in flesh that does not decay all right so so but but what owen barfield noted was that words have a soul what on earth did he mean by that he meant that words sort of like my body there's a few little scars on my body that i'm not going to show you mercifully they're they're nothing really to tell about i love that scene in jaws where they're all comparing scars and these these scars tell stories and and jesus even after his resurrection his new body bears the scars and so he invites thomas to put his hand there and put his hand in his side and well words have souls what do you mean by that words carry with them owen barfield believes evidence of consciousness we usually that's we usually attribute words with consciousness evidence of consciousness and owen barfield believed that the transformations of consciousness throughout time communally in terms of culture was was that transformation the the artifacts of that transformation were found in the history of words owen barfield was a philologist so and you can read about this in this book and you can also read about tolkien and lewis and such so he worked on this word ruin making industrious use of the ortho the oxford english dictionary he then bared the soul of the english word ruin now again soul is almost story there he bared the story of the english word ruin by exploring its its etymology here one may note that emerson declared the poet in the poet that language is the archive of history and in praise of books that dictionaries are the raw material of possible poems and histories and one wonders about the extent of the influence of barfield largely unacknowledged apart from scattered references in the latter 1931 poetic dictum and a few essays barfield finds in the latin origin of ruin ruio a large sense of swift disastrous movement and you can sense that that was their ruin whoosh job's family gets wiped out they are ruined the sense would not last ruin changes or evolves through the writings of chaucer gow or spencer shakespeare and the latter writings it becomes a warm and living thing and and here's the fun thing is that we can actually with through literature we can sense the movement of this you can feel ruin of its older sense you can see it there and then you can see in its middle sense and later when we talk about the ancient ruins of the greek theater there in um effesus let's say or or or corinth we sense it whatever a ruin is different from his ruin came upon him and and so we we can begin to sense the soul the story of the word ruin milton pope dryden and others each contributing to its shifting meaning to the import of the word of the words four magical black squiggles wherein the past is bottled like an arabian genie in the dark by the late 18th century with its enlightenment neoclassical and satirical sensibilities ruin had been bled of its original power speed and terror becoming all tumbledown walls and the world's mossy masonry the case is exemplary ruin is but one of 10 000 ancestral words embalming the souls of many poets dead and gone and the souls of many common men it is also barfield proclaimed in an ending burning with eschatological fever a word with a bright future for all words all language invented so that people can relate to one another are striving still towards that that end and consolation as language grows subtler and subtler burying in its vaults more and more associations more and more mind it becomes to those same spirits a more and more perfect medium of companionship in the beginning was the word and the word was with god and the word was god skipping a little bit later we can begin to see its intersectionality with the meaning crisis by now barfield's evolutionary argument had advanced in complexity and detail he believed that very early human beings had experienced a profound intimacy with the world in which thoughts feelings and the and the objects of perceptions lay in healthy and proper relationship to one another sounds like a primeval garden barfield would later call this state original participation that over centuries human beings had developed an acute self-awareness in which this primordial unity disappeared resulting in the philosophical skepticism that afflicted modern times and that the future which barfield had tasted during his sophia moment promised a return to our original experience of unity while remaining the dis the discernment and ability to think abstractly that they had acquired during our evolutionary odyssey poetic dictum focuses upon the place of language in this scheme barfield contend barfield contends um let me go back primordial man barfield contends possessed a poetic language drenched in meaning he quotes with approval shelly's famous line from in defense of poetry in the infancy of society every author is necessarily a poet because language itself is poetry as consciousness evolved this poetic language and the poetic experience of reality that it had made possible faded away this is the crisis in which we find ourselves today i think we're talking about the meaning crisis barfield's most impressive elaboration of his theory comes in his discussion of the greek word panuma latin spiritus to max mueller the celebrated victorian philologist and a principal target of barfield's argument panuma originally meant wind and if you've studied greek new testament this is a word you're dealing with all the time originally meant wind when the greeks required an abstract word for the life principle they simply appropriated the word panuma and and altered its meaning not so counters barfield panuma and the words from which it derived meant neither breath nor wind nor spirit nor all nor yet all three of these things but simply had their own peculiar meaning which has since in the world of the evolution of consciousness crystallized into the three meanings specified and no doubt into others also the history of language is then a history of crystallization of rigor mortis of death and decay so it appears at first glance but this is illusory for there exists in the history of language and thus in the life of human beings all of whom employ language to apprehend the world a second life-giving force the salvatic the salvistic the salvific force is poetry the world can and will be saved by poets the lost meaning of primordial language reappears under the conscious art of the poet as metaphor a recreating registering of thought one of these eternal facts which may already have been experienced in perception poetry induces a felt change of consciousness the felt was added at the suggestion of lewis who read the work in manuscript this change is in effect a return partially though it may be to the poetic richness of our primordial consciousness but now in a state of self of full self-awareness metaphor is the catalyst for this felt change of consciousness every effective metaphor brings with it a more complete perception of the world and its interrelationships it reveals more truth it brightens expands clarifies in effect it helps create our understanding of the world through metaphor we we receive in addition to the moment or moments of aesthetic pleasure in appreciation a more permanent boon it is as though our own consciousness has been has actually been expanded as barfield promised and his book offered a theory of as barfield promised his book offered a theory of knowledge poetry and its metaphors are meant of our means of cognition now my normal everyday experience as a human being of the world around me depends entirely upon what i bring to the sense datum from within the absorption of this metaphor into my imagination has enabled me to bring more than i could before it has created something in me a faculty or part of a faculty enabling me to observe what i could not hither to observe this ability to recognize significant resemblances and analogies considered as in action i shall call knowledge considered as a state and apart from the apart from the effort by which it is imparted and acquired i shall call it wisdom so barfield imagines that what i experience right now sitting as paul vanderclay son of stan and barb grew up in a black community and a dutch reform church at the end of the 20th century beginning of the 21st century time in the dominican republic years now in sacramento in a particular congregation in a particular marriage with particular children reading particular books listening to particular videos making videos of my own on and on and on the consciousness this thing that i have as consciousness is is not just this biological thing biological function such as the electricity that a battery or a generator puts out but is is shaped and molded by jordan peterson with sam harris all of those years of shaping and molding that has happened in our past that has been built into me built into me in terms of the hardware built into me in terms of the software and and in fact this consciousness is formed and shaped by the story verse that is around me it can't be any other way i don't see as sam harris would imagine through clear eyes through some monarchical vision seeing a world of objects that's not how we look that's not how we see things it's it's shaped and molded and in fact if you wonder about the history of consciousness well where would we find out about it through words words have souls people have souls now peterson for all his coyness about believing in god doesn't exhibit the same coyness talking about the transcendent which if you watch my videos about god number one and god number two god number two and in fact a really interesting video where he talks with roger scrutin at cambridge which all of this is now different because of course scrutin has had a bad time lately and peterson's invitation was withdrawn and the other guy i think went on to to teach at a at a at a university in the united states it's now very interesting conversation partly because of everything that happened after and notice how the things that happened after now shape our view of this video we don't i don't watch this this is not the same video in a sense that i watched when i first watched it because of all the subsequent things that have happened in the lives of the people there and now i watch it with new eyes and in fact now when i watch it i pay more attention to this little introduction which seemed to be a throwaway but really isn't a throwaway at all so let's watch that off of rolston college and the cambridge center for the study of platonism it's an immense honor to introduce two of the foremost intellectuals of our age these thinkers one a philosopher the other a psychologist are spiritual writers addressing the malaise of the soul in our culture john stewart mill in his magnificent essay on kohlerage wrote of bentham jeremy bentham who above all others men have been led to ask themselves in regard to any ancient or received opinion is it true and by kohlerage remember kohlerage now what is the meaning with kohlerage in contrast to the utility of bentham the very fact that any doctrine had been believed by thoughtful men and received by whole nations and generations of mankind was part of the problem to be solved was one of the phenomena to be accounted for this i think is true of both roger scrutin and jordan peterson and i'd like to mention just a couple of points of convergence one is an insistence on the importance of imagination as conversion to truth in opposition to a mere fantasy and an opposition to idolatry ideology uh the idolatrous ideology of the post-modern fulcrum derived consensus and an urgent return to questions about truth beauty and goodness and of course part of this is linked to what both perceive as the perilous position of the modern university they both argue that continuity of esteem needs to be regained in the humanities and that the dominant strands of the humanities are leading to an impoverishment of the souls of students narratives both argue are not just stories of power but these narratives persist because of their truth so the importance for both ralston college and indeed for the cambridge center for the study of platonism of both of these thinkers is their insistence upon the relationship between muthos and logos between story and reason the insistence upon a hierarchy of values and their vision of education as conversion to truth this conversation will be moderated by the president of ralston college steven blackwood thank you douglas for those inspiring and grounding words starting us off right in relation to the past that we wish to recover let me start i think with a very straightforward but perhaps difficult question where we're gathered around the theme apprehending the transcendent loosely to gather this conversation and i'd like to begin by asking each of you what is the transcendent what does it mean for something to be transcendent what is the transcendent do you believe in god what is the transcendent the words matter um somehow we're more comfortable talking about the transcendent but let me start i i take a position which i attribute also to cand that um that we have a very clear negative understanding of it we we as it were advanced to the edge of our thinking in so many areas knowing that although there's nothing further that we can say that somehow the truth has not never nevertheless not run out and um that negative view i think needs to be combined with a more positive view which tells us that there are other ways not just maybe not thinking but some other way of of crossing that boundary and as it were landing in the realm of the transcendent and knowing it from inside i think you know and that now you've got the objective and the subjective there crossing that boundary knowing it from the inside this is something that we understand very quickly in personal relations now notice the relationship between the transcendent and the subjective and the personal and i think it was uh i think it was alvin plantiga you know god and other minds um the the transcendent is a mind it because it looks it transcends but it looks and it has that capacity and and i love what what scrutin does right here that when i when i address you i know that i'm addressing something which addresses me too i'm addressing an agent well how do i know you have consciousness how do i know you have this capacity to transcend how do i know you're an agent it's not an easy question but from a place where i could never be i couldn't look at myself from those eyes um and i can't capture the thing that is looking at me from those eyes but nevertheless there are leaps of the imagination which can put me in your point of view and from that point of view i can come to understand exactly what i am but but in other words i and so when i talk about my soul as my story i know my story from the inside my wife knows my my wife knows my story from the outside but from a particular perspective my kids all five of them know my story from their own perspectives and there's there's distortion and error and all of that and all of these stories just there's like there's distortion and error in my story from the inside my parents know me my congregants know me youtube viewers know me and you would somehow need you would somehow need a again we're getting a god number one here we somehow need a viewer kind of number one-ish to two would somehow need a transcendent viewer to know my story in and out my story all the way back through into my grandparents from before i was conceived and and the roots of let's say my dutch calvinism or my american culture or the the culture of the place in which i grew up because that oozed into me and and you know lots of things apparently have souls and and and if i if i were to be reconstituted and perfected and translated that all would have to come into play in terms of doing that to me so i i love what scrutin does and just recognizing just with two people you can begin to see see these boundaries and the lay of the land here but in a completely different way from simply the ordinary empirical knowledge that i have of myself and i think that that sort of interpersonal understanding i would say we can adapt to all the other aspects of our world which is mysterious to us music for instance well that that's a beginning and i want to return to music a bit a bit later jordan well i think it's useful as an adjunct to that so so sir roger mentioned that the transcendent is what we bump up against when we realize our ignorance and that's a key definition for peterson comes back to it again and again is is often we we have a better we we have a better grip on knowledge actually when we bump up to our ignorance because then we're coming into something real something which stops us so it's that which transcends our ignorance and and that in itself makes it an implacable fact unless you believe that you have no ignorance in which case there's no point in furthering a discussion with you so the transcendent is the fact in so far as it's that which transcends our ignorance but you can also think about it technically so and and and i think we know enough about how the brain works now so that not that we know much so that useful things can be that you tend to represent the world in the simplest manner that you possibly can that works for what you're doing that that's one of the favorite things i think my favorite things i've ever heard jordan peterson say and that that sticks in my brain deeply because it's it's it's really a a foundation it's a footing for a whole bunch of really interesting things in terms of human beings and it gets into this barfieldian business well where he's about to go in a minute this barfieldian business about words have souls that that these words these words connect up into our souls not necessarily as words but the words are labels and and and give us manipulables outside of ourselves that we can begin to work on some of these things and so you don't actually see the world you see sufficiently useful low represent low resolution representations of the world and if they work then that's fine there's no need to adjust them and they're relatively easy to remember and to manipulate but now and then you have a misapprehension about someone let's say and you have a conversation with them and the conversation goes sideways and what that means is that the the thing that you thought you were conversing with is not the thing that you're conversing with and that manifests itself in error right so error is the place where the transcendent reveals itself and what is actually revealing itself is the reality that's outside and underneath your perceptions and so what you see in the world in some sense is a set of animated cartoons and a lot of that is actually a consequence of you seeing nothing but your memory because your brain is organized so that instead of going through all of the difficulty of having to look at the thing in it in itself you look at what you assume to be there and if you can get away with that so much the better but the thing in itself is always much richer richer than your apprehension of it which is partly why you make mistakes but also partly why you can continue to garner wisdom in the world there's always more there than meets the eye and god only knows how much more there's there than meets the eye now now in this in this in these low resolution memories that we use to see the world you can very much understand why consciousness changes over time because these low resolution memories have all been shaped by the people in our lives the language that we're using the experience that we've had this is this is the stuff we've all built in and so it's the stuff we replay and and as a pastor you have this experience often you're talking to someone and it's it's it's sort of like the non-player character meme where you know they're just boom boom boom i talk to talk to somebody hopefully i gotta send them those videos um we'll post it because he talked about jockey lulz book propaganda and and how and we see this right now in our culture our public discourse everything is just simply repetitive because people aren't actually thinking and engaging they're just they're just pushing propaganda points to each other and so barfield's idea of of tracking the history of consciousness through words matches up here with with this observation that peterson makes about how we are and and then the transcendent well the transcendent the big one or that our our touches of transcendence with each other happens in these spaces and you can show this even in the religious sense to some degree because you could say that there's an element to the transcendent that instills people with a sense of religious significance you can do that by immediately scientifically by feeding people chemicals for example that disrupt the inhibition of perception by memory and then that puts them in a place where the transcendent tends to reveal itself sometimes an overwhelming force so this it's not some fiction i i don't know if you know the way he said that and again i don't know a lot about psychedelics and i'm not going to try them so but you're taking some things offline with chemicals other things are still online obviously otherwise consciousness disappears so i i really don't know that we know what's going on with with these things this exists it's the what's transcendent is more real than the reality that you perceive well let's pick let's pick up on that because the the the ancients and the medievals had a clear sense that it wasn't the world that was changing it was we ourselves as we make an ascent towards again barfield deeper truths higher forms of the beautiful as we ourselves become more self-conscious so it's not the world that's changing uh but but us i wonder if you could say how you understand the nature of that ascent that that that that movement and and what brings it about i i would be a bit wary of the metaphor of ascent i think in plato it's quite clear what he meant that he wanted us to actually to transcend our earthly perceptions and our earthly way of seeing things and look on the world from uh from a god's eye perspective um and this could be done if we enter the world of the pure forms and so on leave empirical reality behind i think actually um insofar as the experience of the transcendent that i as i understand it is available to us modern people it's not that way that we get it perhaps perhaps um jordan might be right that that there are these drug induced experiences where things open up to us because old barriers are suddenly swept away but in my own case it is the concentration on the empirical reality which at a certain point flips from mere sensory understanding to a vision in that of its communicating something to me and i think this is what the literature and art and music do at their best they they re-describe reality so that it is actually communicating something to you it's not just there as an inert object before you and that sense of the transcendence is like discovering yourself in a mirror um seeing in the world as a whole that thing in you that you could never identify in words you know the subject which is looking at it um and it's not a mystery but it's something that you can't then explain and it's the difference between a good writer and a bad writer of course is that a good writer will describe something in such a way that the thing described has the soul of the reader in it um so so that might be the distinction in part between the thing and the meaningful thing right and that's a that's a very mysterious phenomenon in fact in some sense the essence of phenomenon because that means to shine forth you know as we're surrounded by empirical facts they're everywhere there's more of them than we can possibly count but some of them do emerge and manifest themselves as that as that conjunction between the factual and the meaningful and then that's what's gripping and if you're fortunate I mean to me that's also partly what what leads us onward and maybe in in something approximating the ascent that you described is that the set of facts manifests itself as implicitly meaningful and that means in some sense that there is a call to you that isn't from within you I mean I don't know how else to put it exactly because you walk into a bookstore and a book will will will reveal itself to you you know or or you have a conversation and part of the conversation will trigger something in you or you're reading a scientific paper and much of it's dull and then all of a sudden there's something that sparks outward that's like a port that's a portal into the transcendent and that is a place where the fact and the meaning converge and that's a phenomenon we don't understand very well it has something to do with its convergence with the narrative that drives us convergence with the narrative that drives us it's the story it's the it's the story that is the movement of consciousness through time Coleridge is there something else that's really below is it is metaphysics do must we start with metaphysics can we know metaphysics is in fact what we're doing punching through something to another thing and back to C.S. Lewis's abolition of man where he takes apart an English school book in their second chapter Gaius and Titius quote the well-known story of Coleridge at the waterfall you remember that there were two tourists present that were once that one called it sublime and the other pretty and that Coleridge mentally endorsed the first judgment and rejected the second with disgust. Gaius and Titius comment as followed when the land said this is sublime he appeared to be making a remark about the waterfall actually he was only making a remark about the waterfall but way remark he was not making a remark about the waterfall but remark about his own feelings he was a captive who couldn't see the waterfall basically what he was saying was what he was saying was that I have feelings associated in my mind with the word sublime no no that's not it or shortly I have sublime feelings here are a good many deep questions settled in a pretty summary fashion but the authors are not yet finished they add this confusion is continually present in language as we use it we appear to be saying something very important about something and actually we are only saying something about our own feelings the question is whether we can penetrate through it and of course if you read CS Lewis's very brief little book Lewis will take this on until quite modern times all teachers and even all men believe the universe to be such that certain emotional reactions on our part could be either congruous or incongruous to it believed in fact that objects did not merely receive but should merit our approval or disapproval our reverence or our contempt the reason why colleridge agreed with the tourist who called the cataract sublime and disagreed with the one who called it pretty was of course that he believed inanimate nature to be such that certain responses should be more just or ordinate or appropriate to it than others and he believed correctly that the tourists thought the same the man who called the cataract sublime was not intending simply to describe his own emotions about it he could have said i was feeling awe it's a fine sentence but his claim that there was that there would be no nothing to agree but for this claim there would be nothing to agree or disagree about to agree with this is pretty if those words simply describe the lady's feelings would be absurd if she had said i feel sick colleridge would hardly have replied no i feel quite well when shelly having compared the human sensibility to an aeolian liar goes on to add that it differs from the liar in having a power of internal adjustment whereby it can accommodate its cords to the notion of that which strikes them he is assuming the same belief can you be righteous astra hern unless you be just in rendering to things their due esteem her back at playdoin sacrilees all things were made to be yours and you were made to prize them according to their value metaphysics epistemology axiology modern skepticism writes to bracket out metaphysics in the hope that we can discern within the iron box of secularism what will be good enough and i am skeptical of that claim ester writes i think her best title sam harris asks jordan peterson questions he can't answer the box affords no reason to not be provocative by denying its limitations you will lose status if you embrace faith based on revelation all those i will um all those i will lose status with will die and be forgotten got a better reason that's the thing about the iron box of secularism you it's your your your worldview is passed on through little remarks that give you clues about saying what things will give you status and saying which things will lose you status and those are very powerful movements in us but but the box itself cannot offer us the kinds of things we really desire we want to see real things we want to see things that do not decay we want to escape the suffering the decay the the wheel that takes itself apart we want to escape this suffering we want to live forever ecclesiast says he has placed eternity in our hearts and i would add we are haunted by it i think we saw some of this play out this week at notredame why the gasp as the great as the fire burned through the great building and why the pictures feel so poignant and and rolling stones asked should we be making such a fuss about this building why were the people of paris moved to tears and and and listened to the commentary surrounding it if we listen to ourselves and peterson is right we are and keller is right they make the same points and and vervecky is right the the belief language and what we actually do and live and and our capacity to provoke transformational consciousness in us we're really bad at this and we're disconnected from ourselves and and when we saw the flames in notredame and when we heard people singing hymns in the streets i thought how many people are around the hymns by heart and why and what does it mean and where is it going and right there the very simple language of do you believe in god well fair enough what do you mean by believe and what do you mean by god i've just spent five hours making a video about it why the hubbub about a building why the singing in the streets is the building sublime does it point through some to something eternal and what do i mean by eternal if we human beings destroyed each other through nuclear annihilation some bad germ getting out of some bad laboratory global ecological catastrophe whatever would sublimity remain does it transcend is it eternal is there eternity in our hearts or not language is about the only way we can really negotiate this and so i've talked at you for four and a half hours in these two videos do you believe in god depends what you mean by believe depends what you mean by god fair enough but