https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sWnUfkmV9Aw

 In my last video, I took about an hour to frame the Sunday special show one, episode one, interview between Ben Shapiro and Jordan Peterson. I thought this was an outstanding interview. If you like Jordan Peterson stuff and you like Jordan Peterson unleashed and because I don't know what goals Ben Shapiro had for this interview, but Jordan Peterson took it over and ran with it. And so what I did in the video I just finished was basically run through all of this stuff and Jordan Peterson breadpilling people and Orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism and Protestantism. Would he fit into Orthodoxy? The way the Enlightenment split the world, modernity, how in a sense God got lost in Protestantism through the Enlightenment. Modernism, fundamentalism, the divide widens in the 20th century and now the strange way that the camps are splitting and how many different ways this group of internet people are divided. Sometimes it's Jordan Peterson against just about everyone, sometimes Jordan Peterson and just about everyone are against postmodern neo-Marxism and on and on and on. So I went all through that in my last video and I'll have the link to that in the notes here. So now I'm going to basically twitch some of this video and the reason I did this is because the first part of this video from minute 0 to 16 Jordan and Ben are kind of running through the kind of stuff they usually run through. If you're a hardcore Jordan Peterson fan, a lot of that stuff you've heard before. You might want to listen to it again, fine, but as we talked about in our meetup group last night, there's a saturation point that a lot of hardcore Jordan Peterson people are at and they're waiting for new stuff. Now what comes after minute 16 is again, I don't know if Peterson had caffeine or what, but he was on fire and poor Ben is trying to contain him and keep him contained talking about the Enlightenment and that's where he launches from, but he's going some different places and the relationship with the Enlightenment again here is key in terms of what I think might become Jordan Peterson's contribution to church history and the history of Western civilization if his influence continues to grow. I don't want to get too far ahead of ourselves here, but there's this long split that's been happening in the West. The first thing I noticed when I started listening to Jordan Peterson, I thought he's trying to undo the split, which would be a really big deal. And now there's been a lot of attempts to try to undo the split, but Peterson is doing it in a new way and the size of his following and again, what I've appreciated is how many honest skeptics are saying, well, Peterson maybe doesn't have me believing in God yet, but I'm not as anti-Christian as I used to be and I'm more interested in tradition and mythology and all of this as a result of what Peterson has done. And again, I would not be paying all this attention and making all these videos if I didn't think Jordan Peterson was important. Now who else between me and Jonathan Pigeot are making a lot of videos on this? I don't know. There's a few other folks making one or two videos, but yeah, it's been kind of an obsession for me and that's just kind of the way I do when I find something interesting that's helpful for me to knit my own head together because yeah, I'm a Christian reform minister, but I've got my inner skeptic too and I got to deal with that guy. So, you know, that's why I do this. So let's jump into the video here at minute 16 and this is after the commercial break and Shapiro wants to get Peterson talking about the enlightenment and as I noted before, the context will be on this side, Peterson, Shapiro, the intellectual dark web are lining up to battle postmodern neo-Marxism that is threatening science. And again, I ran through that whole history in my last video. That's where Shapiro wants to get Jordan Peterson engaged here and now Peterson's going to take it and run with it in the way that Peterson always does. Jordan, one of the things that we've been talking about obviously is the big gap that I think we certainly agree on between the collectivist identity politics and the sublimation of science in favor of subjective politics that favors a power group. But I want to talk a little bit about a division that is also now breaking out among those of us who I think would consider ourselves friends of the enlightenment. So you consider yourself a friend of the enlightenment style thinking, at least in the essence that individuality matters and that the individual is sovereign. And the scientific method is useful and that facts are useful and real. Exactly. So again, now Peterson is aligning himself with the enlightenment. And if again, you go back into my past video, a lot of the punditry on Peterson's implicit faith or covered up faith or new faith, all the oddsmakers say he'll join the Orthodox Church. I'm skeptical. I don't know. I mean, he might. I mean, he can join whatever church he wants to. But his relationships with, everybody lines him up with orthodoxy because they see his use of symbolism. And that's right. But he is also, and where he's going to go with this video, he's going to say the enlightenment of all of this stuff from below. And that's different from saying the enlightenment was a big mistake in detour. And so from the position, and I'd love some of you, those of you who are in the Orthodox Church to weigh in in the comments here, is the enlightenment, from the position of orthodoxy, it is very understandable and natural. And if I were in your shoes, I'd probably think the same way to say that the Roman Catholic Church and Protestantism are both a huge mistake. That the Roman Catholics, they left us and then the Protestants left them. And if we had all had just stayed Orthodox, we wouldn't have this big mess. Okay. That's another big conversation. But it's very interesting here. How orthodox would Peterson be? Because look at his commitment to the power of the enlightenment. And so that's what you should be paying attention to here. And in this group, I consider myself as part of this group, people have started to call it the intellectual dark web. Sam Harris is part of this group. There are a wide variety of folks with a lot of broad political differences that are part of this group. But there are some real differences that are broken out even among people who consider themselves part of this group. Steven Pinker has a different perspective on the world than you do. I have a different perspective than Sam Harris does. You and I have our differences probably on some matters of philosophy. So where do you think the vulnerability lies in the possibility of revivifying enlightenment mentality? Because it seems to me that one of the big problems that's popping its head up above the water now is the rejection of the enlightenment in favor of this old style tribalism that you've been talking about. Now I wonder if I left my notes up here. Yeah, I noted when I noted when Shapiro said this, he said, where does the vulnerability lie in revivifying the enlightenment mentality, rejection of the enlightenment in favor of some old style tribalism? Now, it's so interesting that it's so interesting that Shapiro calls this a vulnerability. That's very much when I hear him say that, I think that this is a war and these are armies looking at each other. So we're going to look at the vulnerability in their armies or the chink in their armor. And that's what we're going to go after. And I thought that was kind of interesting. But then he also he also casts it the enlightenment in favor of old style tribalism. And that's an interesting take. And I don't think an unfair one on where this goes. But both movements are playing funny games with history here. But now Shapiro really wants to camp in on the enlightenment, which I find very interesting because in terms of his philosophy and his religion, so you have Judaism, which is an ancient religion, and later he's going to really make an appeal to Aristotle. So he's a traditionalist who is staking his claim on the enlightenment, which is very interesting. And that's going to kind of show the relationship between the enlightenment and Ben Shapiro's Aristotelian ideas. So back to the show that we're now going to repeat history because we benefited so much from the enlightenment that we forget that things don't have to be this way. We've got so much nice stuff. We live in so much freedom that we forget that if we just toss those enlightenment ideals out the window, things get really ugly again. I think that's what unites. Well, that now. Okay. So this is where Shapiro and Peterson are on the same page because they both see the rise of postmodern neo-Marxism, the rise of the identity tribalisms coming up. These are going to undo the benefits that we have experienced from the enlightenment. And he, in fact, here a little bit later, will reference Jonah Goldberg and his new book that's just come out. So here Shapiro is kind of a classical American conservative of a certain type. And so he's saying, okay, Jordan Peterson, here we are together. How are we going to keep us from sliding away from the enlightenment? But now again, one of the things I talked about in our meetup last night is I said, the constant discussion in our meetup is where's this whole thing going? And one of the things I think is that there are two tracks here. One track is the political and the other track is the religious. Now the social is in between and it's going to be social political or social religious. And I think Peterson will probably stick to the social religious more than the social political, even though he's got a lot of things to say about politics, even though he seems to be a very regular on Fox News. And NBC slammed him. You know, I don't know. I don't know how thoroughly Peterson wants to get involved in American politics being a Canadian or even if he wants to get into Canadian politics, I would imagine he wants to stay being this kind of prophetic outsider. And so I would imagine he'll probably keep to the social religious track. But again, he's going to play. He's going to stay outside the religious boxes as well. And he's I think he's going to be this John the Baptist, you know, out in the wilderness. So let's get let's get Peterson some camel's hair and a loincloth and have a munching on some, you know, grasshoppers and lobsters. They're both crustaceans. Well, I don't know. Somebody will correct me of that in the comments section, but keep going. That's the question is that what what what do you toss out the window before things get ugly? Right. And the enlightenment proponents you could say Harris, you could say Pinker, Charles Taylor in Canada. Why'd you put Charles Taylor in that list? And now he's going to go off into Charles Taylor. And so this is this is where Peterson is a little uncontrollable because he's got stuff he wants to say. Is it going to stick to the question? They trace back the development of the modern self. Let's say Taylor wrote a book called Sources of the Modern Self to the Enlightenment. And it's quite interesting because if you look at the typical academic psychologists and actually Taylor traces it to the Reformation and I think this is partly Taylor's Roman Catholicism coming through. They their historical knowledge generally runs back about 15 years. And so because they're all concerned with the with the modern literature and there's some utility in that but the downside is they don't have any historical context. So you read someone like Taylor and you think wow, he's stretching it back 500 years, you know, but there's there's reading that goes way beyond that to look at the sources of the self. And I don't know if I would put Taylor in a conversation with Pinker and Harris at all. I mean Pinker and Harris have much more in common than Taylor. Taylor is a he's a Canadian philosopher who is interested in this in this in the creation of the modern world back to the Reformation. The source of the modern ethos and this is a huge bone of contention between people like me saying people like Harris and I think between people like you and people like Harris is that my sense is that the enlightenment values themselves are grounded in an ethos that's much deeper and much less articulated and that would be an ethos of metaphor image drama ritual religion art music. Okay, put a dot right in there because this is this is Peterson this comes from below And so in a sense what he's saying is that he's going to found the enlightenment upon Christianity and that's where he's going to go with this. I've obviously listened to it a couple of times already, but that's where he's going to go with this that the enlightenment is a product of Christianity. Now that's different from say an Orthodox perspective where the enlightenment is a detour away from Christianity. And so when when you listen to Jonathan Peugeot wrestle with you know a lot of what Jonathan has been wrestling with he grew up fundamentalist Baptist and then converted over to Orthodoxy is is this literalism and so Jonathan's pursuing this symbolic world. So it's very interesting how Peterson and this is this is again why I don't think he's going to easily fit into any church Peterson is going to try to wed the enlightenment with this older mythopoeia mytho this older symbolic mythological world that that Orthodoxy is so at home with and why so many breadpilled Peterson fans feel a natural pull to Orthodoxy. But what about you know, and this is why I think a lot of those people are going to I don't know that denying the enlightenment is going to give them peace of mind. I and that's this is why in a sense I wonder if many many people start coming start wanting to be Christians as a result of Jordan Peterson. What churches can they? Where can they fit? That's my question. That's been my question all along. Now, of course, I have a tiny little church that is so diverse and so odd and so strange partly because I'm so diverse odd and strange. Yeah, I might not look diverse but inside I am. Where can these people fit because Peterson's got this Orthodox and this enlightenment thing going all of that dance even for that matter the nonverbal the the pattern recognition in McGill Christ has written a book called the Master and his emissary which lays that out quite nicely with regards to hemispheric specialization. It's kind of predicated on Elkone and Goldberg's observation that the left hemisphere is specialized for what we know and the right hemisphere is specialized for what we don't know. So in a sense you might say here that the left hemisphere is the Orthodox Church and the right hemisphere is Protestantism. That's an order chaos dynamic and the rough idea would be that the left hemisphere generates paradigmatic systems. So that would be like the enlightenment system axiom predicated right even stateable axiom predicated but that that entire axiomatic system is based in a nonverbal in the nonverbal domain. Okay, let's pause there because what he said was really important. So he goes through the 500 year young through then he goes to Ian McGill Christ that's he's talked about quite a bit the less the less the left hemisphere generates. Paradigmatic systems like the enlightenment system axiomatic predicated even stateable axiom predicated but it's based on nonverbal domain. It's also associated with deep motivations biological motivations and emotions. Well, he didn't quite finish that's problem. I have that's associated with well, it would be associated with the right hemisphere, but it would also be associated with deep motivations biological motivations and emotions and so because here here's one way of looking at it. You think well, how do you validate an axiomatic system of ethics? How do you validate its axiomatic system of ethics? Well, what do you mean by that? Well, okay, so back to the other video. After the enlightenment the modernist compromise with the enlightenment says we look to we look to external observation empiricism general revelation to know history and physics. We look to special revelation to know ethics. Well, and it's sense have our religion. Well, those are the axioms if you go back to the interview he did at Lafayette. What is religion religion is the expression of the axioms. What is Peterson saying here? Well, this is this is how he's trying to knit the world back together. He is saying he is trying to do what Sam Harris has been trying to do and in a sense what Jonathan Haidt has been trying to do. They're all working on the same project. They're looking for an evolutionary basics for ethics. That is in some ways that is that is very central to his program. But but unlike okay, so you have Sam Harris kind of saying we can create we can find an evolutionary or rational remember he's much more modernist a rational basis for ethics from evolution and Sam Harris will say and that'll be very different from Christianity and Jordan Peterson says now it's just like it Jonathan Haidt happiness hypothesis, which is a book book. I read a few years ago very interesting book where he's basically saying he's more like Jordan Peterson where he's saying that there is there are similarities between ancient wisdom and what science teaches us. What's the difference between Jonathan Jonathan Haidt and Jordan Peterson Jung and if you look at the interview between Jonathan Haidt and Jordan Peterson Heights all excited. He is a real Jungian and you know, everyone's kind of afraid of Jungians because you know, everyone looks at him says well, they're kind of weird and scary because Jung was kind of weird and scary. But but that's the difference between Jonathan Haidt and Jordan Peterson Peterson is a Jungian. But but Haidt is kind of working on the same the same product projects. Now Peterson now is saying here there are axiomatic we can let me let me pull up the quote. How do you validate axiomatic systems of ethics? How do you validate them? Well, that's that's a that's a big deal. That's a really big deal. Now, how do you validate them? I want to be a little careful here because a religious project a traditional religious project will say validate they are given to us by God and so automatically by that they're validated by virtue of the entire narrative because God is the creator God is the owner God gets to say what's good and what's bad. Peterson now will say as he does what we can get to it from below and he's going to use Piaget again and now pay attention when he's running through that he's run through this before but he's going to use Piaget and he's saying we can validate our axiomatic foundations to our ethics. How well that's what you should pay attention now. So he's going to he's going to run through his Piaget speech here. It's going to go fast, but it's important. And the answer is quite straightforward Jean Piaget figured this out is you play it out in the world literally you act it out in the world and then you watch each other's emotional responses. And if the thing that you're playing out if the axiomatic system that you're playing out satisfies the motivations and the emotions of the people who are engaged in that system, then the system is justified. Right there. Okay, so again, this is within the box of modernity. You don't need a God to do this. The the axiom at the axiomatic the axiomatic elements are validated socially and again, this is a social scientist. So if everyone is satisfied. It's good. All right. Well now if we let's translate that into the political realm. Well, what is that? Well, that's liberal democracy. This is the consent of the governed. This is the enlightenment. You know the the enlightenment. This is the enlightenment through Piaget that these axiomatic values that underpin morality and society are validated are validated socially and now he's going to do the Piaget thing that you know going this way going through the axes. This has got to be true. Not only for me, but for me for you for you and all the way out and also in time. Now remember with the monarchical vision the two elements you have to take out our time. You make it eternal and subjectivity. You make it universal. And so in a sense Piaget does this but he tries to incorporate time and subjectivity to in that sense fill it out and make it more religious instead of just simply an objectivist viewpoint. And then you say well, it's not just that their motivations and emotions are satisfied. It's more complex. It's that the motivations and emotions of each individual are satisfied, but not only now, but now next week next month and next year. So you have to extend it across time and not only my. You got to feel for poor Ben at this point. Ben is thinking crap. He's hijacking my show. Motions and motivations, but yours as well. Now next week next month and across time. So there's there's terribly tight constraints placed upon an axiomatic systems validity. And this is again how he attacks postmodernism and says, you know, not every that not every interpretation is valid. These constraints these constraints hem it in and to to think about Philip Reif. Rod Rear, of course, introduced me to that whole business. But but where basically religions are defined by what they say no to and so now with Peterson all of these constraints come in and that then is going to become an ethical system that these come up from below with through millions and millions of years. Remember Peter says this starts once we have eyes to see we begin seeing each other. We're watching the emotions and this is how that this is how we will get these axiomatic values that inevitably result in ethics. And again, this is this is the Enlightenment project of in a sense. We don't need God, but Peterson's not going to say that he's going to say I'm going to keep God out of it intentionally. But but this is how we can know. Now the way Jean Piaget thought of that, he said, well, think about it like a child's game. A bunch of kids get together and they decide to play pretend. Okay, and pretend is let's model the world right and as a place to act because to pretend you act out. Now again model the world is a place to act. If you go back and you look at his conversation with De La Honte, okay, De La Honte is a modernist atheist. And De La Honte is in a sense sitting in a movie theater looking at objects. Peterson says the world is not a place that we're a part of looking at. You know, there's an implicit monarchical vision in that modernist approach to the world. The world is something we see and we're not really quite a part of it. We say, oh, yeah, we're constructed by atoms. But through reason we kind of see above it. Now, now Peterson says no, no, no, the world is a form for action. Okay, he's a pragmatist. The world is a form for action. Right. So the kids get together and they assign roles and they say, well, you're going to be mom, you're going to be dad, you're going to be the dog and we're going to play house. And then they they act it out and what they're doing is seeing if they can regulate the manner in which they're constructing the game so that everyone's emotions and motivations are so well satisfied that they want to continue the game. We learn by doing. Okay. And so that's so cool. So what it shows you is that's how an ethical system is is tested and justified. It's like you again pay attention to that word justified. Play it out and you see if everyone wants to keep playing. And so that's a whole different methodology than the scientific domain. Right. So the axiomatic system isn't the ethical axiomatic system isn't justified by reference to the scientific method. There you have the departure from Sam Harris. It's not validated by reference to the scientific method. It doesn't go outside. It stays inside and within it's justified from within and the revelation happens in action. So, you know, right now already he's he's starting to move away from Ben Shapiro the view that Ben Shapiro is going to talk about later in terms of his own view. So this isn't a modernist realism that gets validated from outside. Neither is it. Although again, he's going to stay agnostic with this. Neither is this a classical theism which gets validated from above. This gets validated with it within. So in a sense, it's modernist in that it's secular. And again, if I pull up my drawings, the top of the box is open for Peterson with a dotted line because he wants to keep it in the box. He's not going to keep that line because he wants to keep that agnostic. But that's that's the frame here. It's justified by reference to the emotional and motivational well-being of all the players of the game. Now that game emerges. This is the second part of this and this is so cool. Then the question is, well, how does that game emerge? And the answer is the same way that children's games emerges. What I noted is that kids would get together and they play marbles. And if they were young kids, they could all play marbles. Say six years old, they could all play marbles. And if they were in a group, they were playing marbles and it all worked out fine. Squabbles and all that. But you know, the kids would keep playing, validating the game. But if you took the kids out of the game and you said, what are the rules of the game? They would give completely disparate accounts. So they knew how to do it. It was like the wisdom was in the group. The wisdom was fragmented enough among the individuals. If you pulled the individuals out, they'd give disparate accounts. But if you put them all together, they could play the game. Now, here again, you have a difference between Peterson and kind of an implicit order of existence. Modernists sometimes implicitly say, first we see and then we speak and then we know how to act. Peterson says, no, we're acting and acting and acting and acting. This is why Peterson and Sam Harris can sit on a stage together and talk and so on and so forth. We all know the rules. We just can't articulate the rules because first we have to represent them. We have to have them. We have to represent them in drama. And then maybe at some point we will get to the point of being able to articulate them. And then we can abstract them so we can apply them to other things. But then if you waited until they were 11 or 12 and you pulled them out of the game, then they could tell you the rules. Then at 14 or 15, they would be willing to, this is with more sophisticated games, they would be more willing to regard themselves as makers of the rules. Okay, so here's how it happens in an evolutionary sense. For Shapiro. Going all the way back to our primate forebears, organize themselves into functional hierarchies. Okay, and the hierarchies are complex and they're not just based on power despite what the idiot Marxists even DeWall has noted that chimpanzee hierarchies are unstable if they're only based on power. They don't last. They degenerate into violence. So you have a hierarchy that works. But it's acted out. No one knows why it works. It works because everyone seems to be happy with it. Okay, and so those hierarchies get more complex and more sophisticated. And then people start to observe them and talk about them. It's like, oh, we've got this hierarchy here. What's it like? And then they spin off dramas about the hierarchy. Here's a hero who climbed up the hierarchy and here's what a hero looks like. Now Peterson is moving so fast here, but I'm trusting a lot of you have seen maps of meaning and personalities. A lot of this is review, but he is piecing it together in some different ways. And he's got this within the context of the Enlightenment in a few minutes. Superior is going to try and rein him in again because at some point you begin to ask, what was the question again? Okay, so then you get the idea of hierarchy and then you get the idea of the hero as the person who moves up the hierarchy and generates it. Okay, then out of that you get the extraction of the idea of the hero and then you get development of that idea. And it's out of that you get the monotheistic religions. And so it's like the procedure and the hierarchy come first. Now remember what the question was because it's a little hard to remember at this point. Shapiro asked the question about, you know, are we going to, you know, we here in the intellectual dark web, we're worried about losing the Enlightenment. How is this new postmodern neo-Marxist tribalism this now again, Shapiro is dominant, predominantly a political figure. That's his interest here. And he wants to, you know, have Peterson be an ally in Shapiro's political agenda. Peterson's given him a load of far more than politics because Peterson's running through the history of Western civilization all the way from, you know, the beginning of at least life in the world. And so now we're up to the hero. And so, well, how does this fit again with the Enlightenment and with our project to be political conservatives? No one knows what the rules are. It's all played out the same way that wolves play it out in a pack or chimpanzees play it out in a troop. Then we wake up and think, oh, we live in a structure. Here's the structure. That would be Osiris in the Egyptian mythologies. Here's the structure. Here's how the structure goes wrong. Here's what the structure does. Here's its tyrannical aspect. Here's what you have to do to generate the structure and to thrive in it. Okay, that's even more important. The hierarchy is important enough. But what we want to know is how to master the hierarchy. Okay, that's where you get the mythologies of the hero. Okay. And then so then this generates all sorts of different heroes. Ben is being very polite. Because there's different ways of being successful. Then you have a panoply of heroes. Then you think, okay, well, now we've got all those heroes. That's a set. We can pull back and say, okay, something about all these heroes is what makes them heroes. That's when you extract out the monotheistic Savior. Because that's why in Christianity Christ is the King of Kings. It's actually you can think about it as a literal statement. Now, it's really rather interesting to know that this question on trying to get Jordan Peterson to be his ally in the Enlightenment has now moved on to Jordan Peterson making an argument for the founder of Christianity. The founder of Christianity to be the King of Kings on the first show of his very polite and eager host who is a committed follower of Judaism. And I saw that and I thought, well, that's interesting. Forget about the religious overlay. It's like, okay, got a bunch of people. Some of them are kind of King like, okay, so you admire them. It's like for whatever reason that is, it's not easy to figure out why you admire someone. Right? That's complicated. But let's say you've got admirable people. You start telling stories about them. That's why you go to a movie. Right? You want to go watch someone you don't care about? You're bored by? No, you want to go watch someone admirable and interesting or maybe the opposite of that, but doesn't matter. It's the same thing. Then you think, okay, well, we've got all these admirable people. They're generating the world properly. That's what makes them admirable. There's a principle they embody and that principle is the process by which the admirable world is generated. That's the logos. Okay, that's the thing that's operative at the beginning of time. So here's my question. And then it's like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, we're not going to do all of Maps of Meaning again, are we? I'm going to ask you a question about all of this because now we're really not talking about 12 Rules for Life as much as Maps of Meaning, which is your first book. You're doing the audio read of it now. Yeah, I'm recording the audio. It's definitely a harder book than 12 Rules for Life and a much more complex book in a lot of ways than 12 Rules for Life. So how universal are these systems? Meaning, why is it that the Enlightenment only arrives at one time in human history and one place in human history as opposed to if human biology is essentially consistent across humanity? Why is it that if at the apex of the levels you end up with the Enlightenment idea, which is what we're talking about? Okay, we put the Enlightenment at the apex of the levels. And this again is where this gets really interesting because again, Shapiro is kind of a classical Aristotelian observant to his religion of Judaism. And now we're talking about Peterson, come back to the Enlightenment and why has the Enlightenment given us these riches? And so now Shapiro is going to reference a couple of books. I started this particular question. Then why is it that it only arrives in one place at one time as opposed to arriving in a variety of places in a variety of different. So what's special about us? That's the question. It's a great question, man. Okay, the first thing we would say is. But I don't think Peterson's done. The process by which this the hierarchy itself and success within the hierarchy is generated. That's to be accounted over millions of years, at least hundreds of thousands of years. But I would push it back because you can see analogs in the chimps. So 20 million years, let's say that's a long time. On that time scale, the fact that the Enlightenment values arose in Europe 500 years ago before anywhere else. It's like, well, who cares? It's five old men. It's a great illustration. But again, now it's interesting because in a sense, Peterson is is he answering Shapiro's question? No, but I'm loving the ride. Long, right? If you put five 100 year old men in line, it's like it's yesterday. It's this morning. So we've we've evolved these hierarchical structures. That's our culture. We've evolved ways of maneuvering within the hierarchical structures that are successful. And now we've started to evolve ways of mapping our our adaptation, not just adapting, but mapping it. Okay. So how does the mapping occur? First, admiration. Second, imitation of admiration. And that would be drama. It's like you dramatize Shakespeare, extracts out what's admirable and interesting and plays it out. So that's the use of the body as a representational structure of the body. So we act out what's admirable. They think, okay, now we've kind of got the drama down. We're all captured by this drama. It's like, well, then the literary critics come along, the philosophers, and they say, oh, what are the principles by which the admirable people operate? It's like chimps woke up and said, oh, well, some chimps are more successful than others. What are the rules of success? It's like, well, there were no rules because they weren't running by rules. Right. There aren't rules until you describe the patterns. Then you have a rule. Okay. Those of you talking about the laws of physics, there aren't rules until you describe the pattern. Those are rules and they're not laws until you describe the pattern. Those are laws. But what kind of laws are these? That's what happens with Moses, by the way. Moses has a revelation. Here's the rules. It's like, yeah, we've been living out those rules forever, but we didn't know what they were. Now, I can't wait till we get into Exodus because right there, that's going to be very interesting because, of course, Moses comes down from the mountain with the law. And basically the story is Israel can't keep the covenant. Well, we've been doing these rules. Yeah, but we can't do these rules right. And this, again, is where Lewis comes in because Lewis makes the comment that we make these rules that we know we can't keep. What's with that? If we were, you know, if we wanted to be good, we would make rules we know we could keep. Well, you can go the, you can go Piaget's two axes and say, well, we make the rules that we all know are correct, even if we know most all of us can't keep any of them. All of us can't keep all of them all the time, but we want most of us to keep most of them most of the time. Because they weren't rules. They were customs. Right. Okay, so you start by mapping your. And poor Shapiro, he's kind of wondering, you know, this is not the conversation I thought we were going to have, or maybe it was. I don't know. Maybe he's delighted with it, but it sure is interesting. Customs in drama and story. And that way you can represent them and you can transmit them. Then once you have them in your grip, say they're represented now, not just acted out. Well, then you can move one step backwards from them and you can say, well, what's the commonalities among these? What are the general principles? That would be the development of something like the code of Hammurabi. Right. It's like, well, we've got all these customs. What are they? Right. Revelation. It's like, oh, here's how you map the customs. And in the style, you know, the God gives Hammurabi the code. And, you know, so at some point, you know, none of the people I'm conversing with are like, well, when are we going to talk about, you know, like, is God real and so on and so forth? And we'll get to it. Not Peterson here, but I will. That's the decalogue. It's the same idea. So it took human beings a very long time to evolve their hierarchies, to evolve their structures of success, and then to have enough people around with enough spare time to engage in the cultural process. The artistic cultural process of mapping the adaptive structure. This is the this is the agricultural revolution, which is the proliferation of grains, which is a little ironic for this guy who right now is mostly eating meat and vegetables. That all emerges in mythology and drama. Then that lays the groundwork for philosophy. Then the philosophers could come in, especially once it's written, like in the Judeo-Christian pantheon. It's like, oh, now we've got it written down. Oh, well, we don't have to remember it. Right. We can read it and while we're reading, we can think about it. And so then out of that starts to come the semantic codes. Well, then you get the enlightenment. It's like, oh, well, here's a bunch of semantic codes. It's like, yeah, yeah, those are great. So this is really interesting because, you know, if you get Shapiro, can we bring it back here? Or if you read John Goldberg's new book, essentially they attribute the enlightenment to Jonah Goldberg calls it the miracle. It's almost as though it accidentally occurred in a certain place in a certain time. Jonah doesn't quite go quite that far, I think, to be fair to him. But I think that that philosophy that this sort of sprang up randomly here is is very much embedded in a lot of Sam Harris's thinking, a lot of thinking. And you're taking it further back. But I do wonder if this may be an area of actual disagreement. I think it's really fun. Are you attributing the growth of the Judeo-Christian ethic that emerges into the enlightenment as also as now? I wish she would pause there because the Judeo-Christian ethic that emerges into the enlightenment. You know, again, in the previous reader, I ran through a lot of that. I wish they would elucidate that because this is exactly what Peterson is trying to do. He is trying to connect up the enlightenment with Peterson's Piagetian, Darwinian God from below. And so, you know, poor Shapiros keeps trying to bring him back. Incidentally, just pushing the timeline further back. No, I don't think it's accidental. OK. I'm not making a reductionist argument. So the first thing is. So that's his agnosticism. OK, says I'm not I'm not saying it is only from below. I'm going to say this is how religion evolved. But I'm not saying I'm not saying that this explanation exhausts the phenomenon. Now, again, what is the question? We're supposed to be talking about the enlightenment. And Peterson's way back here at 10000 BC talking about the emergence of religion. And because it's a very strange phenomenon. It's very, very strange. But but that doesn't mean we can't generate a plausible evolutionary account. It's like. And that's what Peterson is doing. He wants to have he wants to keep this both. And he is not being reductionistic saying we can eliminate God. But he is. Oops. And so then to go back through the slides of the previous show, this path here, he is he is in a sense saying, see, this is where he is. Getting back. He wants to have the enlightenment and pre enlightenment to, in fact, pre modern. So he's kind of running this back and saying, I'm not going to I'm not going to eliminate God like we did in the 18th, 19th and 20th century. I'm not going to reduce it. I'm going to stay mum with that. But this is the this is an account that could possibly shed light on it. Motivated, emotional, limited beings occupying the same territory and competing and cooperating for the same resources, including the resource of cooperation, which can generate more resources, not a zero sum game. There are going to be patterns of adaptation that emerge from that that are similar. So here's a way of thinking about it. If you put a bunch of kids together, they're going to evolve games. Right. Well, which games? Well, a bunch of different games. Yeah, but they're all games. Right. So even though so that's the moral relativist element, a bunch of different games. OK. But the moral absolutist element is, yeah, yeah, but they're all games and the games have to be playable, which means they have to continue in an iterated way. Right. So that's a big constraint. People have to want to play them. So not only do they have to be games and comprehensible to everybody and enjoyable, but people but they have to be simple. They have to be people, but they have to be self-maintaining and everyone has has to want to play them. OK. That's the answer to the postmodern conundrum, a plethora of potential ethical implications of the world. But that wasn't the question. It wasn't. It wasn't the question because Shapiro is trying to to have Peterson ally with him against the against post-modernity and the tribalisms that are coming. An infinite variety. Yeah. OK. Fine. Not an infinite variety of pragmatically applicable interpretations. You instantly constrain the universe to well to what? Well, this is why there's commonalities in mythology. It's like if you put enough people together in enough different places, the commonality of the groups of people there because of the grounding in common motivation and emotion and embodiment because we're embodied, means that they're going to generate hierarchies that are broadly similar with strategies of success within those hierarchies that are broadly similar with descriptions of the strategies that are broadly similar. And so you could say I got to give Shapiro an award here. The most patient host, some sense, the ethic that gave rise to the Enlightenment is in place more or less everywhere. Now, it's tricky because not every hierarchical system is as functional as every other hierarchical system. Some of them can degenerate into tyranny. We're talking about the set of all voluntarily playable games. Right. Something like that. And that can degenerate. Out of that, you're going to get common hero myths. You have to. And then that lays the groundwork. That lays the groundwork for even our ability to communicate. Right. Right. And this is the Enlightenment guys. They just they're not getting that. So and this gets to, I think, the broader question. The Enlightenment guys, they're not getting that. So Peterson, Enlightenment, no Enlightenment. Again, he's kind of saying, you know, Sam Harris and Pinker are not understanding the deeper picture. And I agree. I agree with Peterson here. I agree with him. But now Shapiro is going to try and get him back on track. I think you and Sam went on for three hours about about the nature of truth, because particularly truth in the moral sphere. I think that would be fair to say that you guys agree on the idea of truth in the scientific sphere. That if something that there is such a thing as objective truth. OK, now notice again, we're back in the question of modernism, because again, in the church, the church basically, the modernist church said truth in the in the physical in this physical world, the physical world is is known by empiricism, basically by observation. What about truth in the ethical world? And again, that's that's kind of the project here. And so Shapiro is trying to bring him back and say, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, I'm the host here. This is this is this is not maps of meaning addendum. This is, you know, this is my show. Or are you? I would say we agree on a lot of that. The question is, to some degree, why do scientists accept the idea that objective truth is true? And then I would say we probably don't agree about that. OK, so again, here we have in a sense we can put Jordan Peterson over here with a pragmatist. We can say Sam Harris here is maybe the idealist realist. And we've got Scott Adams in the middle who's trying to play, trying to play both ends. Because I would ground out in pragmatism. And Sam would ground out in the idea of an independently existing objective world. And Peterson would say, we don't have access to that world. And that's where the phenomenology kicks in. And so that's where the Peterson with his phenomenology and his pragmatism is over here. And Sam Harris is over here because Sam Harris sees objects. And then Peterson puts puts the frame around, as I've done in my in my other videos. Right. Which is a leap of faith more like my own, actually, than the pragmatist view. And this, this I really appreciated this move by by Ben Shapiro because he notes, yeah, this is so again, if you listen to Alvin Plantinga, if you listen to Descartes, This is the move that theists have been making in terms of they don't have the skepticism that they address the skepticism by which we engage the world via via God. God fills in the gap for a theist that Sam Harris doesn't have a God to fill in that gap. Peterson and to a degree, again, I don't know if Scott Adams is actually consistent with this. They fill it in with pragmatism, but that leaves them still much more skeptical. So it's going to be interesting because at some point on my list is to bring Dallas Willard into this conversation because Dallas Wilder was a phenomenologist. And, you know, I don't know if Dallas Willard and Alvin Plantinga ever sat down together. And, you know, I've been kicking around in my head the possibility of talking to Alvin Plantinga about this. I use in the same denomination as me. That might be a possibility, but this gets very interesting. And if you believe that there's a God who's out there in the universe who created the structures in a particular certain way, then what he created is the truth. And it is apart from you. And human beings didn't exist and they weren't able to utilize the truth. That truth would still exist out there. Whereas the pragmatists say it's truth is in the use that it has. Well, that's the thing is that. And so this couldn't right now degenerate into Matt Dillahunty, Jordan Peterson, because in that sense, Ben Shapiro is in line with Matt Dillahunty and Sam Harris. I don't know if we would consider scientific truth true unless we are also simultaneously accepting the idea that scientific truth is good for people. And that is Jordan Peterson's definition of truth that the rationality rule guys tried to a bunk debunk. And this is where Peterson and Sam Harris will have squared off. So there's one other thing I wanted to bring up. So so poor Ben, he's totally lost control of his show, but he's going to get a lot of traffic and it's a great to watch. But I think when Ben sat down and said, this is what I want my show to be about, I don't know if you know if it's relevant because you brought up the idea of God. So here's a way of thinking about it. And I don't know what to make of this because this is stretching me. This is stretching my thoughts out beyond. This is this is this is for Peterson. This is where he always goes when he gets to the God question in terms of ontology. And I'm thinking at the limits of what I can. So we're winding up here where I've been able to develop them. So this is the intuition that I have based on a variety of things, experiences I've had. So imagine that there's a very wide range of human behaviors. OK, and some subset of those are both admirable and not admirable. So let's call them good and evil at this at the extremes. OK, then we might say, well, there's a pattern that characterizes all the actions that are good and a pattern that characterizes all the actions that are evil. Now, don't forget the PSJA part we're at earlier. I know it looks like Peterson is rambling, but I don't think he is. He's going somewhere. Now, this might not be where Ben Shapiro had intended the interview to go. But Peterson is going somewhere. His watchers are working and he's firing on all cylinders here. And that's a transpersonal pattern because it's not just about you or me. It's about everyone. OK, and so then that gets personified. That's Christ and Satan, let's say, or Cain and Abel. That gets personified. And that's a bad guy and a good guy in a movie. It's personified all the time. Now we're getting archetypal. Thor and Loki in the Marvel movies. I wish you didn't say Thor and Loki because is Loki chaos or is Loki evil? And that itself is a very interesting conversation, chaos and evil. Now you have the idea. Let's say you take the idea of Christ and you think, OK, so that's the abstraction of everything that's admirably good about the set of all human behaviors. I could sit and ponder that statement for a while. I'd love to stop him there and say, whoa, let's unpack that. OK, and then you think, well, what sort of reality does that have? What sort of now? Now we're now we're now we're knocking on the door of ontology. And this this pulls back into the reality of the idea of the logos and the idea that it was the logos that God used at the beginning of time to extract order out of chaos. And he already accepts that reality because that reality is fundamental in terms of his understanding of his systems. So you think, well, it's transpersonal, the goodness, because it's not just characterized stick of any one person. It's more like something that inhabits a person rather than that a person is. You can really see this, for example, on the other end, too, with the satanic end, because if you read the writings of people who do absolutely horrific things, like the shooters, you can see that possession extraordinarily clear if your eyes are open. It's like and it's shocking. So people don't usually look at it. And they even say that themselves, like the Columbine kids, their writings are hair raiser, you know, and they were clearly possessed by an evil that you only encounter. We're back in Maps of Meaning, by the way. If you sit in a dark place and brood on your hatred for months and years, right, you go places that are so far away. You go places that you go places where all the dark people go. Right. Right. And then that that takes you over. OK, so the good can take you over as well. And again, award to Ben Shapiro, the most gracious host. So there's this there's this spirit of good, let's say. And what the spirit of good does is act in the world on the potential of the world to generate the actuality of the world. And the Judeo-Christian proposition is, is that if you confront the potential of the world with good in mind using truth, truthful communication, then the order that you extract is good. And then that's echoed in Genesis when God is using the word and he creates cosmos out of potential. And every time he does that, he says, and it was good. Now, this really isn't off topic because, you know, in terms of their their larger landscape, Shapiro and Peterson want to locate. Classical Western liberalism as good as opposed to the tyranny of the right and seen in Nazism and the tyranny of the left as seen in communism. Which is, I think it's so interesting because there's a proposition there and the proposition there is that if you encounter potential with truth, the cosmos you create is actually good. Well, that's that's just overwhelming. Okay, so has now Peterson arrived at his destination of of giving us a plausible evolutionary account for morality. I think that's what he's trying to do. And I think that's what he's trying to do. And it's a big idea. It's like if it's true, if it's true, it's the greatest idea there ever was. Yeah, your thoughts on this actually from maps of meaning help generate what we in Judaism called Svar Torah in Hebrew, leading a thought about the Bible. But this merged with a little bit of Aristotelian thought led me. And you can play the rest of it yourself. I'm about at an hour, which is kind of where I wanted to keep it. I've got some other things I have to do, but very, very, very interesting. You know, now having watched it again and chopping it a little bit. Yeah, Ben Shapiro gets the award for world's most gracious host on the first show of a obviously a series that he wants to do. But but I think Peterson here is, you know, again, with the frame I brought to it in terms of, well, where's Peterson going to go? What's he going to do? Orthodoxy, he's not. Is he going to stay pre enlightenment? Where does he stand with respect to the enlightenment? I don't know. I don't know that we can answer that on the basis of this. Well, maybe we should listen to a little bit more. We can go a little longer. To the idea that when it comes to the mystical notion of the tree of good and evil in Eden, what is that supposed to be? What did what did people do wrong by eating from the tree of good and evil? And my feeling is that what they did wrong is that God created a universe in which the value was embedded in the object. In the same way that you in your in your book talk about if you're teaching a child about an object, the rules of the object are embedded in the teaching about the object. So you use the example of a vase. We were discussing this earlier, but you use the example of a vase where you teach a child. Don't touch the vase because the vase will break so that the rules embedded in the object in the same way in Aristotelian thought. The rules for behavior are embedded in the nature of the universe, meaning what makes a man good is what makes a man unique, which is reason. The idea is the reason is what makes man unique. So acting in accordance with right reason is what makes something is what makes an action good. So if you believe that God created the universe along these lines and that what natural law is is just a human attempt to understand the lines along which created God created the universe, then where. Human beings went wrong is when they decided to separate values from the universe, when we decided to take values and say this is a completely separate thing. So this vase has no rules attached to it anymore. Okay, remember the scheme here of of modern of modernism. What happens in the Enlightenment is that we separated values from existence. And now again, Shapiro is, in a sense, making a pre Enlightenment argument. While at the same time in the same show, he's trying to make an argument for the Enlightenment because what happens in the Enlightenment is this same separation that he's now complaining about and and referring to Aristotle, which is which is itself very interesting. And he's presenting this to Peterson. Or it's just a vase and we can construct the rules arbitrarily as to what to do with this vase. And so eating from the tree of knowledge of good and evil changes the nature of good and evil from the universe comes along with a set of rules to human beings think that they can use their own intuition to supplant God's rules and supplant universal rules with their own particular vision of what the universe ought to be. And at that point, they have to be expelled. Yeah, well, now, Shapiro's Shapiro's exegesis of Genesis three is not terribly different from pretty common Christian exegesis of Genesis three. It's a it's a rebellion motif. But but also in a sense with with his with his object with his object orientation. Yeah, I don't quite know what to do with with Shapiro here, but it's it's not anything that Peterson is talking about. OK, OK, so that's also associated to some degree, I would say, with Milton's warning in Paradise Lost, because Milton basically portrays Lucifer, who's the bringer of light, weirdly enough, as the spirit of unbridled rationale. Shapiro settles in for a lot more listening. Which accounts for the say the Catholic Church antagonism, the Catholic Church's antagonism towards rationality. The idea was same idea in the Tower of Babel that human beings have a proclivity to erect their own dogmatic ethical systems and then to expand them into a grandiosity that challenges the transcendent and that that's a totalitarian catastrophe. And for Milton, Satan was the spirit that eternally does that right, who says everything I know is enough. And that supplants what I don't know. That supplants the transcendent. And that's a catastrophe. How that's tangled up with the with the knowledge of good and evil while you're making some headway towards towards sorting that out. Again, I really enjoyed this interview. But in terms of rules of an interview, it's all over the place. I mean, there is a cataclysm that's explained in the story of Adam and Eve. And it's going to be nothing like Shapiro just described. Right. The cataclysm is the coming to to wakefulness. Because Shapiro's description is so deeply embedded in a relational ontological, the relational ontological assumptions of traditional of traditional religion. And Peterson's way post enlightenment. It is partly with recognition of nakedness. Which is recognition of vulnerability and mortality and the discovery of death. And then also the discovery of good and evil that goes along with that. So you said, well, that's partly the cognitive division of ethics from the facts of the object. So I have to think that through. Well, watch my video, because this is this is exactly what I'm talking about. In the downstream of the Enlightenment, where the modernists and the fundamentalists part ways, because this was a way to save the Bible that the modernists believed from the what was implicit in the assumptions about knowledge that generated after the Protestant Reformation. I would also recommend to people. I think I mentioned this before is Ian McGilchrist's book, The Master and His Emissary, because he looks at this neuropsychologically. Right. And and looks at the I don't know that he looks at this neuropsychologically. But I think the book is the book that I would recommend to people. The left hemisphere is the hemisphere that's dealing with the explicitly. Poor Shapiro. The axiomatic systems and the right hemisphere that's dealing with what those systems are embodied in. OK, so part of what happens with with the emergence of good and evil is that the right hemisphere is the hemisphere that's dealing with the axiomatic systems. What those systems are embodied in. OK, so part of what happens with with the emergence of good and evil, as far as I could tell, it took me a long time to think about this. And now we're back. So so we had Shapiro's question and now Peterson's back to his main train. This is the and this is different than the than the hypothesis that you laid forward, which is why I can't reconcile it exactly. Yes, you recognize you're naked. You know you can be hurt. You know you're vulnerable and insufficient. You hide from God. And again, this is review for a lot of you. But even worse, you can figure out how to hurt other people. And so that's part and the rule structure. Not because there's anything wrong with the rules. They're necessary precondition for discipline, which is actually why I wrote 12 rules. It's like you need rules, but there but rules conflict. Stract out the world of actuality. And if they did that properly, then the world they extracted was good and that that is a divine principle. And then we might say, well, is it a divine principle? And you might say, well, what is it that's acting through people in the good? Like the Christian theological answers that would be the logos, right? That's the idea. That's the idea of the Holy Spirit, roughly speaking. Right. My think, well, is that a real thing? It's like, well, to me, it's real the same way that consciousness is real. And we don't know the role of consciousness in determining reality. But even if you're an evolutionary biologist, and this is so interesting because the evolutionary biologists actually discriminate, differentiated themselves from Darwin on this point. Darwin was very, very forthright in his claim that sexual selection was as powerful as natural selection. And where he's going to go is they're going to then go talk about sexual selection and and on from there. And in a sense, what comes then is that the mind comes back into the conversation. And so this is where Peterson and his phenomenology and his focus on consciousness and his focus on the mind kind of gets us out of this cold world of objects and into this this phenomenological world. But again, enlightenment. You know, again, poor Ben Shapiro, if he if he if he really wanted to have this interview be about the enlightenment, it didn't make it. So again, it's a it's a fascinating interview. I think, you know, early on, especially where we see Peterson trying to make the make an evolutionary case for for the axiomatic underpinnings of ethics. You know, I think that's I think that's helpful. Now, watching it again, I'm less convinced there was much new stuff in here. Peterson was certainly animated. It was interesting that, you know, Shapiro couldn't keep him on track. Now, again, in something like this status is involved. Peterson is older than Shapiro. You know, I don't I'm not going to try to look at their different hierarchies and try to evaluate that. But Shapiro is a is an incredibly gracious host. He posted this. I Peterson was very, I think, happy about it. But but the question might you might the question you might have for the interview is, well, it'll it'll get a lot of attention for Shapiro. And it's a way to launch a show. And Peterson is always a a someone who draws draws a lot of attention. But I don't know that this cleaned up much in terms of Jordan Peterson. He continues to. Yeah, in terms of the question I brought in the first one, if you understand kind of this framework of of Western civilization, well, what we know of Peterson is that he and Shapiro are on the same page in terms of saying, you know, we have to save Western civilization. We don't want to lose science, but he and Shapiro on different places in terms of, you know, exactly how knowledge works and what does the universe look like. Shapiro is kind of a classic theist. Which kind of makes him similar to Sam Harris in a sense in that in their embrace of realism, as opposed to Jordan Peterson's embrace of pragmatism. So, yeah, there it is. And watch the rest of the video. Let me know what you think. I just finished twitching that video of Peterson and and Ben Shapiro. And as I was writing someone about it, I was continuing to have some thoughts in terms of that video, because on one hand, you know, I think in some ways the video, I don't know what Ben Shapiro had in mind for that interview, but, you know, having Jordan Peterson on is kind of like having a force of nature in the room. I mean, Peterson, even in a sense, took over the post-game show of Bill Maher when he was on. And that's just who Peterson is. And I think that's part of what Peterson's followers really enjoy about him. But now if Shapiro's goal was to have something like the Avengers, where you imagine Jordan Peterson and all these guys are part of this intellectual dark web, and they're going to do battle against the forces of postmodern neo-Marxism. You know, I think Dave Rubin, I think there was a meme that was set up like that. That wasn't quite, it was more, I don't know if it wasn't Civil War, but every Avengers movie, the plot of the Avengers movie is that the Avengers can't stay on the same page. And I think that's part of what we're seeing with the intellectual dark web. They are all over the map in terms of where they are on all these different levels. And I've walked through that here. And so you have Jordan Peterson through most of this video kind of goes through his account for an evolutionary narrative of ethics. And in the end, Ben Shapiro kind of comes down with his Jewish Aristotelian framework, which is obviously different from Peterson's pragmatism. So it's a very interesting video. I don't know if it achieved Shapiro's goals, if he had goals for it beyond popularity or a way to kick off his show and do interesting interviews. And thinking it through, I think a lot of Jordan Peterson followers will enjoy it. Peterson has a lot of energy in it. I think Peterson continues to work his synthesis. But I still don't quite know what to, what, yeah, I enjoyed the video. But how much new it adds? I'm probably less certain of that now than when I really kind of went through it slowly and listened to the parts. And I think for those, again, who are watching Peterson and are feeling this moment of saturation, the questions are going to come up in terms of, OK, where do you go now? And what new will you bring to the table? And again, I know a lot are really waiting on the biblical series for that. But in terms of when Jonathan Peugeot in some of his videos mentions Jordan Peterson as kind of Cyrus, and that's still kind of holding true. But where will Peterson land? What will he be able to finally contribute? And yeah, I'm not quite sure at the end of this video how I feel about it. So go ahead and make your comments.