https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=s39T9IlMnj8

 Hi, this is Paul. Last week, or maybe a week and a half or so ago, I did a conversation with Benjamin Boyce. He's got another YouTube channel. And Ben had talked to Esther O'Reilly, and then he talked to me, and we talked about Christianity, and I thought the conversation went very well. And just yesterday, I was, or yesterday or the day before, which is one of my late speeches, I saw that he posted a very interesting car video entitled Varieties of Religious Experience, which is the same title as a William James book that I read when probably I was, my guess is, Benjamin is in his early 20s. That's probably about the time that I had read William James Varieties of Religious Experience. At that point in my life, I was, well, I haven't talked a lot about my own journey. I grew up, I'm a pastor's son in Patterson, New Jersey. I went to Christian school, which was part of being Christian Reformed back in those days. And then I went to Calvin College, which was, I was not a rebellious kid. I was a very dutiful kid and just kind of went along with the program. I went to Calvin College, and at that point I decided, well, if I'm going to believe this stuff, if I'm going to live this stuff, and this is kind of typical what happens when you go to college, if I'm going to live this stuff, I want to think it through for myself. That's, after all, what any self-respecting American with enough left brain decides that they want to do for themselves. So I went to Calvin College and decided if I wanted to live as a Christian, if I wanted to be a Christian, I should at least read the Bible, probably in a different way than I had read it before, and decide if this was something that I wanted to do with my life. And that then sent me on a spiritual journey or pilgrimage of my own. And that led me to various different corners I played around with. I didn't do any psychedelics in the early 1980s. A student at Calvin College wasn't really going to do much LSD. But I was exploring Pentecostalism. I was looking at Buddhism. I was exploring meditation. I was reading the Bible in a much more serious way for myself. I was looking at theology a little bit differently, probably with a little bit more of a skeptical posture to see if this is something that I bought, that I believed, that I thought I should invest my life. And these are all really good things to do, period. But for many of us, when we go to college, so I guess I was my late teens, I went to college when I was 18. This is something to do in your late teens, early 20s, to explore the world for yourself and try different things, and so on and so forth. That's part of what, at least in our culture, college is for. And so I did that and started, at least in my own estimation, started thinking for myself, instead of doing what my parents told me, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. That's what you do. This is part of growing up and differentiating and all of those good things. So I was delighted to find Benjamin's video, Variety of Religious Experience. It was then that I read William James and the Varieties of Religious Experience, because I was very curious about mystical experiences and supernatural experiences and miracles. And like I said, I started to explore more of the Pentecostal side of Christianity, tongue speaking, faith healing. I didn't do any snake handling. There wasn't a lot of snake handling going on in Grand Rapids, Michigan at the time. So that was the stage of life that I was in, and I was exploring a lot of these things. And probably the most important thing that I was doing was thinking critically. I was evaluating the Dutch Calvinism that I had been raised in, and I was evaluating the, well, my particular Dutch Calvinism was a little bit unusual because it had been formed in the middle of the African American community. And that tradition was part of my experience. And the racial reconciliation story was a deep part of my experience, given the kinds of things that I grew up with in Patterson, New Jersey and the ideas about justice and good news for the poor and what hope did someone who grew up poor and black in Patterson, New Jersey really have in the United States. I mean, all these kinds of issues were the kinds of things that I was wrestling with in the, I graduated high school in 81. So it was the early 80s that I was all through the 80s in many ways, because I've never stopped thinking about these things and all through college and seminary and then to the Dominican Republic and experiencing what the Haitians, how the Haitians lived and the kinds of things that they had to deal with and the kind of religious experiences that they had had and the kind of ways that they approached Christianity, so on and so forth. So this path that Benjamin begins articulating, and I know there are some comments over the comments in the video, I know some comments like, you shouldn't be doing this in the car. And that's a good point, distracted driving. But I also know the drive through southern Oregon and northern California, there's just not a lot out there. And he has to stop at the fruit check-in place to see if he's bringing any fruit that could have bugs into California that will threaten our fruit industry. And so I just really enjoyed this. And it was, I don't know if it was the camera setting that he had, but the windows, I just thought it was a lovely video. And I loved his rambling and his stream of consciousness and how he's kind of putting it out there. So I decided, oh, I want to make a video about this one. So I hope sometimes when I mention people in videos, people get their feelings hurt. And then they write me and they get their feelings hurt. And I'm sorry, most of the time when I mentioned someone in a video, my assumption is that they're big boys and big girls, and they're used to sharing ideas and saying things back and forth. And yeah, we all do get our feelings hurt, but people say stuff about me. You're not going to be on YouTube if you're particularly thin-skinned. And again, YouTube is a place for people with not a lot to lose. So Ben put this out, so let's have at it, because I thought it was a delightful and interesting video. Oops, I'm all the way up here. Hang on. Here we go. ...establishing connections with people who are studied in various faiths. And so I want to set the ground rules for my own where I'm coming from, so that people who are interacting with me are curious what is my take. They'll have something to connect with. Now, I just love the look of this video. It's probably very foggy out there. He set the camera, because later it's a little bit clearer. He obviously edited the video, and so just as someone who is making videos on the cheap and really quick and really efficiently, I saw this. And many times I'm driving in the car and I'm thinking, man, I should just set up my phone, because I'm having all these thoughts, especially when you're driving through the middle of nowhere, which is Northern California. I mean, I live in Sacramento. It's kind of the bottom of Northern California, because once you drive north of Sacramento on the 5, oh baby, you get to see Redding up there, but there's just not a lot of a lot up there, especially once you get north of Redding. It's beautiful, beautiful country. You get to see Mount Shasta. And this time of year it's cold, and there's snow on the ground in some places, probably, and it can be foggy. And so I saw this video and I just had all kinds of warm, fuzzy memories of long drives that I've had as someone his age and I was driving back and forth from between Grand Rapids and Patterson, New Jersey for college vacations and so on and so forth. So I love this video. And he's just kind of putting himself out there and he's saying, I'm going to think about religion and I'm going to think about the big questions in life and I'm going to think about all of this stuff. And I want to process that and I'm going to be talking to people, so I'm going to put this out there so people I'm talking to have kind of a benchmark to know where I'm at. So and I've already talked to them, but to me this was just this was just fun. This is as a pastor. This is what I do because people talk to me about this stuff all the time. And to have someone just kind of lay all their cards out on the table in such a transparent way. And he's not just doing it in my office to me alone. He's doing it to the whole world on YouTube. I thought this is this is too much fun. So let's let's get into it. I'm going to do several disclaimers throughout this. The first is disclaimer is that I'm going to be embarking on some language that when people speak about it, it's never a bad idea to be skeptical of people who talk about this. It's never a bad idea to question and to doubt people who begin to speak about this kind of stuff. That's an absolutely healthy response. It's very necessary. So this is kind of our cultural default, which is the same cultural default that I began my own journey with. And this is this is skepticism. Now, again, I'm going to give the disclaimer. Some of you are going to complain that this video right now has less than 2000 views. So many of you haven't seen it. Go to his channel. And I like Ben's videos. And I know he's he's doing a lot of his he came out of Evergreen and he had that experience with that Brett Weinstein, you know, the Brett Weinstein episode. He had that experience and that that clearly has set him on his way. And he's using his video channel to process a lot of these issues that the that the IDW is working through. And that's that's what Ben's doing. And for some of you who listen to my channel, you're really into that. Others of you who listen to my channel, you're not into that at all. But that's what Ben's doing on his channel. But he's he's great fun to listen to. Again, in many ways, YouTube is this weird Truman show. And but there's lots of lots of us, Truman's out there and we're watching each other and we're wondering, how's it going to end? Where's where's Ben going to end up in terms of his spiritual journey and his his his path of discovery and all of these things? So it's it's just it's just great fun to watch. But this this move that he that he talks about here is kind of the the the personal exploration. It's I'm going to bring up this this course that I use often, not because it's the final say on philosophy and religion in the West, but Philip Carey's great courses. Now, again, why do I use this and not a book? Partly because if you're watching my YouTube channel, you're probably already an auditory learner. Some of you do read a lot of books, but some of you don't read many books at all. And so that's part of the reason that I do use a lot of auditory materials here. And I really recommend Philip Carey's Philosophy and Religion in the West, part of the great courses series. I got mine through Audible. I'm a big Audible user. Audible, why aren't you why aren't you sponsoring my channel? Where is Audible? I use your stuff all the time. Maybe if they sponsor my channel, they'll be taking down my videos from YouTube. But I really I really enjoy this this course by Philip Carey because he's got these nice half hour segments where he walks through just all the major figures and contextualizes them nicely. And Philip Carey has solid credentials. He's got his degree from Yale and he teaches at Eastern University and which is a which is a Christian university in the Mennonite tradition. Now, those of you who've been watching my channel know, you know, I just talked to Julian recently. Julian is part of that Anabaptist that Anabaptist branch of the Protestant Reformation. Eastern University is part of that branch. So so Philip Carey is is processing is basically as a terrific course. And he talks about Descartes here is in terms of the this this embrace of skepticism, but also the turn towards the subject. So it's it's saying, OK, I'm going to use skepticism. And this is the West has followed Descartes ever since he made this move. I'm going to use skepticism to to try to find out the truth. I'm going to use skepticism to debunk is not the right word. I'm going to use skepticism to clear off the detritus of of hundreds and thousands of years of talking. And I'm going to get down to the foundation. I'm going to get down to the core. I'm going to get down to the bottom and I'm going to see what's true. Now, this is the fact that we make this move so instinctively talks about the fact that none of us are actually doing this within a vacuum, that even the process by which we imagine we are going to discover the truth is itself culturally formed. And we are doing so within the stream of of Western philosophy that and this is so embedded into the culture that we so naturally do it. And when we do it, in a sense, we think, oh, this is like a great idea. I should I should use skepticism to clear off all of this stuff on top to really get to the bottom, to really know the truth. Now, I'm not saying that's a bad thing to use skepticism. My observation is just that this, too, is formed by the culture. And it's not dissimilar to Brett Weinstein and and Sam Harris's moral formation that in some ways they don't look at the credentials of their moral formation. They don't ask penetrating questions about where did I arrive at these assumptions, basic assumptions of what morality are. And then Sam Harris in particular goes on to basically say, well, I don't get that from Christianity. And anybody from outside the system would say, no, you're not working in a clean room here, buddy. These very much are downstream from Christianity, not just Christianity downstream from a lot of things. And that's sort of how history works. History is this broad river that floods regularly that that carries with it all of this stuff. I think about this scene in my brother's movie with my brother. Where are you now? Is that it? No, I can't believe it. This is why I should bring up things on the fly. But, you know, there's this great scene. There's this great flood in the south. There's all this stuff just floating down the river. Well, that's what history is like. And we're we're born into this river and we're raised in this river. But ironically, we're not terribly self-aware of how this stuff is clean to us of the food that we're eating, of how things get inside of us and how we are formed. Often about the only way to see that is to step out of our particular currents in the stream over to another part of the stream where other things have had a different mixture. And then you begin to look back at your own culture and say, wow, there's you know, we're really we really we really bet hard on today. Cart there and we really liked that. And that really became so assumed in terms of part of our formation. So there's a lot of Descartes in here and there's a lot of turning towards the subject here. And and Philip Carey will will get into that then when he gets into Kant. And I was I was tempted to play some of Philip Carey's video with Kant. But this is going to be long enough without taking 20 minutes of I forget what chapters his first chapter on Kant Kant is so important. Philip Carey says that he has two chapters on Kant. Again, I do recommend this this great courses if you want to kind of have a very a nice overview of philosophy and religion in the West and their developments. So but but kind of gets into this and gets into the a priori structures because as as Jordan Peterson kept trying to point out to Sam Harris and Sam Harris kept saying, yeah, I know. Yeah, I know. Yeah, I know. But Jordan Peterson kept listening to him said, no, I really don't think you do. No, I really don't think you do. No, you're not just seeing the world with naive eyes. You're not just evaluating the world with with your people. Someone keeps asking me what the monarchical vision is. The monarchical vision is the vision from nowhere. This is this is the imagination that that the world is a place of objects. And I just apprehend the objects directly. And there's another video I want to get into later this week. Who does a little bit of philosophy where can't really along the lines following Descartes really starts to wrestle with. Well, what really can we see? And really, how do we know? And of course, Kant arrives at a says that religion is really more about more about morality. And surprise, surprise, cons morality looks a lot like Christian morality of the 19th century. Who would have known the 18th and 19th century, the the the era in which he lived and worked and was as well as worked through. This is this is how we do. We we are formed morally by our surroundings. And Jonathan Haidt will get into all of that in terms of the moral taste, but so on and so forth. But we're going to prioritize. See now, when Benjamin gets into this and Esther picked this up in her conversation with Benjamin, didn't really come through too much in my conversation with Benjamin a little bit. But but he prioritizes experience. And this, too, is a is is kind of the common move that most are making right now in the 20th century. It's it's connected with this string since the reformation that I've gone through in a number of my videos where the Protestant Reformation that was Renaissance humanism, there's really turn towards texts. And so, for example, if you want to know about God, you study the text, you study the Church Fathers, you study the Bible. Of course, the Protestant Reformation prioritizes the Bible. If you wanted to study physics, for example, you study Aristotle and you turn out, you learn Aristotle from the text after the Protestant Reformation, after these wars of religion, there's a skepticism regarding texts. And people then turns to what if you don't have text to depend on, you look at reason and empiricism. And so these are kind of the two default options. And so philosophy comes roaring in and philosophy in some ways displaces religion as the West is trying to get beyond wars of religious pluralism. And so then philosophy says, well, let's look at reason and let's look at empiricism. And these are two ancient options that you can find in Plato and Aristotle. And these are two options then that people begin to say this is how we can get beyond religious pluralism. And now haunting some of Benjamin's quest in this is in fact religious pluralism. This comes up when with Jonathan Pujol's conversation with David Fuller and rebel wisdom. This is so deeply a part of the Western project right now, because right away Christianity continues in some ways to have its have its to have its its its top seat at the table. But people say, yeah, but but what about Buddhism and what about all the factions and Christianity and all the Christians can't agree. And and then the Roman Catholic Church in a sense says, yeah, yeah, you Protestants, that's what you did with your reformation. And Luther thought he could take reason and the text and come out with one thing. But we know you need a you need a magisterium. You need a church to tell you what the text says. And the Protestants say, yeah, but then you put the the the this this administration, this bureaucracy, which is prone to corruption. And in the middle in the Middle Ages, we saw terrible corruption in the church. And so now now suddenly you have this big conversation between the the Roman Catholics and the Protestants and the Orthodox are kind of back there and say, yeah, yeah, you you you Roman Catholics with your popes. You did that before us. And so the people are sitting back watching the squabble and saying they can't even agree on the truth. You know, how are we supposed to know that they don't even agree on biblical interpretation? How are we supposed to know this literally this this? So, OK, so then you're going to solve this by taking the Bible literally. And that's going to answer all the questions. But then they see that you've got all these groups taking the Bible literally. And that isn't solving anything. So it's like, well, what is truth? You're back to Pontius Pilate's question. And so religious pluralism is haunting this. And then in philosophy, I get a good drink of water. This is going to be wrong. So then via philosophy, you hope to attain a ground that is not cluttered with centuries of religious warfare and argumentation about ultimate things. Well, how can we arrive at that? Well, after they turned away from the text, after the Protestant Reformation, they turned towards reason and experience. And so philosophers, again, Plato and Aristotle, this is an old this is an old tactic to try to find consensus and uniformity. And when we find consensus and uniformity, then we think we will arrive at truth. And part of this is revelatory in terms of human beings, because part of how we understand truth is the thing that everyone around us agrees on. So there's a sociological component to this idea of truth for us as well. And that's why religious pluralism is so devastating among us when it comes to these questions of truth. So how can we arrive at truth? Well, clockmaker universe, Isaac Newton and most of the people of his age, deeply committed Christians. If you want to learn about physics, how do you how do you discover physics? Well, you well, you can measure gravity. So so this little dongle here, this thing is this thing is hard, you know, fabric and the dongle are made. Well, I got a stapler here, too. See, if I clean my office, I wouldn't have all these illustrations here. So there's gravity and there's there's mass and and Newton can begin to to discover these things and to work on these things. And here's the thing. If you can if you can measure it and if it's available to all of us and if we all get the same answers all the time, now we have truth. This is what we've been looking for. Now we have a basis upon which to degree to agree. And this is the promise of science. Now, it's fairly easy when we even though the big G constant as Oh, Rupert Sheldrake, why do you come around and and bother us with questions about dip changes in the constants where the speed of light changes and big G gravity varies and an oh, Einstein. This this this time space idea where where time is is changed by gravity. You troublers of certainty. Well, science still promises. Well, if we get beyond religious pluralism, then we can arrive at truth. And and so this is then the quest behind natural theology. You go back to NT Wright's Gifford lectures, which you can find on YouTube about natural theology and how in the past I've really said in many ways what Jordan Peterson is doing is natural theology. The the desire behind natural theology is to arrive at the kind of certainty we experience in Newtonian mechanics in theology, because the the frustration with science when it comes to these questions is that Sam Harris, I'm talking to you. We've been unable to arrive at consensus via natural theology. And and so this is the desire that if we can if our religion can be like Newtonian mechanics, then finally we can answer the major questions of life. Then finally, we can have a a a common morality that we can all agree on and hold each other accountable to. And and then finally, we can answer these questions definitively about a God. And then because stocking in these questions behind God is, well, if there is a God, he might have some ideas about how he wants us to behave. And and what if I get it wrong? And what if there is an afterlife? And what if he does punish me? And so on and so on and so on and so on. So huge history behind all of this stuff that's going on. And so Benjamin comes in and says, well, I'm going to begin with skepticism. OK, well, that's he is following the process. He is following the the set trajectory of what I don't know how old maybe I'm Ben. Ben, if I'm saying you're younger than you really are, I am apologizing or I'm saying you're welcome, depending on how old you are. Because when you get to my age, I mean, my wife was I won't tell you what you said. But when you get to my age, people like to worry about how old they are. Me. I don't care how long I got to live. Who knows? So this is the project that most people start on. And this is where Benjamin begins. And I just ran through a little history of why this goes. So let's jump back to the video and let's have him continue. Because what this stuff does, what religion is, in a way, it's it's deep programming. It's how you plug yourself into life on a day to day, moment to moment level, on a relationship level between the people that you interact with, on a societal level like in your town. On a historical level, as in what does this all mean? What is the whole project that we're doing it so are involved in? And so. So, yeah, religion is deep programming. And well, and again, the point I just finished made is you've already been programmed. And there's been a lot of religion that's already in your program. And there's been a lot of philosophy and there's been a lot of culture. And so even though the desire that Descartes has and the process that Descartes employs that almost everybody's been following since Descartes, there's stuff built into that, too. And the irony is that everyone employs where Descartes started, but hardly anyone goes where Descartes goes because Descartes says, OK, I think, therefore, I am cognito ergo sum. Here I am. I'm thinking I'm that I exist. I know that. And then, of course, Descartes, well, God wouldn't let me be fooled. And, of course, everybody today says, what do you mean God wouldn't let you be fooled? That kind of built in assumption about God's goodness by virtue now of religious pluralism, we look at it and say, no, can't go there. Can't do that. That's not only that's Jesus smuggling on a grand scale. And we won't have that. So we have to take steps back. And in a sense, the history of philosophy since Descartes has been taking steps back. And, well, every time you take a step back, you still have to live, Peterson's point, making real choices in life demands that you even if I don't have everything figured out today is today. And and and living in this world of of things and values and other people demands that I make decisions in terms of how to treat people and what to do. So I just have to act before I even have the whole thing figured out. In fact, I may never have the whole thing figured out because our our skepticism is that deep and pluralism is that disturbing. So, well, I got to act. But, OK, none of this God won't let me be fooled stuff. Descartes, I ain't buying that. So, you know, religion is deep programming. Well, that's true. And you've already been programmed. And this, again, is the point that I keep bringing up to in Brett Weinstein's things is that you don't have a monarchical vision. You don't have a clean room. You don't have an epistemic clean room. Once you interact with this space, you've already contaminated it and you you have to bring you and all of your assumptions into it. There is no neutral space. There is no you are not able to see the world as such without bias, without you. This is Kant's main point. And this is the main point that Jordan Peterson hammers and hammers and hammers and hammers at Sam Harris for four nights. And Sam Harris at the end of it just kind of shrugs and keeps on with his thing. And Peterson keeps saying, it doesn't work. It doesn't work. You do not have an epistemic clean room. You once you engage in this quest, you bring to it all of the stuff that you have. And that are built into you and it's built into your approach. And we see that clearly because we started with Descartes. Where did we get Descartes from? We didn't make him up on our own. You might not have even heard the name Rene Descartes, but you you've absorbed it because you've watched everybody else and you've watched other people do it. You thought, wow, they really have status. Wow, they really seem smart. Wow, they really seem cool. This is what everyone does. So I'm going to be a skeptic. That's the way to do it in the West. When people enter into discussing this, what they are doing is providing you templates to organize your life. And yep, that's exactly what we're doing. And now we've got a consumerist layer that comes in and says, all right, well, you got the Pentecostal Christian package. Well, you're going to be going through reading pretty soon, Ben. So you can stop at Bethel Church and they've got their whole their whole Pentecostal schtick available to you and they'll have your easy answers. And you can find maybe a little Fundamentalist Baptist Church and they'll give you their answers. And then the Roman Catholics and they'll they'll say, have you watched Bishop Baron? He is so smooth. And he is. Oh, my gosh. I'm nowhere near as smooth as Bishop Baron. Look at look at my office is even a mess. And and and then and then the Buddhists will say, well, you know, you can have direct experience by meditation. And the Jungians will jump in and say, oh, did you see him? Did you see him on that TV interview? He doesn't know or he doesn't he doesn't believe he knows. And on and on. And then the New Agers that, you know, well, we're just on and on and on. The world is full of people offering you platforms and packages and saying, you're a religious consumer. I'm a religious vendor of wares. Take my product. You'll you'll be happy. You'll be fulfilled. You'll be great. Everybody's got their upsides and downsides. Everybody's trying to maximize their upsides and limit their downsides. And so on and so forth. That's the game, right? From a consumer point of view. You have to be really smart about how you organize your life, because ultimately it's your own responsibility. Oh, there's a little bit of West in there, too. That's it's up to you. You have to be your own. And again, this is this is some of the irony of, let's say, the Sam Harris position, because. Do you have a free agent? Are you a free agent? Do you have free will? Are you actually an agent or are you really just working out your programming at Weinstein? You live your life. Ultimately, it's your life. Now, in my own in my own experience, this world is is put together in a very tight way. This material reality is formed out of very dense particulates of forces. But it's all it's basically all energy. But it it's very, very dense. It's a very dense form of energy. Now we're getting into some fun stuff. Because now we're taking the move into his worldview and materialism. Now, now I haven't done a lot of research, but he seems to live in Portland because that's where stories are coming from. He's traveling to California. Maybe he's traveling for family stuff. I don't know. But if you live out West, it matters not wait matters not really as cool as energy. Energy is all about, you know, I'm watching their energy and I'm feeling her energy and I'm seeing his energy. Energy is a really popular world. And we have equals MC squared. So matter is just other forms of energy. And we know that. So but at the same time, the tale he's about to tell is is pretty much a materialist tale. And but but he's intuiting, I think, some lurking doubts around it. So let's have him continue. And what has happened over time is that this energy has been organized into more and more more and more interactive states. Now, now, when you listen to him say this, and this is very, very common, he's using passive, basically the voice of passive agency, because this is what we do in the West with respect to our with respect to where this all comes from. And if you use passive agency, you can kind of leave room for for people who think God was doing it to say this is God doing it and leave room for people who if you listen to the materialist and the atheist materialist, who will say, well, you can't really know God did it. So we skeptical and you don't really need a God to do it. So we'll just use the passive voice. But but the thing is, you can't get around in the English language, this talk of agency. There's there's actually no way to do it. So genes want something and memes want something and gravity want something. And it's just very interesting how our language does not afford in some to some degree the atheism that that that certain groups, I'm not saying Ben is doing it because later is going to talk about God quite a bit. So but our language doesn't really afford the kind of atheism that that people are promoting. So so just listen to all the times that he why do I tell you to listen to it? Because, again, I'm what I'm doing here, what I'm doing with Ben is what I do as a pastor. And what I'm basically saying is usually what I'm thinking in my head when I listen to people talk like this, because if he were actually in my office and they were talking like this, I wouldn't be so rude as to interrupt his every word and to monopolize the conversation. And again, if you think I'm monopolizing this conversation, just go to his channel and and watch him or have this video on one side and have me on the other side. So you can listen to him and then you can jump back and forth. However you want to do it. This is again, this is my shtick. So you have we can go from like the whole Big Bang thing and start with like just the formless matter was eventually formed into molecules, which were eventually formed into stars, which were eventually formed, which eventually formed into planets and then the planets densified into the materials like we have in our planet. And then within on our planet, that matter was worked on and worked on and worked on and worked on and worked on and worked on and worked on and worked on and worked on by whom, by what causes formal cause patterns. Go see my video about Peugeot and patterns, so on and so forth. We don't know what form that why why do these forms take the shape? Why do the why do the laws of physics? Why are they as they are? We in a sense see them third hand because something something forms. Then we see the material residue and then we look at the patterns of residue and then we call that science. We call all those the laws of physics. We've just discovered them incredibly slow, incredibly patient and incredibly creative and also patient creative. Those are awfully anthropomorphic, very critical, like both creative and critical manner to form. Various levels of life such as what you can go into Dawkins and you can see his whole story about the gene about this. Let me check my. Oh, yeah, I wanted to bring in God equals the whole show. And I think Benjamin, you should definitely read C.S. Lewis's miracles because the problem that you have with a materialist, I'm not saying you're materialist because you're also kind of a theist. You said that to Esther. The difficulty with materialism is that if we're merely products of these impersonal forces, then we ourselves can't claim agency. And C.S. Lewis walks through that in the first number of chapters of miracles. And I walked through that in my videos that I did quite a while ago now. Selfish Gene was basically just have this clay that eventually formed these replicators that eventually formed containers, which eventually replicated and formed other containers and so on and so forth. It's a beautiful freaking story that now remember Ben was at Evergreen University to go there to study under Brett Weinstein. And so that's his credentials in the IDW. He comes by them honestly. Now, I want to mention some of what Ben and I share here is that the default assumption here is that we are formed. We are formed by processes or if you're Canadian, processes. And the question is, by what? The real dangerous question is by whom? Because is there agency working on these? What is defining the patterns? What is defining the shapes? And we don't know. Now, I agree that we are certainly products of forces we can observe and track. There's there's way too much evidence. And I think this is actually built into Christianity that we live in a stable universe where there are no forces. We live in a stable universe where there are forces that we can track. We can do history. We can do science. We can do all of these things. The world is not simply illusion. OK, that's that's that's the argument that says science could only have arisen from a Judeo-Christian worldview because the world is stable. And the stability of the world is there because of the stability of God. All right. That's that's where that argument goes. Now, Christians and atheists alike will say we are formed by processes and we are formed by forces that we can track and we can make predictions. The world is stable. But here's the big question. But are these forces but are there forces we might not be completely aware of? And that's a really big question because in a sense, implicit in a lot of scientism is the assertion that we know we already know the forces and the universe is closed. It's a closed system. Now, they were very readily say with their own eschatology, oh, but there'll be more that we find. Well, well, now you've kind of given up your game because, well, how do you know there won't be a who in what you find? Well, we. And right there, the line is exposed. And I think one of the most honest atheists about that is Thomas Nagel, who notes that the project up until now was successful because we took subjectivity out of it because we acted like we could see the world through a monarchical vision, through an epistemic clean room. And we acted like we can know all the variables. Now, in some simple operations, it's pretty clear we know the significant variables because prediction and outcomes seem at least to us solid enough, and then we bring in the pragmatist, solid enough to live and to depend on things. And this is the basis of technology that electrolysis will predictably yield hydrogen and oxygen out of water. And that's good. But systems get complex very fast and the fudge factor starts to come in. And then you've got bothersome people like Rupert Sheldrake sniffing around the edges saying, why do you need an office to manage constants? Shouldn't they be constant? So, yeah, but, but, you know, speed of light changes. Why? And, and well, being G gravity, that changes too, so we have to keep measuring it. Well, why? Well, does this put the stability of God into into jeopardy? Well, God is the kind of idea that affords variability in the way that a lot of the 19th century materialists and how they imagine laws of physics to be don't leave quite as much wiggle room. And of course, now you've got Einstein and all of these other big questions coming in and physics gets a lot weirder than it seemed to be under Newton. And the weirdness doesn't seem to be going away. And that leads us to, well, what should we really think? But, but again, this leads open the open the question of there are forces we might not be completely aware of. And so then we have questions of patterns of persons. And we can't answer those questions. So now we not only have religious pluralism, but in a sense we have pluralisms of other more disturbing kinds. If we put our hope in scientism. We'll get into Ben's hierarchy in a minute. It's also terrible because it gives you the sense that there's nothing at the helm that this is all accidental, that this is nothing but matter, just material force that has happened to form in such a way. And that might be true. I think you're going to have to interact with that on your own. But in so far as I understand it, there's different energies and those energies stack upon each other. And what we are as creatures is we're built out of matter. And then we're built out of like this kind of vegetable kind of stuff, like what you can think of as just brute urge. Now he's getting into desire. Okay. Now give Ben some latitude here. He's talking in the car as he's driving through southern Oregon, northern California. This is a total stream of consciousness. And so he doesn't have an outline in front of him. And he's working through this. But now we're getting into, okay, so you've got why does stuff want? That's a really important question. And actually later, I think he's going to, beyond what I'm going to play actually for this video, he's going to wander, I think, probably into some stuff that he's picked up in the river from Augustine. But if you look at the plants in life, what they do is they kind of they eat and they don't move, but they consume and they flourish. And then atop of that is a subtler form of life, which roams around and has various forms of intentionality, which intentionality can think of as instincts. And I'd just like to bring in, okay, I brought up C.S. Lewis's Miracles. When you get into instincts, you should really read The Abolition of Man, which is a book that I've spent some time into, C.S. Lewis's Abolition of Man, because C.S. Lewis basically addresses the question of instincts and instincts. And intentionality and agency, which which you might find really helpful. Abolition of Man is a very short book. Then you have like this multiplicity of different instincts, such as birds and reptiles and kitties and doggies and giraffes and elephants and all that stuff. Right. All these different variations of that intentional sphere. On top of that, though, is this is this extra thing. And that extra thing is what man is. And another way of thinking about this is that now he's just he's just crossed the line from Sam Harris because he created a line. And so you have the question of is man on another side of a line from the plants and the animals that that have seemed to have some intentionality or instinct. And so now we're getting into free will and agency, real agency. If you if you make soup, the soup, of course, is made out of matter. Everything in that soup is matter. It's material. You have the water, you have the salts, you have all the proteins, you have all the vegetables. Right. And then you have like the richer proteins, the meats, which is analogous to the animal matter. And then on top of that, what makes the soup a soup is this is this human force. What makes soup soup? Why you don't just find it in the wild is what I say colonization. C.S. Lewis and Miracles will say reason colonizes nature, reason colonizes matter. Now, why some people have kind of pushed back on the use of the word colonizing. I get it from C.S. Lewis and his book Miracles. I don't think it's a bad word. Now, there's a moral taint to the word colonization. I understand that and that moral taint is in many ways credible. And OK, I get that. But every time in a sense, what you do when you build a stapler is you colonize the properties inherent in in carbon and iron to make steel or with electricity to make aluminum. You colonize. And what you would I why I use the word colonize is that you you you basically bend these forces to your will. And it's a lot of bending forces to our will to go on. Hey, Stanley, you know, you can you can support this channel to here. I've got I'm using your stapler as a as a this is my product placement scheme. Yeah, patrons going under baby man's got to figure out a living. So so we basically colonize the stuff of nature, domestication of animals. It's another example of what I'd say colonizing. We take the stuff of nature and we bend it to our will. And we do so via technology. OK, that's that's what I mean by colonizing. And so in a soup, in a sense, a soup is colonizing. Now, if you've listened to my talks about glory, you'll also notice that that a soup is glorious. The the great chef is a sub creator. And Benjamin's going to talk about this because Benjamin's been talking, you know, he and I share a lot of cultural similarities here. And so we're we're pulling from parts of this same parts and currents in the stream. And and so what happens when we make a soup is that we bring glory, we create glory into this world. And that that's where this colonization and this agency and this is what we're doing. And again, CS Lewis's miracles. First number of chapters really go into this nicely now. Now, Lewis is in Lewis. Lewis loves Plato. And so Lewis is a bit of a Platonist. And so Lewis says that it's actually reason that's happening. And and our use of reason is actually a. A bit of God's question of the. The question of the. The image of God in us, Lewis would use reason. There's been a lot of. There's been a lot of candidates for for articulating what the image of God in us is. And reason's been a longstanding one. And so we use this one that that Lewis uses. We use reason to colonize the minerals of the earth and and the the forces of nature as we call them. And we colonize them in the form of this stapler. And we use this staple to to make put staples and papers and we colonize and we bring order out of the chaos of multiple papers and on and on and on. And so this is what we do. Which is distinct from the other forces. The human force isolates, extracts, and then recombines everything else. Then I call that colonization. And the way in which the human force does this, the way in which humans do this is through our thought and through our feeling. We have a very subtle. OK, now we're getting a little bit into Ian McGillchrist and left brain, right brain and reason and intuition and the master and his emissary. And we'll talk about that as we go into this a little bit further, too. Subtle sense, the spectrum of feelings and a very subtle instrument of mind. Now. Those instruments are absolutely essential. Every single thing that builds us up is absolutely essential for us living in this world. But that's not all. What religion is, like I said, was a way of tying us together into the moments of how we behave towards reality, how we behave towards each other, how we behave in societies and then how we behave in history. And all that stuff is formed out of the heart and the mind that's all attenuated to the emotions and the intellect. But within every single. OK, I'm at the border, so hold on. He's got to do the fruit check. And for those of you who don't live out here, California has a lot invested in grapes. Don't be bringing your grapes with little fruit flies and stuff into the state, boy. We're going to check you out the border because don't be messing with our grape industry because we got wine to make that we're going to sell all over the world. So it's got to do the fruit stop again. That just that just this. I love this video. I love this video. So where was I? I'm in California now. I don't have any fresh fruit. I don't have like a McDonald's sandwich, which I refuse to eat. Then why did you buy it? I love this video. So that religion is a product of the human level, but it's not. Ah, now we're getting to the definition of religion. This is this is another big whole thing. And now he's going to basically take a turn with with Jonathan Haidt and my friend Adam over at Think Club. And religion is what we do. It binds and blinds. This religion is how we form tribes and we need tribes to to to be productive in this world and so on and so forth. So it's going to go down there a little bit. The end product within religion are different levels. Again, just like just like we're created out of different levels, religion is created at a different levels and just now we've got a hierarchy like material reality. You have the basically an analog between the mineral, the vegetable, the animal and the human. OK, mineral, vegetable, animal, four levels, and he's got four levels of his religion. I've listened to this a couple of times now, so I know where he's going. The lowest level of religion is just the physical church and the rituals. And you go there and you go through the ritual and it binds you together with everybody else. Right. That's the Durkheimian kind of Jonathan Haidt level of religion. OK, before he goes there, we're going to we're going to track his religion and we're going to and we're going to follow the diagram. So OK, Ben's hierarchy of religious values. He places a lot of value on experience and that's going to be manifest as he walks through. And again, he this came out pretty clear in his conversation with Esther and we didn't touch on it a lot in my conversation. That's because I'm a sneaky pastor and I. Yes, this is this is what I do. He plays a lot of value on experience. He's biasing, he's biased, he's biasing empiricism a bit above rationality, it appears. And you can correct me if I'm wrong. Remember the common post-reformation dualism in search of certainty. And I just walked through that a little bit earlier in the video. Again, you've got Renaissance humanism, embracing of texts. I mean, the texts that are coming out through the Crusades are coming back into Europe. Europe is settling down politically. Monasticism has kind of been the been the grasses that keep the the soil on the hillside, to use a biological term, to use keep the soil on the hillside. And now larger plants can start to develop and they start developing politically and universities develop and and everybody's believing in texts. And of course, the Protestant Reformation comes kind of at the pinnacle of it where the text is even above the hierarchy of the church. And you can see that kind of as the pinnacle of this belief in texts. OK, now, now this doesn't go well. And I know I'm going to probably be in trouble with a lot of Protestants for some of these things I say. But again, YouTube is a place for people with little to lose. So so this doesn't go well. And and Luther hopes that if you want to read more up on this, is it Luther? Protestants Dangerous Idea by Alastair McGrath is a terrific book on this. And McGrath is a Protestant and is an Anglican. Anglicans are always weird fish. They're not really they're not really Roman Catholics, but they're not really Protestants. We can thank Henry VIII for Anglicans. But but so so what happens is texts kind of reach their pinnacle and come crashing down in in because pluralism. No, Luther Luther's hoping that boy Luther Luther's going to make his argument just like every intellectual Luther's going to make his argument. Everybody's got. Oh, Martin, you're right. That doesn't happen. Carlstad doesn't agree with them. The radical reformation happens. The Anabaptists, they go off in a corner. You have you have John of Leiden and the whole Munster mess and and on and on and on. And Europe, you know, Europe was a mess before. It continues to be a mess. And Luther doesn't seem to clean it up. And John Calvin comes and, you know, cleans things up a little bit further in terms of the theology, in terms of counts, institutes. And people start arguing at the pope and Guido de Brea, you know, in the Netherlands, in the low country, Belgium says, you know, oh, oh, oh, King Philip, you shouldn't kill us over this stuff because we're we're Christians, too. You know, won't you won't you acknowledge our Christianity? No, you don't break. It's killed. But the Protestants win and the Netherlands breaks off and capitalism starts and Voltaire comes along and says, oh, look, Muslims and Protestants and Catholics can all agree. If they make money. And so then philosophy kind of displaces religion. Let's find our certainty in empiricism or rationality. I just ran through this before. Now, Ben seems to be biasing experience, which is empiricism, not rationality and empiricism. Always work hand in hand. As as Kant said, again, I'm not going to go through Kant, but look at Philip Kerry stuff. And Ben, of course, embraces skepticism. You practice skepticism as a way of seeing through some things in order to see other things as C.S. Lewis says. And then Ben says, OK, so here's our hierarchy. We're going to have a hierarchy. So down here we have mundane religious practitioners and mundane religious communities. And we have Durkheim and we have Jonathan Haidt. And and you go to church and you believe the cleric and you do your duty and you give them and you give your money and you believe the teaching. And this is kind of this is kind of baseline broad-cutting. This is kind of baseline broad common religion and Catholics do it and Protestants do it and and Buddhists who actually organize themselves into communities. Buddhists do it and see America. Oh boy, get off into. I don't edit, so I have to self edit as I go through because there's a whole nother rabbit trail. But this is Ben's hierarchy of religious values. And this is the base level of religion. So that's level one. So let's look at level two. This level of religion of every religion is the is the of every religion. Buddhists have their monasteries. Hindus have their practices. And the guy lives next door to my church once or twice a year. He has a Hindu thing and he puts up his flags and he says, oh, pastor, he's a very good neighbor. He says, pastor, can we use our parking lot? I'm going to have some religious things here and say, sure. And and so then they have lots of cars and he has a is this Hindu thing. That's common mundane religion. That's what that's what people do. Wisdom traditions where you begin to employ your mind and ask questions. Now, this is the next level. What do all these symbols mean? And you begin to initiate a process of developing yourself towards what's at the heart of the religion. If the religion has a heart and you have to take it into faith that it does, you can't initiate the process of entering into religion without at some point letting go of your skepticism of whether or not you're headed anywhere. But I'm not. I just preach. I noticed this recent video had had a nod to Ecclesiastes. I just preached about Ecclesiastes. I haven't posted the actual sermon yet on my church channel, but I'll do that later on this week. Anyway, saying that you give up your skepticism, you just you aim your skepticism higher. Like what is the what is the purpose of entering into a relationship with religion? It's to develop yourself is develop your your understanding of the world, develop yourself, and then foster a relationship between you and reality. Foster a relationship between your consciousness and that which is consciousness. Let's just say. OK, so this is his second level. So now we kind of have first we have the mundane religious practitioner. That's kind of the base level. That's all the schmucks going to mass and going to church and going to temple and so on and so forth. Then you have the cleric class and really hasn't really gotten the Esther. Maybe let him play a little bit more. So the second level, the first level of religion is you show up and you go on Christmas, you go on Easter, maybe you go once a month or you go every Saturday or whatever. Like depending on how religious you are. And that's just the fundamentally religious aspect of the church. That's just the root code of the church within that is various forms of meaning. And you initiate a process of asking what does this mean? And then you contact people who've been wrestling with different questions and understanding all these symbols as kind of ways of wrestling with deeper questions. So you start to get into contact with these questions. And that's where the apologetic sense. And that's where I was pushing Esther because Esther's at that level and it's a great level to be. I don't mean to like say that it's we're Americans. We got to be sensitive to each other's feelings. Esther's a big girl, good or bad, wherever she is. I'm just saying she's at that level of what does this mean? This is what this means. This is why I believe this. This is how this all fits together. Those are all those tools. The question is, what are all those tools for? Are those tools just to replicate those tools in the world? Is that pneumatic structure only there to replicate itself in the world? It's not. And now this is when you get into evangelicalism and evangelicalism's high value on proselytizing. This is the suspicion behind evangelicals and evangelicalism that all they want to do is grow their market share. That's what evangelicals want to do when you watch them. They're out on this. They're street preachers that come from Vacaville into Sacramento because when I see a street preacher and I have time, I like to pull off the right side of the road and have a conversation with them. And what I've discovered is that they don't do street preaching in their own city. They don't want to be recognized by their own, by the people who live there, but they do their streets preaching and have their signs. And so I love stopping and talking to street preachers because it's really fun. Well, usually they try to evangelize, but I'm a pastor of a church. Well, you might be the pastor of a wrong kind of church. And again, we have this pluralism thing going on. So maybe you'd be better if you were, you'd be better if pastor you were a street preacher too. And I'd stand outside in the floor and road with a sign. Or if I, and I get this in the comments section that, you know, Paul Mandelklee isn't a very good pastor because he's not. Actually, I get this more in terms of the emails that people said, because he's not closing the deal. And he's not, he didn't work. When I had my talk to Benjamin, I didn't work really hard to close the deal. And this is the same impulse that when the Super Bowl winning quarterback is on TV after the interview, if he doesn't try and give a gospel witness and he's a Christian right there on TV, he's missed his chance. That's part of a religious tradition. So there's a, there's an aspect of evangelicalism in America that says, if you're on TV, make sure you get that gospel presentation in there. And, okay, I understand that. Another part of the culture says, maybe you shouldn't wear your Christianity in just that way. And I think actually there's things to be said for both sides of that. I remember having a conversation with someone about door to door stuff. And I was like, well, you know, I'll tell you when the Jehovah's Witness come to my door, it makes me less want to really find them credible. And then another person in the room said, yeah, but I became a Christian because someone came to my door. And it's like, yeah, there's always upsides and downsides to all these things. There is a purpose within all of this stuff. And that's my claim. And that's my understanding. That's been my reality is that there's a purpose. There's something that's animating all this stuff. And the special thing about being a human being is initiating a process of developing yourself, of coming into contact with all your faults and beginning initiating in the process of becoming harmonized, of developing. Okay, now, now here's the funny thing. And again, as a pastor, one of the things you do as a pastor is you learn to listen carefully to key words because these key words are our tells their ties to deeper cultural things that harmonize. So we hear underneath this the struggle with pluralism and the hope of using scientific methods to transcend religious pluralism. And this is embedded in the Jordan Peterson project as well. This is deeply embedded in a lot of projects because we're disturbed by this pluralism because now we can look at it as a sociological frame. Because pluralism indicates to us that maybe we have not fully arrived at truth. Okay, so what we're looking for is harmony. And what we're looking for is for us to all be able to agree like the way we can agree that, boy, if we do electrolysis on water, we'll get hydrogen and oxygen coming out of it. We want that level of certainty. But then I always turn it another turn and say, why do we want that level of certainty? Because if we can take the world, again, if you read C.S. Lewis's Abolition of Man, that's where he goes in those little three chapters. If we can, and this is where Dostoevsky goes with his piano keys, if we can reduce the world to splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen. Now we've got desire. Now we're knocking on Augustine's door. Now, if we can reduce people to technology, then my vision of the good can dominate. Now we've got the Ring of Sauron. And what Lewis points out is exactly that, because there's a circle here. And this is the circle I always see when Brett Weinstein talks about this stuff. We're going to transcend our robot program. Okay. What program will you use? Well, we're going to use the moral program. Okay. Where do you get your morality from? It just keeps winding down. You get your morality from somewhere. And it's the same issue you have, let's say, in American politics. What American politics does is divinize a process. Say this is the process. We're going to have this Constitution. We're going to divinize this Constitution. And you just have to play by the rules. And if you play by the rules, then it's fair. Then everything will be okay. But we always have the question, well, who's going to decide? Who can we trust? And I always trust me more than I trust anyone else. Sometimes I don't even trust me because, yeah, I've seen what I do with my life. I'm pastor of a small church. I'm not a success. As a human being and developing as a creature, created, and as a co-creator in this world. I get a little Tolkien coming in here. Sub-creators. And an inspired co-creator. Inspired co-creator. See, that's why I listen to people talk because we have these little tells and we tell each other where we're from. And if you know enough of the background, you can follow these tells to find out how did that fall into the flooded river? And what is traveling downstream with us? Eventually, all that second level of religion is for what? You become a minister. You become a priest. You devote your life to it. You understand all this stuff. You're a really wise person. You're really good. You can take care of people. You're interacting with society great. You understand how to translate all this code into something that's applicable into everybody's life. Right? You become a master. You become a doctorate. There's this other level. Okay. So let's finish up the second level. So here's the second level. So the first level is the mundane religious practitioner. The second level is the cleric class. So you graduate and you become a minister like me. And then you become really wise and good. And you help homeless people. And you're nice to people and all that stuff. And pastors are quivering masses of availability. And they want to ride Jordan Peterson's coattails up into church growth and fame like Vander Klee and on and on and on. And so, okay, we've got these two classes. And so I guess me and Esther, we've leveled up, baby. You know, she's doing her apologetics. We're thinking. We're arguing. We're promoting. We're cleric class. But there's another level. Whoops. So and this is the level of revelation. This is the level of experience. And this experience, there's tons of stories about this, right? But that's eventually like kind of like the hope of everybody who initiates this process is that you will get your own experience. You will get your own revelation. You will be able to have your own experience of this stuff and no longer need to rely on the tradition itself. You can begin to rely. You begin to let go of those training wheels and to have initiate a process of becoming any and of yourself a person of God or somebody who is connected to God. And that next stage is beyond the heart and the mind. It's after you you you get to a state of being a good person. Right. And then you but you still have to surrender your consciousness. You have to let go of all the thinking and all the feeling and the wanting and the desiring. Right. And there's different ways of training yourself to do that. In my own understanding, there's a very minute split here in the mystic traditions that I can't really get into because it's going to launch me into a whole host of questions. And stuff that that I have encrusted in literature because I think mythology is the best way to talk about this stuff because I'm always going to be stepping on everybody's ideas about this stuff. But there is a there's a way of initiating that that process of having religious experience and you can do it through you can do it through the material means you can do it through drugs, which is you. Now remember, he's got his material plant animal human got that hierarchy is working on to. Using the lower to achieve the higher, which, which does do something there is a place for that for sure. But the drugs itself will will again it will hijack just like anybody who's talking about this stuff. There's always a capacity that that which is connecting you with a greater understanding of things can actually hijack your understanding. Just like me, my memes want to ride on you and replicate. Of course, there's always that replication crisis going on. Religious experience can be gotten to by various different means through material means such as LSD through vegetable vegetable means means means such as you know silo Simon through animal means by by initiating a process of chanting. Like and using your body and synchronizing your body and entering into an ecstatic state through human means, which is a mimetic structure such as incantations or various different sorts of meditations or or mental constructs that you use to do that. And then there's something else. Okay. We've got the third layer, which is the mystic class. So we have the mundane religious practitioner. We have the cleric class and we have the mystic class. And this is this is young. I don't believe I know I've seen for myself. I've I've had the experience. I've been to the mountaintop. I've done the psilocybin. I've I've I've I've deconstructed my personhood and I've done this through. You can do it through psychedelics. You can do it through meditation. You can do it through chanting. Maybe it's maybe you're a Pentecostal and you went to this worship conference and you had the best worship leader on stage and the whole crowd was there and we were all singing together and our hearts were open our or maybe the maybe the pastor came down and and bang you got smooted and and you fell on the floor and and and this rush came over you and and you were like, oh, I'm going to go to church. And then this rush came over you and and you have this experience of of light and goodness and beauty or maybe you had a near death experience and and and you had a medical emergency and bang you were in the tunnel of light and and now you know you you're not you're not believing you're not rationing your way up there. You're not reasoning based on the revelation of others. You're having your own revelation. This is a this is a this is a level up. So we have the mundane we have declared class we have the mystic class. Yeah, but we got a fourth speed. I really kind of curious about it. The car that he's into. I keep looking at traffic. Is that a Subaru is it. I don't know. There's something else that's beyond the heart and mind but it takes place in the body. It takes place in the matter. It takes place in the mind. Right. And and for some people, it'll be a song, or it's some people, it'll be a tremor in your hand, you'll feel you'll feel an energy, or you'll begin to dance, and the difference between this. This experience and the other experiences is that it initiates from from inside. It's, it's spontaneous. And you know it's real because it is spontaneous, it doesn't come through. You know it's real because it's spontaneous. That's something you're going to want to really think about. Because we're formed. And anything outside of you doesn't come through a concentration or through an incantation. It comes about spontaneously. Say I would assert here that what's floating down the river here is the secret, sacred self. And, and this is not unlike the person that says, well, you know, I now know that that I really am the reincarnation of Shirley Temple. Now I might look like a very large middle aged Dutch white man, but but I really am the incarnation, the reincarnation of Shirley Temple. I know this. Now what would be in it for me to be the reincarnation of Shirley Temple? Maybe I'd rather be reincarnation of Howard Hughes and try to lay claim on his fortune. Now how many generations passed, but this is the secret, sacred self. Now the problem that you have with the secret, sacred self is we already know we're formed. And so often when I get to be a pastor, you have these experiences, experiences where where someone comes up to you and says, says, I'm spiritual, but not religious. Like, oh, and you're like, yeah, I know. Everybody thinks that it's just like high school because they're all there, their own unique, sacred, secret selves. And they're all expressing and, and, and, and coming out right now. And, and, and here it's new. And it's like, yeah, it's new to you. And the high school teachers are like, yeah, yeah, someone else now. We're formed. We're formed. And, and the things that come up from inside of us, how do you know that isn't formed too? And that's, that's the problem with the question of formation. We know we're formed. We just, the assertion that we're a closed system is nothing more than an assertion. We don't know. It's, and that is the power of God. That is the Holy Spirit. See, it's the secret, sacred self. It's the ro-i-lof. There's, there's tons of the Brahman. There's so many names for this stuff. And that, that's at the heart. And that's the third level. The third level of religious experiences. That's where we get to the mystical traditions. And those are in the heart of every religion. And those are pathways towards individual recognition of yourself as an individual created by God. And see, see at this point, we're at 1416 into it. And I'm thinking, do you remember what you said with your, with your worldview section about the energies? And so, and then again, I'm not, I'm not trying to be mean or anything, but I'm just talking out loud. And this is the kind of things that if, if he and I were in our, in my office and we were having this conversation, I'd say, now, wait a minute. Before you said this, now you're saying this. You're going to want to, you're going to want to take those two things and put them side by side and say, well, what does that mean? Though with faults, maybe I'll wrap up with the faults, but let me get to that fourth, that fourth stage of religion is something you don't need to worry about. We don't need to worry about that. It doesn't even really make sense to even talk about this level, but there is another level that we can just. That's kind of the esoteric thing that floated down the river. Well, we get to this point. We can't even talk about it. Now there's truth to that because there are things you can't talk about because we are limited in our capacity to articulate, but we're still going to talk about it. Indicate that it's there. And that's the level where every aspect of your being, every movement that you make, every feeling that you have, every thought that you speak is infused and is guided by the divine spirit. You become. See, now the divine spirit came in and we don't know where that came from at the beginning. And so this is, well, this is what theology does and this is what disciplines do. And this is what religions do where we come in and we say, OK, well, OK, you got all these elements here and now let's put them all on the table and ask, well, how do they all fit together? Where do they come from? What are they? Well, and see, this is the this is the difficulty that you have with something like this is that in a sense, by virtue of your hierarchy, you've taken those things off the table. You say, well, that's that's that's how to layer. I can't articulate. OK, well, then why are we talking? Because in order for us to articulate, we're going to have to put it on the table and we're going to have to talk about it. And in a sense, you're saying, well, this is beyond us having a conversation. OK, well, I understand that there are things beyond us having a conversation, but we are having a conversation. And where can we locate it? And I understand that you can have an experience. And after the after that experience, you say there's nothing that I can say that can adequately encapsulate and community communicate that experience. I say, yeah, well, that's not uncommon. If I have a wonderful meal and you say, well, describe for me that omelet that let's say the stagecoach right down Florin Road, John Van Donken, I often eat at the stagecoach encapsulate for me that omelet that you ate at the stagecoach. What do you mean by that? Well, well, articulate it for me so that I can have the same experience of eating the omelet that you can. I can't do that. I can't I cannot put into words exactly what that means. Now, I might describe the egg and the sausage and the bacon and the green pepper and the cheese and the and the the the biscuits and gravy. And because you've had that experience, you can kind of associate say, yeah, I know what you're talking about. But let's say you've never had breakfast at the stagecoach. Words cannot convey that experience. Now, just because I say just because I can't encapsulate that in words doesn't mean that the experience of eating an omelet with an omelet with biscuits and gravy over at the stagecoach down Florin Road is somehow higher up on the hierarchy. There are many things in life that are ineffable. It's not a unique thing. Now, in terms of going down to the stagecoach, you can go down to the stagecoach and you can have that omelet and probably done by the same cook. It won't be exactly the same omelet, but it'll be close enough. Now, given the pragmatist, they're due. It'll be close enough that after you eat it, you say, oh, now I know what you're talking about. Now the stagecoach with their ambiance and all the stuff that's going on over there at the stagecoach in Florin Road. You know, I know what you're talking about because I too have had that experience. Yeah, but your experience and my experience wasn't really all that similar to because I now we're getting back into Kant and Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris. I brought stuff to that experience that you didn't bring to that experience because I have this whole trail of experiences behind me. So at this move, at this stage, this move is a little bit. I look at this movement and say, we got to talk about this a little bit more because you can have an experience. OK, let's say I go to the Pentecostal Bible Barn and we have the guitarist. I go to I go to Bayside Church up in Granite Bay and you have the guitarist who used to play with Journey and he's up there and he's leading worship and he's an amazing worship leader. You've got you've got 5000 people in the auditorium and the smoke machine is going and the big thing and we're singing about Jesus and I grew up with Jesus and and and boy my you know, bang, there I am. Can I describe that experience? Is that experience from God? This is where this is where I think, you know, the religious were formed. Now, is that experience not from God? Well, and this is where I'll often sit down with with people who have been downstream from evangelicalism and they'll say things like that's a God thing. And I said, yes, as opposed to what the trees, the squirrels, Yosemite National Park walk into Yosemite. I love going to Yosemite and I love sitting there and watching the tour bus let out and all of these tourists from all over the world that we're going to be going to Yosemite. And I walk into Yosemite Valley and Yosemite is a God thing. What do I mean by that? Was it made by glaciers? Yeah. The God of redemption is the God of creation is the God of experience is the God of all of it. It's all a God thing. The stuff in the soup, the glory of soup. That's a God thing. Are there things we can't articulate? Yes. The fact that we can prompt them, let's say with psilocybin and have a mystical experience. That's in a sense where Jordan Peterson, that's the traction he's getting in his natural theology right there. But we got to watch our assumptions between these things. I say, boy, that omelet at the stage coach was ineffable. And then someone will say, yeah, but it was just a really good cook. Yeah, but the glory now we're getting into the neo sacramentalism. The glory is built into that omelet. The glory is built into that eggs. The glory is built in that tradition of making omelets. The glory is built into the ambiance and the uniqueness of that that that dumpy little place down Florin Road. The glory is built into the owners and all that they brought to it. The glory is built into this long stream. And the glory is built into the fact that I grew up in Patterson with with African Americans. And we go to Mama Lou's for the most amazing southern cooking you could imagine. And on and on and on and on and on and on. You know, just on and on. And so then when I go into the stagecoach, I have this ineffable experience. I remember the Dominican Republic once we were hosting a Haitian pastor in our home and my wife thought, well, you know, we want to we want to esteem this Haitian pastor as a as an honored guest. And so my wife decided she was going to make a lasagna. We're living in the Dominican Republic and finding all the ingredients for a lasagna was not easy. And she had to we can't usually get the ricotta cheese that we usually make our our lasagna is from in the state. So then we have to use this this other queso in the Dominican Republic. So we had to use swap out things. And so my wife was really happy about putting this lasagna together so she could offer it to this Haitian pastor. And the Haitian pastor taste it was going. They didn't like lasagna. Like, how could you not like lasagna? We're formed. The Haitian had different ideas of what was delicious by virtue of where he grew up and also individually to your synchroses and so on and so on and so forth. But this is this is how cultures work. This is how pluralism work. This is how diversity works. Essentially an instrument that God is playing in the world. Right. And so like that's profit level. You don't need to worry about that. OK. Well, let's get to profit level. So profit level and he's about to say more. So let's let's say I mean, it'd be great if you go there. But like, to be honest, you probably don't want to go there because that that means that you have to give up all the things that you really want. And I don't mean like just give up on life. I mean, give up on the desires. Give up on your selfish desires. Give up on on treating people badly. Give up on on not taking care of yourself. You have to actually start to surrender more and more of what what forms you as you. And this is and let's wrap up here. So that's profit level. This is where I have to give up the hard stuff. I bet I'm laughing because I'm enjoying this. OK. I do mean no disrespect. And the fact that you put this out on YouTube to me says it's game for conversation. And, you know, I don't want to. You're a big boy. I think you can handle this. So I the reason I love this video is I've not heard this for the first time from Ben. I hear this all the time. And why? Because this is built into our cultural assumptions about what religion is and how it works. That well, if you're if you're at profit class as opposed to mystic class or cleric class, if you have profit class, you some gaming in there too. If you have profit class, well, then, you know, then you have to do stuff like love your enemies. Then you have to do stuff like sell your property. Then you have to do stuff like celibacy. Then you have to do stuff like not being mean to people. I guess I'm not profit class. I still haven't gotten over that. But this is this is a hierarchy of religion. And this is this is how it's this is how it's it's put together. Now, and make some observations here. You see Charles Taylor, if you want to actually try to read A Secular Age, this massive book, you see Charles Taylor's observation about religious speeds. And I've mentioned this before. And some of you liked it. Some of you don't. Protestants reformation wanted one speed instead of two. And Charles Taylor's background is Roman Catholic. OK, so he's not I don't think he's being unfair to his tribe. Others have said, yeah, you know, the Roman Catholic Church wants all of us to be holy to. Yeah. And so I'm not taking any of that away. But this is a this is a big emphasis in the reformation. And this was part of the reform that the reformers want. This is part of what made, let's say, John Calvin's Geneva. What it was, because the goal was to have a holy city. And this is what sent the pilgrims across the Atlantic to found Plymouth because they were utopians in some ways. They wanted to establish a holy city. And this is part of the reason why. Well, you have Rhode Island and and John John Williams, who differed from the pilgrims and then the Puritans, because first the pilgrims came over and then the Puritans came over and the pilgrims were in sense a higher speed version than the Puritans. The pilgrims were the you know, were the super there were the super athletes of the of their particular religious tradition. They were higher up on the hierarchy and they weren't compromising like the Puritans and the Puritans weren't compromising like the other Anglicans. And the Anglicans weren't compromising. Well, get a band with the eighth and everything. But, you know, so you have all these levels and you have these speeds. And essentially, and in Charles Taylor's idea about speeds is that you have the monks who are in the monastery and they're praying for the regular people. So in a sense, you're going back to this. You have mundane religious practitioners, then you have the cleric class. And so you have these multi speed religions. And that's kind of what is implicit in Benjamin's religious value, you know, religious hierarchy of religious value here. That you have these different speeds. And so you have the prophet class and the mystic class and the cleric class. Part of what you have to wrestle with when you deal with Christianity is that shot through the religion. And I wasn't really it was this commentary a number of years ago. Part of the reason I part of the reason I like preaching through books is a fat book, too. This is Joel Green. Joel Green is a was a scholar. I don't know if he's retired or anything. He was at Fuller Seminary in Southern California. And he wrote this commentary, New International Commentary of the New Testament, the Gospel of Luke, that book. And one of the things that this turned me on to for the first time late in the game for me was how shot through Luke is with questions of status. And that kind of sent me down a journey of reading the New Testament with new eyes, paying much careful attention, much more attention to status. And what I began to notice is that built into Christianity are a lot of really interesting and complicated conversations about status, which is hierarchy and equality. And we're still playing through them today. This this social justice warrior culture war business, this is all about equality and status. And you're not getting rid of either. And so the question is to figure out how do these two systems interact. OK. And I've mentioned before, and I should probably do a video on it, the relationship there's bounded set and there's center set systems. All right. Some of you are familiar with this language. Bounded set says the true Christian, let's say let's talk about Christian reformed history. The true Christian doesn't eat out on Sunday. The true the true Christian doesn't get the newspaper on Sunday. When I was growing up, my parents didn't get the Sunday paper. I don't know, it was because they were poor and didn't have any money or it was their sabbatarianism, but they didn't get the Sunday paper. And as a kid, I always felt kind of jipped because, you know, the Sunday paper had the the comics in color and all. And we and we didn't watch TV on Sunday, except we could watch TV after church. The Wonderful World of Disney after church. But that meant we didn't get to see the world's strongest man competition. We didn't get to watch football. All these things we didn't get to do. And we were growing up in the Vanderclay household and my parents were religious. And and so we didn't get the Sunday paper and we didn't watch TV on Sunday. Did that make us profit class? I don't know. We didn't get these things. And the Martins, the Martins got to watch TV on Sunday. So when we'd go over their house after church, they were even in the same church. We get to watch World's Strongest Man Competition on on ABC. And I thought that was really cool. And they got the Sunday paper so I could see the comics in color and other people at Northside because a lot of black folks go in there. They didn't have all the CRC, saboteur and traditions. They were getting the Sunday paper. And I'd look at their Sunday paper and I think kind of want to look at that. But I kind of feel guilty for looking on that because didn't get the Sunday paper. And then, of course, later on, after I went to college, my parents started getting the Sunday paper. And it's like, you compromisers, readers of the colored comics on Sunday. And I remember the first time we went to a restaurant on Sunday and it was like, We lost our prophet class. So you have all these speeds, you have all these hierarchies. And Christianity has all these status and equality conversations built into them. And I'm going to go into those a little bit in some of the verses I'm going to read. Jesus clearly articulates a value hierarchy of rewards in the age to come. He says that all over and over again. And so people who give up stuff will surely be more than compensated in this age and the age to come, Jesus says. It's like, oh, so there is a hierarchy. And then Jesus says things that are just so completely egalitarian, it changes the world. Oh, so we're all brothers. I'm going to read that in a minute. So there's throughout the gospel, there's all these really complex. I was talking about Boundary Set and Center Set. Sorry, I distracted myself. So Boundary Set says you don't read the Sunday comics. You don't get the newspaper on Sunday. You don't go out to eat on Sunday. These are all the Boundary Set that shows you are prophet class, Christian Reformed person in the before the great falling away of the 1980s in the Christian Reformed Church. That's how you know. You know you're really Christian Reformed if your mother cooks the meal on Saturday so even she doesn't have to work on Sunday. That's how you have status. That's Bounded Set by these fixed things. Now Center Set says, well, there's a pole in the middle and it's whether you're moving towards the pole or moving away from the pole. So kind of what the Christian Reformed Church said as well, you know, you can go out to eat on Sunday. But you know, maybe if you're speaking in tongues or maybe if you're believing in women in church office or maybe if you have black friends or maybe if see so that these poles that represent value and if you're moving towards these poles, well, it's the direction. And a lot of people say, well, there's Bounded Set and there's Center Set. All right. The more I thought about this, I said, no, actually the Bounded Set and the Center Set are both part of the same system because those boundary markers move depending on where the center is. And we're not always real sure of what the gravity is around the center and how they're pulling. But it's much more of a dynamic situation. And that's in a sense similar to the status in the hierarchy, status in hierarchy in one sense, equality in the other sense. And so then when you listen to a lot of what Jesus says, I'm going to read a whole bunch of verses in a little bit. You begin to get a sense that Jesus is moving around the boundaries and he's moving around the center and he's doing this in really complicated ways that get even more complicated when you get into different cultures, because that means you're going to have to figure this stuff out. Well, now we're back at the cleric class because that's what the clerics do and see what I'm going to want to do is mess with his entire hierarchy. So, Jesus clearly articulates value hierarchy of the reward in the age to come. But there's often an inversion dynamic in that too, the least are the greatest, the last will be first, poor will be rich, the meek will inherit the earth. This little spat that I had with Jordan Peterson quite a few months ago was a friendly spat. So I'm going to read some Bible verses. Now Thomas, also known as Didymus, one of the twelve, was now with the disciples when Jesus came. This is after Jesus' resurrection, very famous story from the Gospel of John. So the other disciples told him, we have seen the Lord. We have had direct experience with Jesus. We saw him with our own little eyeballs. Okay, these are nice naive world of objects. I'm seeing what's real. I saw Jesus. Ain't no doubt about the resurrection here. But Thomas says, unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where his nails were and put my hands into his side, I will not believe. Seeing is believing. Well, setting this up. A week later, his disciples were in the house again. Thomas was with them. Though the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, Peace be with you. Then he said to Thomas, Hey, yo, Tom. I heard what you said about me. Come on over here. Put your finger here. See my hands. Reach out your hand and put it into my side. Stop doubting and believe. What's VanderKlay doing? Is VanderKlay being an evangelical? Thomas said to him, My Lord and my God. The big thing for a Jew to say in the first century, call a man as God. That kind of stuff will get you stoned. Then Jesus told him, Because you have seen me, you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen and have yet believed. That kind of throws this into a little bit of confusion. And it's not hard to understand. Because for the mystic or the prophet who have had amazing revelations or the cleric who's been using reason based on other revelations, the mundane religious practitioner who's going to work every day and yet practices sacrificially, giving up hard stuff, even though they haven't had those revelations. Jesus says, That's on the top of the priority. That's on the top of the hierarchy. They haven't had those great revelations. Yet they're being faithful. They're being faithful to their spouse. They're being faithful to their community. They're being generous to their church. That's faith. See what you've done. He's just flipped the hierarchy. Matthew 23. Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples, The teachers of the law and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat. They have status. So you must be careful to do everything they tell you. You should submit and do what they tell you. But do not do what they do. Well, for they do not practice what they preach. They're hypocrites. They tie up heavy burdened cumbersome loads and put them on other people's shoulders. But they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them. There's issues with the cleric class here. Everything they do is done for people to see. That's like VanderKlay riding Jordan Peterson's coattails. They make their phylacteries wide and their tassels on their garments long. They love the place of honor at banquets and the most important seats in the synagogue. They love to be greeted with respect in the marketplaces and be called rabbi by others. Oh, VanderKlay loves his status. He goes to a meetup and has people want to take selfies with him and all this stuff. But VanderKlay, you should see how dirty his office is. Take a look at this. Look at this. His table's a mess. There's crap on his desk. He's using that crappy old computer because the other one broke. He's even got a little mess behind him. VanderKlay's a hypocrite. Yeah, VanderKlay's a hypocrite. Take it from me. I know a hypocrite when I see one. Let's look at one in the mirror every day. But you are not to be called rabbi, reverend, pastor. For you have one teacher and you are all brothers. And do not call anyone on earth father, for you have one father and he is in heaven. Nor are you to be called instructors, for you have one instructor, the Messiah. The greatest among you must be your servant. For those who exalt themselves will be humbled. And those who humble themselves will be exalted. And notice that's the future. Jesus is saying something's going to come, something's going to happen. Now part of Benjamin's hierarchy here was, and this again is expressive of the current secularism, that, well, the secular frame in which we now exist, normal time, secular time, is the foundational only enduring frame. Now again, if you read Charles Taylor in the secular age, he deconstructs this to a degree and says, it's an assumption, and people have been playing with time in a lot of different ways throughout the course of humanity. So the fact that you look out and say there's just secular time, there's no second coming, there's no, there's only secular time, that's a function actually of a scientific worldview. But it's an assumption. You can't evaluate it. You don't know it's true. It's like asking what was before the singularity and the Big Bang? Can't answer that question. By virtue of science, you can't answer that question. You can talk about it, you can think about it, you can talk about a multiverse, you talk about the inverse of the, there was the, there was the bizarro universe that kind of got flipped just kind of like the poles on the, the magnetic poles on the planet, blah, blah, blah. You don't know? We don't know. Luke 22. Then Jesus said to his disciples, Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or about your body, what you will wear, for life is more than food and the body is more than clothes. Consider the ravens. They do not sow or reap. They have no storeroom or barn, yet God feeds them. Well, how does God feed them? Well, God feeds them through the trees. God feeds them through the plants. God feeds them through the natural processes. Well, then what is God? And what is God's relationship to those trees and those seeds and those plants and those, those dead carcasses that, that birds are swooping in and, and, and eating up? And how much more valuable are you than birds? Are we more valuable than birds? Or are we just more evolved birds that have these big left brains? Who of you by worrying can add a single hour to your life? I don't know. Don't worry or survive. Isn't it our worry that, that makes us, you know, what movie was it? There was a, there was a coward. I forget what it was, but, you know, hey, being a coward keeps you alive sometimes. Running away from danger. Running into burning buildings. Bad idea. Since you cannot do this very little thing, why do you worry about the rest? That is a good question. Consider how the wildflowers grow. They do not labor or spend. What are you saying? God is growing the wildflowers? Yet I tell you not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of them. If that is how God closed the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow's thrown into the fire, how much more will he clothe you? You of little faith. And do not set your heart on what you will eat or drink. Do not worry about it. For the pagan world runs after such things and your father knows that you need them. But seek his kingdom and these things will be given to you as well. Do not be afraid little flock. It's diminutive. For your father has been pleased to give you the kingdom. I thought that's the thing that we're seeking. Yeah, we are. It's also a gift. Sell your possessions and give to the poor. Provide purses for yourselves that will not wear out. A treasure in heaven that will never fail. Where no thief comes near and no moth destroys. The age of decay doesn't take it from you. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. What's your heart? It's the center of you. If I speak in the tongues of men or of angels, but do not have love, I am a resounding gong and a clanging symbol. If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and knowledge, and if I have faith that can move mountains, well, that's prophet class and mystic class. But do not have love. I am nothing. We have mundane Christians. They have love. Mothers have love. Neighbors have love. Children have love. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. And the truth is, we have the gift of prophecy and knowledge. It is not proud. It does not dishonor others. It is not self-seeking. It is not easily angered. It keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil, but rejoices with the truth. Love does not delight in evil, but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres. It always protects, always perseveres. Boy, if you live like that, yeah, you're going to, it's going to be hard. Because loving like that, that kind of love gets you dead. Because loving like that, that kind of love gets you dead. Love never fails. What does that mean? Where there are prophecies, they will cease. Where there are tongues, in the speech of angels, they'll be stilled. Where there is knowledge, oh, cleric class, big reason, big head. cleric class, big reason, big head. It'll pass away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. You mean even these visions that I have, even these words that I can articulate, You mean even these visions that I have, even these words that I can articulate, even this stuff that when I say it, everyone stops and says, Wow! But when completeness comes, What is in part disappears. And we don't, we don't really spend too much time on old textbooks And we don't, we don't really spend too much time on old textbooks and old science, because it's been subsumed. and old science, because it's been subsumed. When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I put the waves of childhood behind me. For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror, For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror, Now I know in part, Now I know in part, Then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known. You want to be a hypocrite on that day, not like VanderKlay. And now these three remain, Faith, Hope, and Love. But the greatest of these is Love. But the greatest of these is Love. Well, here's the thing. There is Love in here. It's right there at the bottom. Love is, If you're a parent and your child vomits in the middle of the night, Getting up in the middle of the night, reassuring that child, You're okay. Give him a little medicine, change the sheets. It's the nursing home worker changing the adult diaper. It's the nurse, It's the nurse, it's the guy doing the dirty jobs. It's Love. It's Love. And where's Love on this thing? That's what Paul says. That's an inversion of this hierarchy. And we all know it. That's what's funny. But we should inform our religious systems that it's that way. So I'll end with a little pastor advice, This is what I do. If you've got a big left brain, You'd better make your peace with it. And this is what Ben is doing. So I love this video. I love, love, love, love, love this video. And I hope nothing I've said here takes anything away from this video. Because he's doing exactly what he's supposed to be doing in working through this stuff. And he's giving us all a gift by working through it in public. And there's risk in that. Because then, you know, Hypocrites like me are going to make a video about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. And I'm going to be talking about it. It's in these low status places where God so often meets us. It's in the mundane. It's in the crappy little church that has messed up theology and screwed up people and can't do anything right. and screwed up people and can't do anything right. Oh, little flock. It's God's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. We think of monks in the religious hierarchy as kind of second speed religious athletes. And this is where I'll critique this one speed, two speed. Again, almost everything you say you can critique. The world is just that complex. Because the monasteries were a container to allow ordinary people to do mundane things, to bless the world in small, quiet ways. And it wasn't just their saving of manuscripts that allowed Europe to transcend the great falling away after the collapse of the Roman Empire. It was the embodiment of Christianity in people taking care of children, in people taking care of farmland, in people taking care of animals, in people loving one another. The home isn't much different from the monastery. The home isn't much different from the monastery. Nor are many of the places that we take for granted. From time to time Jesus began to explain to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things at the hands of the elders, the chief priests, and the teachers of the law, and that he must be killed and on the third day be raised to life. Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. Never, Lord! You're way too important for that. He said, This will never happen to you. We won't let it happen. Jesus turned and said to Peter, Get behind me, Satan. If you read the few verses before he just said, Peter's the rock upon which he's going to build his church. Now he turns around and calls him Satan. You are a stumbling block to me. You do not have in mind the concerns of God but merely human concerns. Jesus and your hierarchies, you don't let them go. You don't let them dominate. You keep messing with them. That he who is on top goes all the way to the bottom and gets abused by unspiritual, unworthy, unworthy people. You don't let them dominate. You have been bullied for oneness by unspiritual, unworthy, unrighteous people. Then Jesus said to his disciples, Whoever wants to be my disciple must deny themselves It's in the prophet class, this is basic. Must deny themselves, take up their crosses and follow me. Requires no history. Every time if you're working in a daycare and that parent comes in and makes silly demands that are actually counterproductive to the child counterproductive to the child and rakes you through the coals and you sit there and you take it, you're bearing a cross. You can bear lots of crosses in your life. Whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me, what does that mean? We'll find it. Don't you mean secure it? Don't you mean grasp it with both hands or find it? There it is. It's a surprise. It's a gift. What good will it do for someone to gain the whole world yet forfeit their soul, their psyche, their self? Or what can anyone give in exchange for their soul or their psyche or their self? For the Son of Man, read Daniel 7, is going to come in his Father's glory with his angels and then he will reward each person according to what they've done. So keep at it, Ben. I love what you're doing and I hope you understand my little offering today. Two hours worth for a 20 minute video and I played half of it. I hope you understand my little offering today and the spirit in which it's given. It's a spirit of love, it's a spirit of encouragement, it's a spirit of, you know, you want to say Vanderclay's all wet, you want to say Vanderclay's full of it, you want to do all that, go right ahead baby. I probably am, but this is what we do and this is how we love each other and this is how we we think through these things with our big left brains and this is how God does wonderful things in this world and he makes glory and he changes us and transforms us and creates in us creatures the likes of which clean dirty diapers and no theology. Just Google Libri, not Libri, it's a community where, what's his name, it's the Dutch Roman Catholic, Henry Nowan cares for the disabled along with others. Henry Nowan, writer of many books, brilliant, smart, Dutch, Roman Catholic, gay, cares for the disabled. Says this is the greatest work I've ever done. Our hierarchies, they're so funny. God bless you.