https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qPcD-zxgg6M

 Hi, this is Paul. I don't know that I have a big video for you today. I had about an hour into a video, but just didn't like it and I was pondering the other day Freddie hasn't felt up to doing a Freddie and Paul show for a while and a few of you have been asking about them and I appreciate your concern and Hopefully Freddie you'll feel up to doing our show again sometime soon But I started watching some of the earlier episodes and I noticed that it's about two years ago that we started doing the show This is before I started doing Jordan Peterson videos and I had maybe 12 subscribers to my YouTube channel and The show started as I told in this video one day Freddie says Paul you and me should do a TV show Freddie how are you and I gonna do a TV show Freddie had done some public access Sacramento TV shows a little bit and so he wanted he wanted to do this with me, but I wasn't gonna That I wasn't gonna go down and do public access. I didn't know anything about that so I said Freddie, why don't I just record why don't we just record some shows and we put them up on YouTube and I've known Freddie for 21 years ever since I came to Sacramento and and the church here and Freddie's Freddie's about 45 is about 10 years younger than I am and we were talking about this and I'd always you know I usually take Freddie out for lunch about once a month and we go and we have a good time and Freddie often reminded me of Uncle Psy from from Duck Dynasty and Freddie would sometimes say things that just would absolutely crack me up and I could never repeat them in the same way that Freddie would say Them so I thought yeah, let's do a show and let's just have some conversations and of course the rapping came into it at some point because Freddie's a rapper and Maybe in one of these shows I'll I'll talk a little bit more about Freddie's Freddie's career as a rapper But I thought well, you know, how about while Freddie can't do the show. Let's do the Best of the Freddie and Paul show and I'll pick out some episodes and play them and if I have any commentary I'll add them. So this was episode one of the Freddie and Paul show and I have to move my little window So I'm not over Freddie's head. So here's episode one. This is our first episode So Fred wanted Fred suggested that he and I should make a TV show What are we gonna call the show Fred? The Freddie and Paul show the Freddie and Paul show and Fred thinks this would be a comedy. I said Reggie and forest should be in it too. Yes Reggie and forest have been in a few episodes, but they're not always geeked to be in and so anyway So Fred Reggie and forest have been in a few episodes Fred said that was okay Right, and so I asked Fred what we should talk about and what was your suggestion Fred? football and fantasy football and Basketball, that's not what you said to me. Oh what I say Trump and Hillary Trump and Hillary. Yeah, Fred wants to talk about Trump and Hillary now Hillary is a good candidate They're saying she isn't that great, but I think she's a very good US citizen When you say she's a good US citizen, what do you mean like she pays her taxes or what? She's a good all-around person. She's good all-around person. How about Trump? What do you think of Trump? Trump is okay, but he's got a couple flaws a couple flaws. What are what are Trump's flaws? improvement needed Okay, how should how should Trump improve himself? Well, you should be more treat others the way he would want to be treated. Oh That's a good one Fred. I like that apply the golden rule to Donald Trump Yeah, Donald Trump should treat others like he wants to be treated. Yeah, like you said in the sermon Freddy always thinks I say this in the sermon and I don't remember the last time I talked about the golden rule in a Servant, but this comes up continually from Freddy that like you always say in the sermon So whatever I preach Freddy always hears the golden rule So What else would it I don't know I don't know I don't know if people can be too interested in fantasy football or basketball or baseball Fred's a little upset that the The Giants are out of playoffs. Yeah, whatever my Giants Giants. Come on. We got next year So who do you who do you want to win the Dodgers? Cubbies Cubbies Cubbies want the Cubbies to win. Yeah, okay. Anything else you want to talk about in our little video Fred? Um, I should be making a comeback in music a comeback in music. You got a quick rap for us, right? And and hey, he's made a comeback in music on the Freddie and Paul show Okay, well this is so this is the first this is the first installment of the Fred and Paul show Or Freddie and Paul is it Fred or Freddie? Which one? Freddie and Paul show so why'd you get top billing? I don't know cuz he's the one he's the he's the one that came up He's idea Freddie had the idea He's the celebrity. So so this is here. This is his idea. So thank you for watching I promised I would post this on Facebook and maybe even on YouTube and we'll see what we want to do for the next one So how do we say goodbye? We'll catch you on the flip side catch on the flip side That was our first catch phrase and pretty quickly the second one comes That one went away That one stuck we didn't have a hand motion in there yet Now if you go all the way back to 2012 I actually found the video that I made of Freddie's rapping and this is when I went out to lunch with Freddie and Reggie and when I recorded this is the first rap I ever recorded of Freddie's. So here it is Right to you on your TV screen Pastor Paul doing this thing we got yo everybody just like that enough to the chat Your stuff is fat a bus platinum tracks out your speaker when he's on the podium He is the preacher don't you know Reggie is a one he's eating his pie Don't you know he's good to go like that? No, really though. They call me Freddie and I steal the show So that was That was that was the first that was the first rap I ever Ever recorded a Freddie So there's this is the best of the Freddie and Paul show episode 1 and I'll probably do a few of these until Freddie's back in the swing of things and Back to making more new original content for the Freddie and Paul show. So One love