https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ph8hxmhbfkc

 Hi, this is Paul. I have over the last year made several videos about the Christian Reformed Church and the crisis that it is currently in right now. I hope to make some shorter videos on some of this. A lot of these videos are readings from what I've written on CRC Voices. CRC Voices for me continues to be the best place to sort of process the kinds of things that are going on through the Christian Reformed Church. Yesterday I made a video about Better Together. I'll do some talking about that and then I might make another little shorter video about the conservatives that are coming up in leadership now. Maybe I'll put it all into one video save you a few clicks. Post after post, thread after thread, the position that same-sex marriage is inherently sinful it misses the mark. This is the heart of the 1973 report and remains the majority belief in the Christian Reformed Church. Many others believe that same-sex behavior is just a natural variant of human sexuality like left-handedness. This is of no moral consequence. This is a minority belief in the Christian Reformed Church. This is an impasse. As we've seen with women in office, such differences tend to irritate. Women in office irritation seems tolerable by the system. LGBTQ will not be. With women in office it has been difficult to live out the difference the difference whether that woman can serve in office but not impossible. With women in office it has been difficult to live out the difference whether women can serve in office but not impossible. The establishment hasn't always played it fair. A sizable group believes that women should not serve and this bothers the women who are serving. Again and again we hear about this both publicly and privately from both sides both from women who are ministers and those who don't believe that it's appropriate to have women in office. Again and again we hear that any non-affirm any non-affirmation of same-sex relationships or lifestyle or even potential is not just an annoyance but an existential threat to LGBTQ people. Remember that a solid majority of people in the CRC, many of whom are members of churches with leadership that want to affirm, believe this way. How on earth are you going to create a safe space with this reality? What you're telling the majority of the Christian Reformed Church is that they may not have any voice or space to express their beliefs in their church. A belief that has been the majority belief in the Christian Reformed Church for almost all of its existence, for frankly all of its existence it's been a majority belief, and has been the majority belief of the Christian Church far more broadly than any belief with respect to women in ministry. The recent public posturing of this issue is a justice, the recent public posturing of this issue as a justice issue means that the affirming camp cannot back down. They are going to adopt a prophetic posture that demands confrontation. This is the broader cultural posture. This is their use of power. Activism, flags, protests are going to be the tools used to address the majority of the church who do not see it their way. The majority understands that the banner, liturgy committees, social justice groups are going to try using the tools of the denomination to evolve the position of the majority of the Christian Reformed Church into their position. So this is part of the reason why the Christian Reformed Church is at an impasse. Now I want to talk about the age thing. There are two growing demographics in the Christian Reformed Church, the old and the conservative young. Many of the old increasingly do not wish to be bothered. That goes with age. At some point they are done fighting and just want to get ready for their last struggle which is increasingly, which is increasing loss of friends and vitality. They don't want to fight. They don't want to be the target of someone's re-education program. Many beyond Grand Rapids who are coming into the CRC are young conservatives. They are ready to fight and they have the tools and the organizational imagination to carry on this fight. We've seen this in the Abide Group. They are frankly winning the fight. I'm familiar with social media tools and they are playing the game well. In my opinion all of these things are a given. Whatever course you wish to chart, this is the landscape. Whether you like it or not, this is the truth about the CRC. Now in some ways I stand with the theory of Better Together and even the HESIT project. I want good conversation and space for appreciative inquiry. The question is where and how. If you try to do this inside the CRC with tools of power, you will elicit the defensive posture we've already seen. Synod 2022 happened like it did because people who want to change the CRC's position on this have for over 20 years been pushing, pushing, pushing. Year after year what happened was that there were new overtures. Well we need more study on homosexuality. We need more study on homosexuality. Some of this came from moderates who very quickly saw that well children growing up in the church weren't fitting in. They were leaving the church. They're hoping to look for an answer and the Christian Reformed way of doing this was to have a study committee do it. Others wanted and believed that the Christian Reformed Church should change its position on it. Other moderates didn't want to see the Christian Reformed Church take this up because it knew once it got to this level, the level that it got to in Synod 2022, it would probably be game over for sort of an implicit don't ask don't tell that was happening in the denomination and in local churches. So what had happened is that year after year after year, I can show you the website, I probably shouldn't show you this because I know a whole bunch of you out there in this little corner are gonna say these are all the positions of the Christian Reformed Church. Let's see how uncomfortable we can make Paul with respect to them. So let's go to the homosexuality page. Full reports and exact statements of the CRC position on a particular issue. See references provided below. So what you have here is a history and well here are all the synods addressing it. 1970, 71, 72, 73, 74, 77, 81, 83, 73 was the major report. 92, 92, 93, 93, 94, 94, usually there's there's two because there's an agenda for Senate and an axe for Senate. You can see that this didn't get much treatment between 1981 and 1982. Then 95, 96, 97, 99, 2002, 2013, 2016, 2017, 2017, 2019, 2022 and it's going to go on from there. And so a lot of this was well the way to make change in the Christian Reformed Church is usually to address the Senate and have the Senate write a new study committee giving permission and then the church can change. As year and year and report and report compounded it became evident for those who wish to see the denomination change on this that the synodical route was not going to go and one of the groups in the Christian Reformed Church that wanted to see change on this was All One Body. Dan Wienarski who is currently on CRC Voices at that in 2018 wrote a piece on the CRC network about what he went to. He went to the All One Body organizational meeting and basically they openly talked strategy. One of the speakers made an assertion that I'm disappointed to say I agree with and Wienarski is conservative on the issue. He stated that the current crop of young people in society at large and the CRC in general are completely on board with the idea that homosexual behavior is something to celebrate. Now I don't think he was right on that I think he was living in Grand Rapids. He had a particular view of the Christian Reformed Church but he had a view of the Christian Reformed Church in Grand Rapids. The Christian Reformed Church is quite a bit larger and as I've talked about before with the hollowing out of the Christian Reformed Church in major cities in North America as the Christian Reformed Church has declined it's also gotten more conservative. He stated that it was merely a matter of time until the defenses of the CRC and other denominations like her crumble against the persistent battery of LGBTQ plus movement but where I am saddened by such things the speaker was delighted. The problem for the speaker is that he and almost everyone who believes as he does is not patient enough to wait for the next generation of leaders to rise up. Friendly to the demands for inclusion acceptance and celebration they want things to move more quickly. To this end one of the board members of All One Body gave the audience a piece of advice. Do not use scripture to convince your fellow CRC members of the beauty of full inclusion. Instead rely on personal stories. Everyone has a story he said you can't argue you can argue back and forth all day about scripture but we've never we're never going to win that way. Nobody can argue with your story. Another member of the panel shared the focal point of his personal story strategy. He said that it was about convincing people through stories about real people who have embraced the gay lesbian bisexual transgender lifestyle that such people bear healthier fruit than those who are non-inclusive. Whereas the panel referred to the old teachings of the church as toxic All One Body wants the CRC as a whole to accept the new teachings of full inclusion yielding good fruit. The panel members made it clear that the relative health and goodness of the fruit was completely dependent on how a person feels about himself herself herself or whatever gender pronoun the person identifies with. The church tells people that their preferred lifestyle is sinful and destructive people will feel bad about it. If the church will affirm someone's lifestyle people will feel wonderful. That's good fruit and maybe they'll want to go to church. Skipping ahead the panel members recognized that the legislative approach of sending an overture to synod was not likely to turn the CRC into an all-inclusive ally of LGBTQ plus promoters. They also exhibited pessimism that the 2021 synodical report on human sexuality will move the CRC closer to their desired outcome. Because of this the panel revealed their preference for strategy using the judicial ruling similar to the way secular activists won their case in the United States Supreme Court with Obergefell. All One Body's plan to transform the CRC will proceed as follows. They will identify a current CRC pastor who is sympathetic to their cause who is willing to perform a homosexual wedding ceremony. Having taken another route they will find a CRC congregation that is willing to elect an elder or a deacon who is openly and proudly living in a homosexual partnership. Eventually this will cause a firestorm of protest in the CRC. Complaints will be filed, debates will ensue, the banner will publish articles both for and against. Not a lot of that has happened. The great brouhaha will eventually make its way to synod and the hope on the part of All One Body is that synodical deputies will embrace the path of least resistance and rule in favor of the pastor or the church or the office bear or you don't even have to rule in favor of you just have to not do anything about it which is what happened in the Reformed Church of America. Synod might decide as it has done with other controversial topics that LGBTQ plus question is a matter for each local church council to decide or if the personal story of the individual involved is especially powerful synod may embrace empathy as a path towards inclusion. Perhaps the desire to move the CRC's relevancy credentials will convince synod to get with the times. Now there was a majority and minority report given to synod last year and the majority report was what carried the day. The minority report I liked as well because the minority part said we need to continue to talk about this because the truth is that no one has a solution to sort of make things like they were before. There's no getting around this issue there's only dealing with it and there are basically two very different very opposing approaches to dealing with it. On one hand in the Christian Reformed Church you have Jim Lucas you won't be most of you out there hearing his name won't know who he is. On the other hand you've got people like Rosaria Rosaria Butterfield and Becca Cook who are large and in charge on YouTube basically talking you know pursuing the approach that the conservatives are pursuing. In other words there's sort of two ways to go about it. The difficulty is how do you do both because in fact you have to do both you can't just do one or the other you're gonna have to continue the conversation and anyway part of what's plagued the Christian Reformed Church is after the church decided about women in office with all of this language of well let's see if the spirit blesses it the Christian Reformed Church basically stopped talking about it because whichever side sort of won they were afraid of losing the ground that they had and so then you sort of freeze the conversation too. That of course will get into hopefully the video I'll do at some point about Harry Bohr because Harry Bohr is a tremendous example of the difficulties in having a really productive confessional conversation. So for that way in some ways I stand with the theory of better together and even the HESIT project. I want good conversation in a space for appreciative inquiry. The question is how and where. If you try to do this inside the CRC with tools of power you will elicit the defensive posture we've already seen. Synod 2022 happened like it did because people wanted to change the CRC's position on this for over 20 years and they've been pushing and pushing. Well you pushed and you got your answer. At Synod 22 the other side finally pushed back. If the votes get closer they'll push back harder. The CRC repeatedly has tried to structure its way out of problems and if you go back over the history of the church for all of these functional issues restructure restructure well I think this is actually an issue that requires restructuring and the best restructure is not a local option. Well happy day this is a problem that requires a structural solution but the establishment doesn't want it because it's going to cost them dearly. This is where we are in my opinion. Then I talked a little bit about KFAB. Team better together is on a spectrum. This generates the energy of the current winsome wars. Say David French in an evangelical space and watch it rise. The suspicion is that Jamie Smith won't say on better together video what people believe he truly believes. Signaled previously on Twitter. It's not winsome it's dishonest they fear. He's a mole. This tends to fuel the root them out of the institution impulse. The irony is that via Twitter he called me out over a decade ago for voting at Synod for maintaining relationships with the PKN. I'm the conversation guy. Over the issue of homosexuality Jamie Smith has evolved on the topic. Plenty of people have questions about my winsomeness too. Lots of people in this little corner. Others fear that PVK has evolved the other way. We watch each other. Now many will scratch their heads asking what do I mean by KFAB. I actually found a really cool channel today. This little channel frame problems only has three videos but they're really good and he sort of walks through KFAB. It's sort of a real nice treatment of Eric Weinstein's a lot of stuff he was doing back when he was doing the portal. They're really quite well done. I might even do commentaries on them. They're all fairly short but they're really very well done. Alright back to the text. The leaders of better together represent the denominational middle of the the leadership middle of the denomination. And if you go to their webpage again let's see no it's the other one okay. The reason they put leadership on this page is that many of these people are very formidable leaders and impressive ministers of the Christian Reformed Church. Their names are well known. Their pulpits are well known and you know some of these guys Dave Struck I went to school with in in high school. Kyle Brooks did this conversation with with Jamie Smith. A number of other ones I've crossed paths with. Doug Bratt, Rebecca Jordan Hayes, Joel Cooke I've heard about, Roger Nelson, advisory team members Dale Cooper, former chaplain of Calvin College. Tremendous you know tremendous credentials in the Christian Reformed Chief. Keith Dornbusch again tremendous reputation and credentials in the Christian Reformed Chiefs. Greg Janke, Sid Jansma, Meg Janista, Peter Junker, David Cole, Ida Mutiogo. She was leading World Renew. Ron Knightam. Ron Knightam was pastoral care prof at the seminary. D. Rekker in an institution in the denomination. Joel Rankama friend of mine and colleague from Southern California. John Rosaboum friend former director of Christian Reformed Home Missions. Andy Ricecamp former director of World Renew. James Scop, big author in the Christian Reformed Church. Mary Stedgink, a friend of my family. Her mother and my mother were roommates in college. John Terpstra, a well-known pastor in the Christian Reformed Church. Tom Walcott somebody was the director of the mission field when I went to the Dominican Republic. Colin Watson, former basically former executive director of the denomination. Somebody that I served many places with from Patterson, New Jersey who at least for my part I certainly count him a friend. Derek Zile I hosted his internship. So these are this this is a very impressive group that are charting their way. I wonder about their charting for the reasons that I'm laying out here and I wouldn't be surprised to get personal emails from some of them with respect to this. Now part of what happens in a denomination is you really want to keep the family together and and for many of these people they have devoted their life to the Christian Reformed Church and to have it come apart is very much what they don't want. It's also the case that before the Reformed Church of America came apart it's very much what many of them did not want but come apart it did and it didn't come apart because well it did come apart because they basically couldn't resolve the impasse that they were in which is very similar to the impasse the Christian Reformed Church is in but just not developed and not in the way that it was. The leaders of Better Together represent the leadership middle of the denomination. They are successful these are successful CRC pastors many of which are at the peak of their careers and their advisory committee are a number of retired people who have had absolutely the best credentials in the Christian Reformed Church that you can have. They have not migrated into denominational structure because today the ideal of a successful pastor is in their local church not a denominational bureaucrat sorry Colin but Colin wasn't a pastor he was an executive in a major American corporation. What Better Together is showing no aptitude for that's a little harsh maybe and what Abide is showing tremendous aptitude for now I'll say Better Together and not the people within it is politics. Ironically Better Together isn't thinking systemically. The only shot to really keep most of the family together is to work on the Gravamen rules. I did a video on Cedric Parsons writing that he's done on Abide and he did a video conversation about it well which I thought was very good scholarship and I think he he went through the Gravamen thing and again I think Harry Boors case is a is an important case in that. Cedric Parsons laid out why the current status of the Gravamen is probably not sufficient shelter and Clay Lible undercut it further. Clay's blog now Clay is coming at someone told me Clay is coming to Walnut Creek so Clay's gonna be in the area so hopefully Clay and I can go out for lunch maybe we'll make some videos together. Clay of course is on the progressive end of this things and I certainly welcome people from the right left and middle on my channel if you want to talk about this. I have in the past extended invitations to Abide anyone from all one body or Hesed or Better Together want to come on my channel maybe you should all come on my channel and we'll have one big conversation together I would love that. Where are we? Okay Clay is looking to win but I think he's overplayed his hand. Moderates want to keep the family together if you want to if you want to do that so little bit of advice to Better Together. Number one people obey the rules in terms of ordination and same-sex marriage. Now it's a little difficult for people to understand how something like a denomination works. Where's the okay people in denominations look at the church order they look at rules and they say well here are the rules well yeah but there's also sort of oral tradition and in case law in a denomination because you'll find many rules on the books that sort of get ignored and it's okay then you find other rules on the books that get strictly enforced and everybody understands it and then you find other things that are not in any rule back at all that gets strictly enforced socially in another quiet ways that's how communities work. Now basically what Synod 2022 has done is sort of laid down where the rules currently are they could change in Synod 2023 that's sort of the nature of the Christian Reformed Church with these synods. People obey the rules in terms of ordination and same-sex marriage you can't do what Nealon did. Grand Rapids East for years had their statement on their website about basically how they disagreed with the position of the Christian Reformed Church. Nothing happened. Nobody talked about well maybe some people talked about it but nobody seriously contemplated what let's say the overture from Zealand that we treated on the channel was contemplating in terms of breaking it up. Nobody talked about that because they had the position. A number of other Christian Reformed Churches have affirming positions on their website. Nobody's really going after them at least nobody has gone after them yet. It's not until you do something that suddenly everything in a community gets triggered. If you're willing to not elect officers in same-sex marriages you can stay in the CRC. I think that's still true. That's where the line is. We know this now. If you can't live with this rule you should probably look for a denomination or start the affirming CRC parallel to the current one. That's my advice for you because one of the things that we've seen from the Alliance of Reformed Churches it doesn't take a lot of money to start a denomination and you know I think Abide could do it on a shoestring. If Better Together in fact was launched because Classist Grand Rapids East couldn't find $5,000 except for getting it from their mission fund you should go over to the Abide people and learn something about starting something or maybe call Dan Ackerman and Tim Vink and ask how they did it because they did it for the RCA. You may decide to be patient and hope this will change but the timing isn't now. Unless 2023 decides to not act against Neoland and Grand Rapids East then we're back in the in chaos land and likely dissolutionville. You can have your conscience and your conversations as long as you hold the line, hold line one can stay and I think this is the question of the Gravamen conversation and this might become, we'll have to see what happens in the advisory committees, this might become the focus of Senate 2023 because deep in it is the question how can we manage these in verveki for P-Land propositional knowledge, procedural knowledge, how can we handle these two things. What really triggered the reaction was a procedural act not a propositional act per se. People act like Senate 2022 was a watershed and it was in many ways but it wasn't but in a way it wasn't. Before Senate 2022 we basically had don't ask don't tell. Neoland told, Senate asked and then they demanded. There is the line Senate 2023 could change that line but blurring the line would lead to more chaos and coalitions don't like chaos and basically the RCA sort of fractured once everybody figured out that well similar to what you see happening in the United Methodist Church and other churches if the rules get too far away and again which rules the body sort of knows it. If the rules get too far away from the actions people begin to sense this and then the rules mean nothing and then people are like what's the point. Wiggle Room remains in the Gravamans space and there's potential there. Why hasn't Better Together gone there? I don't know. You've had a major video have a major video about Gravamans. Now Clay wrote something about Gravamans and and you can look up Clay's peripatetic pastor blog and Clay's blogged a lot on this and you know if you're interested in this I recommend that you read what Clay writes. Clay is a very vocal voice and a very influential voice in the denomination has been for a long time. Because the K-Fabe because the K-Fabe because of K-Fabe the conservatives because conservatives suspect K-Fabe is true enough Better Together they suspect that enough Better Together's are closet affirmers and spaces that won't allow them to come out and so the Gravaman path violates their consciences so there might be that group. Better Together just isn't thinking clearly or practically about systemic strategy and I think that's part of it just saying keep the family together well that's just sort of an establishment message but of course the subtext bled out even in the piece done in the banner about Better Together and of course you're not gonna fool anyone with that. You're gonna have to figure out how to do this now maybe I'll just do one video and then be done as time continues to rush on. There's a lot of anxiety because well the conservatives the confessionalists seem to be in control and the confessionalists really haven't been in control for 60 70 80 years. I don't know that the confessional lists are in control I think that basically the establishment has lost the confidence of the moderates that the establishment will no longer sort of keep order in the denomination. The establishment is going to allow chaos to run in the denomination that's gonna make moderates nervous and so moderate votes votes for again really the first time in many years sort of swung with the conservatives so now the conservatives have power. Most of these conservatives however are Millennials and younger. Remember the two groups that are growing in the denomination? Old people and young conservatives and a lot of people think well the young conservatives are going to establish a tyranny. That isn't true at all. One of the things that I saw very clearly in Senate 2020-22 is that the conservatives are not looking to simply become a new establishment. They don't care about the establishment's institutions. They don't really want to run the show. They want to run their local churches and develop networks and for the most part be left alone and they don't want their money being used for things that they don't believe are consistent with the Bible or the Word of God. That's very simple. That's what they keep saying again and again and again. Now most of the establishment is quite a bit older. Let's see looking on this website and I don't know everybody's age but Doug Bratz but Kyle's young, Rebecca's young, Joel's youngish. If that's the Roger Nelson's sometimes there's multiple. He's older than I am. If Dave Struck is a year older than I am. Joel Skurs, so there's a bunch of people. Dale Cooper retired. Keith Dornbusch older than I am. Jay Grant, Jankey classmate a little bit older than I am. Meg Janista younger. David Cole retired. Ida, I've probably retired or my age or older. Ron Knightham retired. D. Rekker just retired. Joel's young. John's retired. Andy Rice Camps retired. James Scott's retired. John Terpstra might be retired. Tom Walcott getting towards retirement. Colin Watson retired. Derek's younger. So but they're leaders. They're in a little different place. The new young conservatives don't want control. They're gonna they're gonna control us. They're gonna be tyrannical. I don't think they're really interested in that. They're not looking to own the institutions that the establishment cherishes. They just want those institutions to stop promoting the establishment values in the name and with the money of the conservatives. Conservatives have been literally sending this message to Senate over 20 years in overture after overture that Senate after Senate has basically been playing Madad Muhammad Ali float like a flutter, flutter by, butterfly sting like a bee or doing the Ropadome. That's what Senate's been doing with these conservatives for a long time and they're pretty much tired of it. Progressives fear that the conservatives want to control. They don't. They're more libertarian than tyrannical. This is the big shift of the 1980s conservatism. CRC conservatives of the pre 1980s died of exhaustion. They were destroyed by the counterculture. Now the desire for control is on the left. They won't rest until their vision of diversity, inclusivity, and equity is ubiquitous. They have inherited the right person's burden of the old CRC conservatives. Confessionalists are happy enough with me in my house and they will leave you alone. This is not just, this is not so much a coup as a fence. Progressives are playing the long game. Everyone will evolve. Conservatives are now playing an even longer game. Progressives will die out because they don't reproduce or cohere to new, or cohere, or cohere, new conservatives believe. Conservatives today are ironically Darwinian. Only those who reproduce inherit the earth. Look how good the Amish are doing. Conservatives aren't worried about the CRC dying. They'll start a new one. They're entrepreneurial. They did abide without any money from any classes and they seem to be flourishing in many ways without a long-term plan, Lloyd says on Voices. They don't really want to inherit the legacy obligations of taking care of all the cherished institutional jewels that the establishment has lovingly built. They're sort of NIMBYs, just not in my backyard. Abide won't rebuild the banner. Why should they? Look at what they've done on their YouTube channel. They get celebrities from the broader evangelical world to make their arguments. Abide has already replaced the banner and on the cheap. Progressives are confused because they think they are fighting mid-20th century tyranny, always fighting the last war. Conservatives are happy to walk away if they have to. Synod 2022 showed them that they might not have to. The CRC establishment will lose either way. Either they keep all their institutions but struggle to maintain them without the feeding funding network that flourished between the World War II and the 2000 and that network is going away. There's enough of it. 20 per 30 percent of the denomination is probably sort of on the progressive side but so much of that is concentrated in West Michigan. You're just not going to get the kind of circulation that really fed West Michigan for the last 70 years. Or they get shown the door because they hold to their convictions. What will really break their hearts is that they see that those who beat them at Synod will have no appetite or desire to maintain the institutions the establishment was displaced from. This is a very sad story. Establishment elites will then try to rebuild some of what they're losing. It will be cheaper, newer, better suited to the current environment. Bees make hives, foxes make dens, CRC establishment types make institutions. It's their nature. Alright, I hate to bore the rest of you with a whole bunch of CRC inside baseball but I want to do what I can to facilitate the conversation and this is an open invitation. Now I'm going to be busy in the month of May if you want to come in and see what My Little Corner is doing in May. Make your way to Chino, California and buy a ticket from John Van Donk and listen to myself and Jonathan Peugeot and John Vervecky talk about the Christian Reformed Church not hardly at all, probably not at all period because this does not occupy most of my local work or in fact my online work but I do care for my denomination. It is my people and I want to do what I can to see it flourish and so in that sense I haven't wanted to see anything break up but I fear something is going to break up and so whatever breakup we have I'd like it to be productive and whatever comes out the other end I want it to be more productive than what happened with the United Reformed Church or the Protestant Reformed Church which broke up in the days of my grandfather. So that's why I do this, that's my appeal. So again I'd be happy to talk to all one body, better together, abide. I had Lloyd on the channel, Lloyd was happy to be on there and again it's sort of like, so I've been listening to people like Brett Weinstein and Glenn Lowry talk about Tucker Carlson and what someone, a lefty like Brett Weinstein says is conservatives will talk to me and you know YouTube is a place where people have little to little to lose and I've you know I've not been able to follow up with some people who are willing to talk but again I'd love to see a robust conversation between the two parties before or after Synod I'm fine because truth is Synod is going to make some decisions and it's going to be consequential and it's quite likely that after this Synod the Christian Reformed Church will not be the same again and that was part of my point about the banner video that I just did that if you read the banner you wouldn't have any sense that in many ways this world of the Christian Reformed Church is about to change dramatically it happened in 2022 it's gonna happen again in 2023 none of us know exactly how it will go which is of course why we have the Synod so they have my hearts in this I love my church I love my people I love my progressive friends I love my conservative friends I love the people on again I go through this I go through this list and better together and these are I don't know all of these people but many of these people I know these are my people you know Derek Derek's I'll held my children I held his when my mother's church needed a new pastor and you know and Derek went there I was thrilled I don't want my mother having a lousy pastor Derek's the best Colin Watson I have just a world of affection for you've heard me talk about Dale Cooper on this channel David Cole worked with for years I see him when I go down to Southern California my synodical deputy duty Joel Rankin was a friend went to the Dominican Republic after me James Scop I did a blurb on one of his book be happy to talk to James Mary Stedgink again our mothers were roommates at Calvin this is a family thing in the Christian Reformed Church so these are all my people and I love them and do I want to keep the family together absolutely but like I said Christian Reformed Church loves to solve things with structure maybe now's the time we use some of those tools all right enough said on this if you want ongoing conversation join CRC voices just be prepared to try to be succinct don't think that you're getting the flow of the conversation when newbies come in they need a little training hold on to yourself don't start name-calling I'm a moderator on CRC voices to Bill Vist does a much stronger job of it and you will get called out for bad behavior on CRC voices so leave a comment