https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4_W4rQw1xxc

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm still in Grand Rapids after Synod, visiting some family and friends. I really haven't had much of any time to make videos, but I have about an hour this afternoon to make a video. I head back to Sacramento tomorrow and I thought I'd make a quick video on some continuing thoughts about the current situation in the Christian Reformed Church with respect to the Human Sexuality Report and the decisions that Synod 2022 made and you can find a couple of those videos, the last recent videos I did, focused on that topic. Now, I wanted to continue on with some of my thoughts and conversation with this. A good place for email conversation and this is CRC Voices where there's a really good group of mature, long-term Christian Reformed people on both sides of the perspective that are involved in, I think, productive, respectful dialogue with concerning these issues. I know a lot of people have signed up for CRC Voices, get sort of snowed under by the volume of emails. There are ways to sign up to the group and to not receive emails, but just to read them online and you might be interested in that. If you do sign up, I'd encourage you to by all means post, introduce yourself and get involved in that conversation. One of the issues going back and forth on CRC Voices has been the question of nomenclature. One of the long-term members of the group, that's a friend of mine who I very much respect, objected to the labeling that I used in my previous video of traditional and progressive, so I decided to try out some other nomenclature and so I'll be trying that out in this video and you can let me know what you think about it in the comments section. With respect to the two groups within the Christian Reformed Church of North America, I'm using confessing CRC and affirming CRC. I'm sure as this confessional conversation and conflict continues to evolve, hopefully both groups can settle on nomenclature that work for both groups. That's pretty essential if you're trying to have a conversation in an area as difficult as this is. So the traditionalists, I'm using confessing CRC as, partly because in this synod they reaffirmed a particular interpretation of the Heidelberg Catechism and for affirming, basically because that's a common label for churches that are affirming same-sex marriage and a variety of those issues. Now the confessing CRC is prioritizing the historic confessional nature of the CRC and understanding confessing, confessions to be both uniting, in other words we can unite along these issues and we can have differences of opinion on other issues. In other words, it's a way to sort of limit the amount of subscription and the boundaries, yet it's also obviously a boundary creating document. And in the Christian Reformed Church we have the Heidelberg Catechism, the Belger Confession, and the Canons of Dort. And so the confessing CRC is prioritizing the historic confessional nature of the Christian Reformed Church. In another synodical decision, Synod, they had a lot of confessional conversations, this particular Synod, they also affirmed that anyone who denies penal substitutionary atonement is outside of the, especially the Heidelberg Catechism. It doesn't say that, you must say that that is the only model of atonement that you're interested in. But there are some people, or at least there's fear of some people within the Christian Reformed Church, that are denying penal substitutionary atonement completely and basically that decision of this Synod says that they are in some confessional, confessing trouble with respect to what the Confessions say and what the Covenant of Officebearers says. Now, the confessing CRC basically has the same challenges in the culture that the Church has had with same-sex marriage. And so in many respects, the moderates and the conservatives lined up to say, we have no intention of changing the stance of the Christian Reformed Church on this issue in terms of its theoretical. And obviously by making the interpretation of Heidelberg Catechism question and answer 108 in the traditional way, what they are essentially saying is that this is the, this is the subscriptional standard of the Church moving forward. And so basically they have all the same problems and challenges that they had before with respect to the changes in culture and the prior to the decision in the United States and Canada to make same-sex marriage legal. In many ways, the Church has just simply accepted any legal state marriage within the Church as being recognized by the Church. In the early days of after the United States decision of same-sex marriage, there was some discussion as to whether or not the Christian Reformed Church should, like the Roman Catholic Church, in a sense have a dual system of marriage. There are legal marriages, legal civil marriages, and state marriages that the Church doesn't recognize. And in fact, there was an overture, and that overture didn't actually, didn't exactly come up in this Senate. I know that there was a study committee. There was an overture that asked if in the Christian Reformed Church you could divide that further and have people be married in the Church but not in the eyes of the state because that way it wouldn't impact, let's say, someone's pension benefits that perhaps they had from a previous marriage. So the study committee said no, and you should be married in both your civil relationship and your ecclesial church relationship. But this is part of the tension that has evolved in this conversation when the United States and Canada both recognized same-sex marriage as legal. The Christian Reformed Church could no longer simply adopt whatever marriage was legal by state standards and assume it within the Church. As many of you know, the Roman Catholics sort of separate that. You can get divorced and remarried in the eyes of the state, but the Church won't necessarily accept that. So functionally within the Roman Catholic Church, and those of you who are Roman Catholic, please correct me if I'm wrong, there is in a sense a state marriage and an ecclesial marriage, and those things are separated. And because the confessional CRC, as I'm calling that, part of the CRC that is not affirming, they are basically saying that, well, these are all the same issues that we've had before, and those issues really didn't change. Now part of what happens missiologically with this is they're trying to leverage the countercultural energy that expresses the transformation of conversion. Lyle Schaller, a number of years ago, noted that in church growth terms, counterculture churches tend to grow better than culturally aligned churches. Why? Because people who have taken a countercultural position on many issues need a church around them to continue to maintain their countercultural issues and to reinforce their countercultural issues. And this is why the Christian Reformed Church is sort of a moderate Protestant denomination in North America, sometimes has difficulty competing with certain kinds of people with more conservative Reformed denominations. For example, driving around Grand Rapids, I was talking with Bernie, the leader of the West Michigan Estuary, and he noted that the Protestant Reformed churches are growing. The Protestant Reformed Church split happened in the 1920s here in Western Michigan out of the Christian Reformed Church, and I think many people assumed that the Protestant Reformed Church would simply die away. But in fact, in this current cultural climate, there is a market for, there is an audience, I'm using consumerist terms here, there is an audience for a more countercultural conservative community, and so the Protestant Reformed Church has in fact grown, and in fact they've recently had a split, and when we were driving around Hudsonville, he pointed out to me, you have the Protestant Reformed Church and you have the Reformed Protestant Church, which is a split off of the Protestant Reformed Church, but I'm not exactly up to speed on what aspect of the denial of common grace has caused that split. Now the affirming CRC is going to have some different challenges. They are going to tend to sort of opposite the confessing CRC. They are probably going to prioritize, prioritize in their rhetoric the evolving, reforming nature of the Christian Reformed Church. There's definitely going to be an urban-rural split in terms of these two groups. Their affirming posture seems to resolve the challenge that the church faces with the advent of same-sex marriage, so on that score, the affirming CRC will likely simply accept any civil marriage, anyone who is married in the state, and that marriage will be recognized in the church. So that tension that is developed in the confessing CRC side, the affirming CRC side will not have that particular tension. Someone comes in regardless of same sex or opposite sex and they say they're married, the church is going to accept them as a married couple. Now they were going, they're missiologically, they're going to try to leverage the progressive energy in the culture. Obviously this is a challenge on the confessing side. This will be seen as an advantage on the affirming side that they no longer are sort of opposite the culture in terms of the wave that is quite clearly seen here in the month of June with all of the rainbow flags, with all of the influence work that is being done on social media in Hollywood, affirming same-sex marriage. In other words, they are going to be in alignment with the culture. Now that alignment, that alignment or countercultural position obviously sort of cuts both ways. If someone is by virtue of their participation in the culture, offended by those who have not yet evolved into accepting LGBTQ couples, they are going to probably say, well, that's at least not a barrier. I'm willing to visit your church. And this sort of gets into Aaron Wren's positive, neutral and negative, I'll call it a valence. I've talked about that quite a bit in my earlier videos about four years ago, where it used to be, let's say 50 years ago, that being an evangelical Christian might be seen as a little bit intense, perhaps a little bit prudish, but you were basically in cultural alignment. And now, of course, those things have flipped. That flipping is, of course, different from zip code to zip code. There are certainly places in the country where this is different, but generally speaking, especially in urban areas, because there's, I think, an urban versus rural element to this conflict. Churches that are affirming, that's for a whole group of people not going to be an issue when they come into the church. Oh, okay. They're an affirming church. They're not complaining. They're not countercultural. But as I pointed out before, with respect to Lyle Schaller, overall, being countercultural tends to be a church growth positive. There's a smaller market, depending on your zip code, that perhaps would be willing to consider attending your church and give you a listen. But depending on what side you're on, if you already have a variety of countercultural positions, you will be more motivated to attend the church regularly, give sacrificially to that church, embrace a bunch of the beliefs that that church has, perhaps beliefs that you never thought of, but you are in alignment with them counterculturally. Obviously, on the progressive end of things, in some ways, in terms of the ascendant morality of the culture, because there's alignment there, you don't have that obstacle. And that was part of the conversation that you could hear at Synod. At some point, I might dive into some of those Synod recordings and just use examples of these arguments. But you could hear the arguments from the affirming CRC very clearly that this will be a real obstacle for our churches in terms of engaging their community, because once you are public with respect to your countercultural position, well, now suddenly for a good number of people, there's an obstacle. I don't know that I would want to go to a church that isn't affirming. And in fact, I've had that conversation being from California with many, many people. And there are some people who are already Christians and won't consider going to a non-affirming church. And so that is an issue. But as I said, that issue tends to cut both ways. Now, beyond Synod, these two groups are going to also face different challenges and obstacles. In terms of the confessing CRC, Synod made a decision, but seeing change is difficult for some conservative congregations. We had a church in Ripon leave the denomination over this issue, I think because the conservatives won almost everything they could have asked for at this Synod, this will probably give pause to conservative churches that might have been considering leaving the denomination and encourage them to be a little bit more patient and less nervous in terms of their fear that the denomination is sliding liberal. One of the issues that we're going to increasingly see in this is whether or not the conservatives are going to try to, in one way or another, to impact and influence the establishment. So you have, let's say, the confessing CRC and you have the affirming CRC, and then you have the establishment. And these are people that are embedded in institutions. These are people who, I'm going to make a video at some point about the structure of the CRC. These are people who have positions in establishment and they make decisions. The Office of Social Justice has been a lightning rod for a number of years with conservatives, and one of the real questions that we have moving forward is to what degree will, let's say, basically just for the sake of simplicity, say 20% of the CRC is progressive, 20% of the CRC is conservative, and 60% is moderate. But within that moderate, you have sort of center-left and center-right. So overall, generally speaking, CRC, since the end of the Second World War and speeding up in the 70s, 80s, and 90s and aughts, CRC establishment has tended to be center-left in terms of the spectrum of the CRC. A big question will be to what degree will the conservatives want to make a play for positional power within the establishment? I think it has been difficult for many in the Christian Reformed Church establishment if you want to get hired in a high-profile denominational job, for example, if you were not welcoming of women in church office. Almost everyone who seems to be hired is a proponent of women in church office, even though only about half of the congregations in the Christian Reformed Church are open to having women elders, and the number of congregations that are actually open to hiring a woman solo or lead pastor is probably less than 25% and could, in fact, in actuality be less than 10%. And that's sort of a complex thing to try to figure out. But the confessing CRC, many people will know that SINNA didn't make a change, and so that will settle down, let's say, center-right or conservative people. Now, how to apply this decision in the future with institutions? SINNA in the end struck a conservative note with respect to confessions, but took a moderate posture with respect to classes Grand Rapids East and Nealon Avenue, and I think that reassured a good number of moderate left people that were not sort of heading out into a witch hunt right away, although there will be visits to Nealon Avenue and there will be visits to classes Grand Rapids East, and because the votes in SINNA were not close, this will come up next year, and so the pressure will continue to be on. Now, how this all gets applied and how there are other overtures that are going on that ask questions to what degree can a church be, let's say, removed from the denomination, and there are a lot of questions in terms of how this new confessional standard will be applied, it will be very interesting. So I'm a synodical deputy, which means that I hear a fair number of examinations of ministerial candidates. The way it works in the Christian Reformed Church is before you are able to or you accept your call, before you are installed into office in your first charge, you are examined by a classist. It's not at all unusual in these classical examinations to get questions on hot top, on hot button issues, and part of what goes on is that people, if they feel quite confident on a hot button issue, that they are in alignment with their classes or the congregation that they are going to, will give a fairly clear answer. If they're a little nervous about what the room is feeling on a particular hot button issue, they'll give a little bit more vague of an answer, vague enough perhaps to satisfy the politics in the room. Now that this decision is made, I would expect that in many classical exams, this question will come up and people will be expecting a clear answer. Are you able to sign the form of subscription or the Covenant of Office Bears with a clear conscience on this position? This will in and of itself become a factor as the denomination moves forward. This will be especially true with, let's say, new hires at Calvin University. I had a good friend send me a text after watching my previous video on this and he said, that's the one thing I quibbled with on your video, he says that most faculty at Calvin will sort of keep their opinions to their self, they want to keep their job, and I think he's probably right, even though a number of them signed, about a third of Calvin staff and faculty wrote a letter that recommended not embracing the Human Sexuality Report. So, but I don't think there's going to be a witch hunt. Kristen Dumais has been quite public in suggesting that this will drive some current faculty out of Calvin University. We'll have to see what comes, but when it comes to hiring and when it comes to new calls, I think that's where we'll begin to see this effect. Now I think it's going, there's going to be at least a year between now and Synod 2023 on this topic in terms of visitation with Neoland and Classis Grand Rapids East. I really don't expect Neoland and Classis Grand Rapids East to change their position on these, and so it's going to take probably a year or two after that to see whether Synod actually follows through and removes churches that cannot agree to the new confessional standard that Synod 2022 laid down. So again, this is going to be, we're going to watch this go in the next two to three years. Now the opposite side of that is on the affirming CRC, where for a lot of people, just a tiny percentage of the Christian Reformed Church closely follows Synod in some of these things, and for a lot of people, you know, things, local news picked up this story, religious publications like the Religious News Service and Christianity Today and other other special denominations and news people are paying attention to this and following this, but a lot of people are going to feel like, well nothing really happened. Neoland is still CRC, Classis Grand Rapids East is still CRC, many of them are sort of soft, functionally affirming, and we'll see what in fact Neoland does with respect to the deacon that is in question. So I think a lot of people from the affirming CRC are probably going to continue to go on business as usual, they'll be constructing arguments why this was a bad idea and why it shouldn't happen, etc. etc. The difficulty that they're going to run into is that in fact Synod did make a decision and it did happen and even though the consequences are going to be felt slowly, as I said probably with new hires and with examinations for people that are coming into new positions, the effects are going to be had and in the next couple of years, anecdotal stories are going to come up and the affirming CRC is going to continue to feel more and more pressure on this score and I think that pressure is going to encourage more and more confessional conversations both between the confessing CRC and the affirming CRC, but especially within a group that might be considered affirming CRC and I think increasingly they are going to be asking structural questions. Is there going to be a split to the right or a split to the left in the Christian Reformed Church? I don't know. There are increasingly going to be these gotcha moments where people are going to feel like trauma and people are going to complain and that's going to continue to inflame the conflict, the conflict that again very well may lead into churches leaving and perhaps churches leaving together and deciding they want to form their own such group and of course we haven't seen really a church split to the left in the CRC and that would provide probably some of the most interesting confessional conversations that I could imagine. What would they use for their confessions? Would they use the Heidelberg Catechism? Would they try to alter the Heidelberg Catechism or do something like the Reformed Church of America does and say well we say that this is an expression of historic Reformed Christianity which doesn't really apply to me. Would they let's say take the Barman Confession, the Bellhar Confession, the contemporary testimony written by the Christian Reformed Church and leave the Canons of Dor, the Belgic Confession and the Heidelberg Catechism behind? If in fact they were really thinking about well how would they then relate to the other Reformed communions early in Senate? They always have fraternal delegates from other Reformed denominations. How would they relate to let's say the PCUSA and what would their ecumenical relationships look like? If in fact we do have a departure of churches to the left, those confessional conversations I am very very interested in because I'm very curious exactly what they decide to do. Part of what's interesting in this is that Classes Grand Rapids East is in many ways the establishment classes. Almost anybody who works at Calvin University or in the denominational offices goes to a church in this classes and the establishment is not accustomed to losing. The establishment really hasn't lost many fights for the last 50 years which is beyond at least the working memory of almost everyone who is currently holding a position here. So this is a very new experience for many of these people and they're going to find it disorienting. Classes Grand Rapids East is different from every place else in the denomination and to one degree or another they live in a bubble and I think this is a wake-up moment where they have to realize that the rest of the denomination that they are tied to is quite a bit more conservative than they are and they have no plans on evolving with them. In my previous video I talked about how in many ways the establishment and people in Western Michigan imagined that this was simply going to evolve like the women in church office conversation evolved but that really hasn't evolved in the way that they thought it would or to the degree that they thought it would and for that reason there's a lot of people who feel quite dispossessed by this. A couple more comments on confessing CRC versus affirming CRC. Another element that is interesting to listen to when you listen to the two sides talk is the eschatological framing. Now a lot of Protestant Reformed eschatology is now and not yet and this particular conflict is driving a fork in the now and not yet. The confessing CRC I think is adopting more of an apocalyptic posture bearing witness to the countercultural kingdom. Faithfulness in this life anticipating reward for sacrifice given for the next life. Shouldn't be in the next life on the slide. Whereas the affirming CRC tends to have a lot more rhetoric that is realized eschatology. Realizing the kingdom, bringing in the kingdom, experiencing the kingdom and if you listen to the speeches by both sides you can very clearly hear this sort of different posture with respect to a shared eschatology. A lot of liberation talk, a lot of justice talk, that tends to be the rhetoric of the affirming CRC and as the conflict develops even this kind of eschatological posturing will tend to inflame the conflict as they go forward. A lot of this rhetoric is about realizing the fruits of the unfolding redemption here and now. Now as I said this is a shared eschatology by both sides but what you tend to hear is emphasis in the rhetoric that both sides are using and what usually happens with a conflict is it increases polarization. So confessing will tend to double down more on talk about judgment and life after death and reward and some of those more apocalyptic themes whereas the affirming will tend to focus more on this dispensation, on realizing our redemption and realizing our freedom and and you know that's very much what affirming means. So you'll hear those emphases in the rhetoric of the two groups. Another element that's going to happen in here will be the slippery slope dynamics and even though it's sort of affirming CRC boilerplate to point out the slippery slope fallacy as it's called, a lot of confessing CRC people will say the slippery slippery slope isn't a fallacy, we've been watching it happen and ironically a lot of that is actually set up by the way that affirming CRC people frame their arguments. Again if you go back to the synod recordings you will find a number of people arguing well it was African-American, it was racial conflicts and racial evolution, it was interracial marriage and then it was women serving in office and so many affirming will sort of set up this this narrative of liberation that has all of the usual elements on it and the argument goes it's sort of a slippery slope argument in reverse that well we are we are not slipping down the slope in fact we are climbing the arc of justice heading towards the eschaton. Confessing CRCs will tend to emphasize arguments like the Bible says no and I want to make another video exploring some of the broader things that I talked about in my video with respect to consciousness and higher beings and spirit and some of that stuff with respect to synod because I've had a lot of thoughts about that watching the CRC it's kind of applying some of that language as I watch the Christian Reformed Church work through these things but that's going to be a different video. Confessing CRC the Bible says no this is against the Bible what more argument do you need? Didn't the Bible then that then sets up the didn't the Bible also say no to divorce and remarriage that issue comes up regularly in this in fact some people on the floor were basically saying well the confessing CRC is now going to turn back the CRC position on divorce and remarriage I don't think it will. Some were arguing that the Human Sexuality Report turns back the position on divorce and remarriage I don't think it will but that's one of the issues that comes up on the confessing side well if we were able to accommodate divorced and remarried why can't we accommodate this evolution and again back to the confessing argument. Liberationist narratives with respect to slaves and women these arguments are going to continue to dog the confessing side because the way the cultural conversation goes it pretty much sets things up in that way. The confessing CRC I think is going to continue to I think double down on narratives that have to deal with sort of ascetic renunciation and one element that is often overlooked in this is that there are numbers of members of the Christian Reformed Church that are same-sex attracted and decided to live celibate lives. Now they don't come out as same-sex attracted they are just quietly living celibate lives keeping the fact that they are same-sex attracted to themselves. They are on the confessing side many of them have huge sunk costs into this position and quietly you will find some of the most ardent supporters of the confessing CRC position to be in that group and this came out in the Human Sexuality Report. Also some who are same-sex attracted who decided that they wanted to marry they wanted to marry the others the opposite sex for the sake of the society and for having children and there are younger people that do that now. Now that triggers the born that way arguments and a lot of the other liberationist arguments because you can find many others in the Christian Reformed Church that before this before what sort of the broader cultural gay liberation movements in fact were same-sex attracted and married and then at some point the marriage broke up and so on the on the affirming side the argument is ah see that's the wrong way to go if they hadn't been closeted in the first place then they never would have made the bad decision to marry someone of the opposite sex and perhaps never tell them they were same-sex attracted and then some things came out and then the marriage blew up and etc etc so those are out there but there are also in the denomination people who are same-sex attracted or to a degree same-sex attracted that married a member of the opposite sex and stayed there and were able to maintain their secret or perhaps just let a few others pastors or their spouses or other trusted people understand their secret and quite happily kept with the decision they made and some of them as I said are some of the most ardent supporters of the confessing CRC. Now here's the question we often hear this label LGBTQ community that's a very vague community as Dave Chappelle has pointed out but do you consider those who are same-sex attracted either side be or decided in fact to marry do you consider them as part of the community and that gets into more of the conversations and observations I want to get to in further videos where I talk about the spirit of a particular community the spirit of the Senate the spirit of an advisory committee the spirit of a denomination the spirit of a family and some of the talk of consciousness and shared consciousness and constructed consciousness and and how some of those things work so the the confessing CRC folks the way they address the slippery slope is basically imagine that they stand at the top and they look down and they say don't take these next steps or you're going to get lost and slide all the way to the bottom the way the affirming CRC sort of reverses it they're sort of at the bottom saying well we are climbing a mountain and we are going to climb it together now it was very interesting that there were some born that way positionings happening on the floor of Senate which if you're around this conversation a lot or you read someone like Andrew Sullivan you know that that particular argument is quite passe and further letters down the alphabet and also as there were a number of people at Senate that sort of said well LGBTQ is not really the way to frame this it's let's just use queer for all of them now I think affirming CRC's that look at let's say someone who has a similar narrative to what I just talked about they were same-sex attracted learned this very young understood the stigma in the broader population decided to stay in the closet decided to perhaps to marry someone of the opposite sex hoping that their same-sex attraction experiences would go away and it didn't and then at some point the marriage blew up they never told their spouse about the situation about how they felt which isn't uncommon and the marriage blew up and then now of course the narrative of that is see that that goes in that goes to show that the affirming posture is the better posture there are a number of issues and and then so then they find someone who let's say is a baby boomer who their marriage fell apart they have children they've sort of reconciled this they they're used to working in the church and everything you know for all intents and purposes the way that that individual manages their sexuality they would prefer to have a same-sex monogamous relationship that's a very easy accommodation it's a very easy transition for a church because in all other respects everything else sort of stays the same and that's in many ways the argument behind the argument saying that actually same-sex marriage is a conservatizing movement because you're taking a conservative institution like monogamous marriage and you're adapting it for same-sex couples and what you're looking for is again male-female for life you're looking male-male or female for life the small adaptation and all this is exactly what the church is affirming and when I listen to many of the baby boomers let's say in the all one body videos making that argument it's very clear that these are the people that they're arguing for if you listen more carefully to a lot of the Millennials and let's say Gen Z ears that are using queer it's not entirely sure how this is going to go so in a sense the confessing CRC and drawing a hard line is saying well we've got this we've got these slippery slopes that will we're ready to deal with and we pretty much know the territory I think for a lot of people in places like West Michigan that have some individuals among them who have this sort of baby boomer narrative of being in the closet getting married something falls apart the disclosure is made they came out now that may very well be a function of a particular broader cultural narrative or a particular narrative within a conservative Christian community that narrative is increasingly going to end when you have people who let's say at a very young age were encouraged and in fact celebrated to pursue non heterosexual gender identities roles and practices what does the church's stance on marriage look like and it's the affirming CRC that's really going to get hit with those issues often when I have conversations with people from let's say the affirming side of the CRC I will challenge them on this and I'll find many that say no it's it's marriage but just for same-sex attracted and I'll challenge them on there's a whole bunch of other issues that if you're paying attention to the broader conversation in terms of abolishing the gender binary or in fact even the sexual binary the affirming CRC is open to all of those difficulties in a way that the confessing CRC will not be open to those difficulties what about open marriages among consenting adults is that okay in church what about as Nadia Bolz Weber you can you can you see you can just look at the main line and you can watch all of these things roll out what about ethically sourced pornography is will that be affirmed now one of the interesting things about the Senate was that both sides of committee eight came down with a rather dramatic and strident condemnation of pornography but that's not exactly where the conversation is going or where the culture is going and so the affirming CRC is going to have to deal with that affirming sex workers now when I talk about sex workers I think a lot of people in the Christian Reformed Church imagine women who are in deep poverty and are let's say for lack of a better word street prostitutes and well that's a pretty ugly and difficult form of prostitution and it's usually associated with a straight extreme property or drug abuse or you know a whole bunch of really ugly practices that either side would condemn but as in the case of a woman in Sacramento who wanted to send her kids to the Roman Catholic school there who was making healthy six figures on OnlyFans well would a would Grand Rapids Christian school allow her children in their school I don't know that would be a very interesting conversation to hear people sort of sort out if this woman decided to go to an affirming CRC would the church celebrate her OnlyFans page as a legitimate sexual expression now I think most people and the affirming CRC would say no but again that's a theoretical no and another element of this conversation which is again I think a follow-up video at some point is the institutional versus the personal because whereas many on the confessing CRC side would say these are institutional perspectives in terms of the personal relationships I'll still be their friend so well how does that work when you know here you have this lovely family coming in father mother two children and things are going along and by the way suddenly there's a rumor that she has an OnlyFans page and she's you know making you know at some level of pornography and earning money from it would she be allowed into membership would she be allowed into leadership and of course you follow this all the way down through the institutions of the church and the last point on this is always the clergy point because people seem very ready to say well I this is okay in terms of the members of the church but would you in fact want your minister to be in an open marriage and just think that through I think most in the affirming CRC would say no but this then gets into the question of of ideals because I think again as I said in a previous video I think it would significantly help the conversation if we move away from law and prohibitions and policies and get back into a conversation about ideals because I think it would actually help both sides the confessing CRC I don't think it's a difficult side it's a difficult for the confessing CRC to talk about this in terms of ideals because confessing CRCs especially in the moderate moderate left or moderate right have a lot of a negotiation that has happened with respect to ideals there's the question of cohabitation before marriage which has become very common in the culture and you'll find it in the churches can you can you cohabitate with someone and be a deacon in a confessing CRC at this point the answer would be no does that work in an affirming CRC can you let's say have a deacon who is living with a girlfriend or a boyfriend and be a deacon in good standing in the affirming CRC is that allowed you can see that the confessional conversations just emerge from this how much flex is there in any given community you're going to find that in sort of the confessing CRC side thing outside of it and the affirming CRC side the liberationist perspective is cautious about ideals because ideals feel exclusive can you celebrate an ideal and not make people who for some reason or another either can't or won't achieve that ideal will they feel bad about themselves will they feel excluded will they feel marginalized because in fact the entire shape of an ideal has ideal and margin built into it and so all of this which is now liturgical language about marginalized pushes against the use of ideals in community and I think that's actually going to be a problem it's going to be more of a problem for the affirming CRC side of thing so the liberationist perspective is cautious about ideals because for some I for some ideals are exclusivistic and must be transcended to invoke the sort of liberationist moment which I think has become sort of a psycho technology in liberate in churches that are really hitting home on these liberationist themes now this liberationism isn't exclusive to the affirming CRC and the confessing CRC someone who lets let's say embraces an ascetic countercultural movement will also have a liberational experience because they are liberated from let's say their desires in this situation so that's what I've got for this video and let me know what you think