https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3iwzYsriWK8

 Hi, this is Paul. Ever since one of you sent me over to the Base Camp people, I've had fun watching them. And what's been funny is that a bunch of corner peoples whose accounts I recognize have been leaving comments. Sometimes people are telling them, dropping my name for them, so I'm sure they at this point know who I am. But I just recently watched this video on, again, their religion. I'm fascinated by these two, and apparently some of you are as well. And so we're going to play some of this video today. And they were happy about their analytics, so we're probably driving some traffic to their channel. But I want to talk about that. And I want to talk about that in the way that I had talked, you know, Sam and I were talking the other day. And this goes back to this Ross Douthit video that comes from, oh, so a few years ago. Ross Douthit, Tara Isabella Burton, Isabella Burton, and Steve Smith on The Next American Religion. And this followed, I think, I don't think, I don't remember if the Decadence book came out before or after this, but Douthit's books, so these are the two Douthit books that I have, his Decadent Society book and the Bad Religion book. I'm curious about his Lyme Disease book, because I think that his experience with Lyme Disease is part of the unmaking of this vision of a rational world. But I haven't picked up his Lyme Disease book yet. But one of the things I appreciate about Douthit is he's a very patient, broad thinker. And here, obviously talking to Isabella Burton, they're asking questions about new religions and the formation of new religions. And when I listen to the base camp, Malcolm and Simone Collins, I very much see sort of new religions in formation. And part of the reason I think they, I mean, the Mormonism and how they're like Mormonism in terms of their perspectives, of course, coming out of a, both of them coming out of a Calvinist past, it's just fascinating watching these things sort of develop. So, but first I want to remind, because of the churn, people come and go, but this comment that Douthit made that I've never lost, and obviously it stuck with Sam the other day when we were talking, Sam Tieteman, I got his name right, he corrected me in the comments. I wanted to start maybe with Tara's point about sort of the durability of this kind of, I'll conflate your two points and say the durability of imminent individualist religion in American life, right, and the fact that you have plenty of divination and God within spirituality going back to the 18th century. It seems to me that if you look at sort of the historical pattern in American life, you have sort of either surges of that kind of spirituality or particular religious geniuses who manifest it, and then the movements and institutions that they build have historically then been sort of pulled back towards a kind of normative Christian structure or framework to use Steve's account, right. So, you know, to take the examples of the two biggest 19th century examples maybe are Christian science, which comes out of New Thought in certain ways, and Mormonism, which gets its start in the sort of, in the kind of divination happy world of upstate New York in the early 19th century, and both of those, if you look at them from a sort of how Christian are they perspective, at the outset, you can make a case that they're both pretty stark departures, maybe not getting all the way to something we call paganism or post Christianity, but clearly really stark departures. You know, in Mormonism's case, you know, you mentioned polyamory, right, as a feature of the contemporary political landscape. Early Mormonism goes all the way to polygamy. And then over the course of the next hundred years, you get to a point whereby the time of the 1950s and 1960s, both Christian science and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, while they're still regarded as heretical or dangerous or cultic by some other Christian denominations, are I think reasonably seen as connected to a kind of, you know, a kind of Christian tradition in American life. And there's clearly an aspiration, at least among parts of the leadership of those, of those, what become those churches to move in that direction. And what that hasn't, it seems to me one thing that's been different since the 60s and 70s, right, is that that hasn't happened to the same degree, right. So we've gone through the sort of Marianne Williamson presidential campaign, which unfortunately has not won enough support to merit the fascination that I've applied to it. But I feel like a 19th century version of Marianne Williamson would have started a church, right, and would have, you know, and over the course of 50 years, there would be a sort of Williamsonian denomination that had some sort of ambiguous relationship to the Protestant center in American life. And, you know, Williamson has some kind of institution now, but it's very clear that she doesn't regard herself as in that light. And the same goes for, you know, figures ranging from Deepak Chopra to Oprah Winfrey and so on. And so I'm curious what you think spending time in these religious worlds, what happens when that doesn't happen, right? Like what happens to this kind of spiritual energy if there isn't one institution building or two a sort of pull back towards a kind of, you know, quasi normative Christian framework? Does it just continue? Are we in just a sort of endless cycle, right, where astrology was big when my parents were young and when I was growing up, you know, I knew what my parents' sign was. And then by the time I got to college. And of course, if you look at Saturday Night Live and men thinking about the Roman Empire, all the women are still thinking about astrology. In the 1990s, nobody talked about astrology anymore, but now it's back. Like, do we just run a cycle or is there, what do you think happens? So I think I would motion that, I mean, you mentioned Oprah and I can think of Gwyneth Paltrow, that the lifestyle brand may have perhaps in some senses replaced the church as the kind of institutionalization of a certain kind of spiritual trend, which is to say, sure, Oprah doesn't have a church exactly, but at the same time, there is a degree in which sort of with enough money, with enough of a following, the sort of grassroots fringe traditions do become, like astrology, like psychics, which are now at goop summits, do become codified in some way. I wasn't terribly impressed by her response to his question, which is why it didn't get clipped for the VanderClip channel. But okay, fair point. My interest is in sort of the movement technology. Let's say in American history, many historians have noted that part of what happened in America was that religious groups came to America and part of how the context formed them was the congregationalizing of their group. And I've mentioned that in the central valley, you're going to Rip in California, you'll drive right on little highway four, you'll look over on your right and there's a Buddhist church. And every time I saw that, I thought, hmm, that's a good idea. But I think that's a good idea. And I think that's a good idea. And I think that's a good idea. And I think that's a good idea. Go to the is another thing you're going to have to dig into. Part of what I've been, you know, in terms of sort of talking about Islam at the fringes and people say, yeah, you're mostly connected with California Buddhism, yes, but this is part of the difficulty about talking about any religion that in Armenia, so I've used a lot of clips from Ash and that Randall's conversation that's going to be coming out, figuring out how to talk about this stuff is really hard. And so when we talk, when we look at the Smaktenberg, Vervecki, Ian McGilchrist conversation, when, you know, John Vervecki is getting serious about stealing the culture, well, churches obviously in America were a key way of stealing the culture and they obviously in the Roman Empire were a significant way of stealing the culture. But but even that as such is not quite so easy to recognize. For example, we hear often about the lauded church fathers of those who discovered orthodoxy, they read the church fathers, they read the church fathers. They didn't have the opportunity to go back in time and go into any of their churches. The church fathers, one person I heard, liken church fathers in some ways to celebrity pastors. Martin Luther, who deeply changed the church, obviously founded a church and Lutheran churches went all over. But so churches then were still a mechanism and in terms of my, let's say my strategy for world impact has very much been community, community based. I dropped the dog back home because my wife and my daughter were coming back home and they could take care of the dog and give the dog a little bit more freedom than when the dog is just here in my office when I'm making stuff and I got back here and I had to do my rough draft for Sunday and I was a little procrastinating and Social Blade is this website that you can look at Google Analytics because I'm always fascinated by what on earth do these analytics tell me and so I thought well I'm gonna pull up my channel and Jonathan Peugeot's channel because I just watched a Jonathan Peugeot video on the angels because I'm preaching about the angels and I'm always looking for new stuff for my sermons and Jonathan Peugeot was a good source of stuff and so then I said oh he's up over 200,000 subs. Wow that's just amazing the growth of that channel. I remember Jonathan Peugeot's channel when it only had 2,000 subs and when I only had 500 subs. Yeah that's when Jonathan and I met yada yada yada and then Grim Grizz is like he's on Russell Brand I thought oh boy I Jonathan Peugeot and Russell Brand that's a video I'm gonna watch. Anyway and so I thought well what does my channel and what do our analytics when you put them side by side now Social Blade only hits really certain analytics but so then I looked at it and Jonathan's channel has over 200,000 subs and I've had a couple weeks ago and I had one video that sort of took off a little bit and so my numbers got my numbers have been fairly hot during December and so Jonathan's daily average for subs his channel's probably a little colder because his energies and efforts have really been elsewhere but his daily average is about 67 new subs and mine's about 34 new subs. So his growth I mean especially once you start growing if he's adding twice as many subscribers every day that I am well that's you know his channel's gonna go like this and my channel's it's kind of the way math works so his growth is much quicker but I put out a lot more videos and that's that means that depending on what number you're looking at and again all of these numbers what do they really tell us it's kind of hard so his average daily views are about 7182 and mine are 6429 so even though he's got you know almost you know he's got not quite 10 times as many subscribers as I have number of daily views mine isn't that far behind now our views but I put out long videos often and his weekly average is about 50,000 views and my weekly average is 45,000 views and it's like wow so how close are the channels and in the last 30 days he had 215,000 views and I had 192,000 views now there's a lot of different numbers that you can get from inside and those weren't on social blade and that's fine but the point isn't comparing my channel to Jonathan's the point is how on earth do we measure impact impact at what time at what place and and this of course is everything to do with with Jesus because you know the impact of Jesus in the Roman Empire for many many people in the Empire and this gets this gets into this incredibly difficult problem of seeing Jesus wasn't really Jesus I mean Jesus didn't impact the Empire in the ways that the important people of the Empire would see for a very long time after the events that are recorded in the Gospels and so we're always trying to weigh relevance and importance and value and and what we learn is it's very difficult to know how so just to continue so yearly estimate of Jonathan's channel 2.7 million views and minus 2.3 million views so then again now that's significant amount that's 400,000 more views than I will have but it's not that huge of a percentage but again now probably many of the people watching my channel it's a smaller group of people and they watch more of my videos because of course I'm putting out more videos and like an average usually at any given month between 40 and 50,000 unique viewers will watch my videos which is higher than the subscriber number so and some people don't log into YouTube yada yada yada and then I went into all because then when in Twitter it's like three people liked your liked your video but whenever you see like a picture of an attractive girl if you click on it then it's like oh yeah these are these are the these are the bots whereas uh so then I was talking to I was I was just having fun on Twitter Twitter Twitter should be for fun and but but this gets to me this gets into this whole this whole question of well what's a religion and I saw it you know I was watching this video I thought is this a are they founding a new religion is it going to be like a cult a couple of years ago I was going to make some videos about the nexium cult we had an estuary meeting last night so we started talking about cults and some of the individuals had really interesting stories about them and I I hadn't had an estuary meeting for a while and apparently every time I stopped doing it that the they start having meetings on their own without me which I absolutely endorse and but we're starting the weekly estuary coming in in January the first Sunday of January the seventh and so we're talking about cults and different people's uh history with cults or people's parents history with cults it's just absolutely fascinating and cults have been sort of a topic that we touched here and there Mary um Mary Cohen of course had a lot to say about cults um uh there's Nick from Nick from Santa Cruz who had been in a number of them who still his comments pop up on the channel sometimes but this whole nexium cult with uh with Keith Raniere was HBO had a big documentary on them and a bunch of high status celebrities from Smallville and Battlestar Galactica were part of these and this guy's this guy's doing time for uh sex trafficking racketeering I mean all kinds of things and I am by no means saying that these two are going to do anything like that they they don't they don't have any of the signs of of doing anything like that but a new religion a new church because what's interesting about them is that they that's very much what they say they're doing and they're constructing a new religion now their books are really cheap on Amazon Vanderclay what are you doing you're driving people to this cult they're not a cult you're driving people to this new religion it's not my point I'm curious about it I I'm watching this stuff and I'm just I'm just I'm just fascinated I just fascinated so a pragmatist guide to governments pragmasist guide to relationships a friend of mine sent me one of their videos on relationships he said I was very impressed by what he saw it's like this will be interesting I haven't watched it yet but I it's very much a pragmasist guide to life pragmas guide to sexuality I mean guide to crafting religions I mean they they wrote a book on crafting religions and I haven't read it yet but I've got it on my Kindle and I'm you know culture is an evolutionary and you know these people are these people are taking this seriously now the question is will they build a church well what on earth is a church and again for for this little corner and for my little YouTube project I mean those are those are salient questions for me because for the last six years a lot of me has wondered what on earth have I started what where is this going and I know some of you have ideas about that and some of you have positive ideas about that and some of you have negative ideas about that because I do read the comment section and a lot of people have negative ideas about it just sort of wander off because who wants to who wants to waste their time on a losing venture or a venture that um anyway so so this video again just sort of fascinated me and I'll give you a little taste of it they usually their videos are edited um they're not highly produced let's say but they are edited oh before before I went there I a little bit more I did a little bit more research on at least on Malcolm he's got a website here we created the Collins institutes for families like us the baby and their doggy there and so they've got well they've got an institute's board Jacob look out Jacob these people make boards and stuff um partner organizations so and again this whole question of well you don't found a church you found a not-for-profit you find and you found an institute etc etc and and then there's this everybody wiki which I I don't really know what this is but someone will enlighten me in the comment section and I don't know if I suspect people now these people are from Texas which again is just super interesting um Malcolm Jake Collins is an entrepreneur and neuroscientist from Dallas Texas oh this is so interesting his work on the brain computer interface and the evolution of human cognition is displayed in the Smithsonian Institute Collins with his wife Simone I think that's his second wife because in the video he made a comment about his wife and I don't think he was talking about her so I looked in I I haven't you know usually with a regular wikipedia entry they'll have some of those little details but um it's also very interesting who gets listed in wikipedia and who isn't so this is maybe a vanity play place if you want to put your own little information out there so people can find you and these people are very very online as they say Collins with his wife Simone raised the first uh married search fund and regularly speaks about it at Stanford and Harvard business schools they made their first search fund deal in Peru acquiring travel max one of the largest travel agencies in America with over 100 million dollars in revenue so these people are financially doing very well he has a BA in neuroscience from St Andrews University and an MBA from Stanford University and this guy I mean like I I was watching it's like this guy's smart I mean I'm sure he's got a nice good score in his general IQ he researches brain computing technology at Neurosky in 2010 he's older than he looks and his first relationship with Korea in 2014 by consulting for bingle an interest-based um SNS and later became the director of the ventures Collins marriage proposal using deviant art to his wife on reddit went viral and garnered a lot of national international media attention including CNET Buzzfeed the Daily Dot and HuffPost he is heavily criticized on the internet at the center of negative criticism as people commented I'm holding out hope that this isn't I'm holding out hope that this isn't real it makes us makes me sad that it that this worked this probably the most cringe-worthy thing I've seen thus far on reddit love is dead and other comments the couple together founded art corgi the largest mid market the mid market art commissioning marketplace is the second most prestigious accelerator in the world by 500 startups they run a few non-for-profits including the pragmatist foundation an NGO focused on pragmatic living pronatalist.org the only solely pronatalist focused NGO Collins is also the offer of three best-selling books and regularly gets interviewed on popular podcast they conducted a multi-state get out the vote program called student votes.org to encourage students to participate in and vote for us presidential election 2020 the dean of stanford business school congratulates both of their efforts Collins is married to Simone and has one kid together now three he's also the grandson of James M. Collins oh it gets who's James and Colin apparently there's a lot of James and isn't this exciting YouTube watching me do internet research right in front of you instead of doing all my research before and giving you a fully formed video well I suspect about the right age James M. Collins here interesting was an American businessman and a Republican who represented the third congressional district of Texas from 1968 to 1983 the district was based around the time of Irving and Dallas County so also from Texas he was born in East Texas yada yada yada so he was a politician I didn't read anything here that dramatically stood out all right let's get into the video this or something like that who received special revelation and their revelation is made apparent to us both through their predictive capacity of future events and through the spread and efficacy of their message and improving an individual's quality of life the elect are different from profits the elect are individuals who have a plan for their lives like this is what I plan to do to have this outcome on the world population this plan needs to one have been accurately executed so they do need to have the impact that they had planned on having and to be in line with the will of the agents of providence so it basically means that they are using you as a vessel to bring about the future that must come to pass from the martyrdom of man persons with feeble and untrained intellects may live according to their conscience but the conscience itself will be defective to cultivate the intellect is therefore a religious duty would you like to know more Malcolm hello Simone it is wonderful to be here with you now what are the key things if you want to found a church or a religion or a cult or something like this is obviously nomenclature I mean once you colonize the language you can really colonize culture because language is culture is so language based and so watching them and and what's fascinating about this video is that they they use a lot of Calvinist nomenclature but they're using it in their own particular way and again as you listen to them you think now what do you really mean by God who really is Jesus and the elect and then she's going to talk a lot about limited atonement it's like oh you've got this Calvinist's attention you today we recently released an episode on our religious beliefs that primarily ended up focusing on the concept of where we think like truth comes from like how you can determine if an individual is a prophet and how you can determine if an individual is being and the will of God like how do you determine what the will of God is and it went into it and in our case what we think God is just so people are broadly aware is we think that God is our distant distant distant descendants humanity's distant descendants that in a million years if humans are still around whatever we have become in that time is closer to what today we would conceive of a god than what we today would conceive of as a human and they don't relate to time in the way we relate to time so it's sort of this self-manifesting entity that reveals aspects of itself to people and throughout the civilizations our civilizations development however when it's explaining itself to earlier iterations of people with less technology and less philosophical sophistication it had to use simpler explanations but we left so I kind of wowed I kind of shared this with the with the with the estuary group last night and my son was like you mean it's kind of like the cult of interstellar I got fascinating again just fascinating I mean Tara Isabella Burton has carved for out for herself as a religious journalist probably one of the most interesting things because I you know I feel like Michael Jackson in the thriller video just while eating popcorn thinking this is so fascinating and thinking about how this develops and how this is related to to new he talked in the other video about how for a while he was sort of a new atheist and of course now he's got this degree in neuroscience and so you see sort of the the materialism here but with the science fiction and please say more left that video with a cliffhanger which was the concept of the elect and it's something that we can dig into a lot on this video because it's a pretty important concept to our religious framework and the gist of it is that not everyone's life matters equally god does not care about everyone equally the the agents of providence we would call them do not not everyone is equally important in their design and some people are holistically unimportant in their design do you want to go over your thoughts on this saman yeah well I would say like there's a larger like I guess bifurcation of religious and metaphysical philosophies that that all every everyone has to make a call on this and each is kind of an asshole for different reasons and I just want to like make that clear so there's there's one group that believes in limited atonement which is really what we're describing here that like some people are saved or some people are important and others aren't and and not all people are equal and that's not necessarily something that we're happy now again almost always with if you're if you're trying to sort of figure out someone's as a pastor one of the things you're always doing is you're listening to people and you're just trying to get a sense of their religious map now again I could read through the books and try and map it out that way but this is probably a little more efficient maybe less fair but my goal here isn't to become a devotee or to help the colons found their church or their cult my my interest in this is the kinds of religions that the history of the last say his age I'm curious about his age no no no birthday um again he looks young but I suspect he's given everything that he's done he's probably in his 30s and maybe even in his later 30s oh that's that's too good a picture not to use for the uh for for a thumbnail continue about it's just what we think to be true and the the upsides to this view or I would say the virtues of this view the nice things are that you're not going to see a lot of forcible conversions with these religions and we're not the only ones who hold this view there are lots of people who also Calvinists hold this view Jewish people hold this view lots of groups right and so they're like you know what it's not our job to convert everyone we cannot save everyone that's not possible so they're just they're a lot less coercive they're a lot less domineering because it's just not practical but then on the like on the downside or the vice end the you know they're just also like and those people are lost or going to hell or unimportant or whatever right like they're somehow lesser or you know not saved or whatever and that's that kind of sucks because I mean in a like very PC everyone's happy world everyone goes again a really interesting take on limited atonement to heaven everything's good it's it's great then there are religions and cultural views that believe that everyone can be saved obviously the virtue there is that everyone can go to heaven everyone can be saved everyone Luke Luke calling Luke calling all our universalists can matter the doubt but of course you've always got to say and this is a this is one of things I you'll hear me do often is well let's let's drill down into this saved category because of course materialists tend to locate there as doubt that was making you know you eminent ties it you bring it down here or you you keep it within the box downside there is that there is then a genuine philosophical like values aligned imperative to convert people and to and to say force your your cultural beliefs on other people so if you believe that's continue this means then that if you have like two groups that hold this view like Catholics and Muslims for example both kind of I think I understand correctly hold this view not all Catholics and all Muslims hold this view yes I'm doing right like are like really heavy proselytizing ones both are believable the other group is going to go to hell if they don't convert to the correct religious view and the correct practices so it is their imperative to through force or through convincing the convincing part is the nice way to do it the force way is the not nice way to do it they have to switch everyone over you kind of see I would say a secular a secular version of this can be seen with and then there's the antinatalist like Lawrence Anton and and his his cohort who we we've spoken with and met with a person who would who never want to coerce anyone who and so then there's the okay so so this natalism is now sort of the hinge and so now we're going to have pro-natalists and antinatalists and they're going to be struggling for supremacy and of course then you're going to get your definition of salvation sort of growing out of that focus of attention only want to convince people they both have the same end there should be no humans anymore and ideally no animals either no sentient life however they have very different approaches so we're not saying that like I think you've drunk the kool-aid a little here I think that these groups historically typically don't try to convert coerce people when they're in the minority but when they gain control of governments they almost always attempt to coerce people some of the emissary and master thing is that once once a certain kind of emissary gets a certain amount of power then it's got a lot of temptation to use all those tools of the majority I mean these these people are not dumb they're a little odd but they're not dumb but we can say though is it like they they're trying to do the right thing they're trying to do the right thing but they they don't they're not just trying to do the right thing if they have control of a governing system they have a moral mandate often to use that governing system to coerce people because otherwise you know that you can save someone and you're letting them go to hell you're letting them suffer you're letting their lives have no meaning and that is truly evil by their framework so again like each one has their benefits and downsides yes now we we are of the other group that's we're just like I'm sorry I can't save you you're not going to matter which is kind of an asshole move and kind of not because we're not going to force anyone to do anything so yeah it's a view that appears condescending from the perspective of an outsider but generally if you're you know abutting another cultural group you would prefer that they had this view than that they don't right because they're going to be a much more symbiotic cultural group to their neighbors than much less dominating and and so the anti-natalists are almost certainly the most dangerous of these groups right now and definitely a quickly growing movement faster growing than the pro-natalist movement if you look at you know their subreddits like the so so then okay so now we're looking at anti-natalists and pronatalists and go back again to the dalphi thing okay how what technologies are the spirits of these groups let's use spirits and just imagine that that all of these groups have animating spirits we can call them angels or demons and principalities and powers we can you know but there's something that's animating these groups how do they form and what do they use and and in many ways obviously the spirits again are moving into the machines and the spirits are coming through the machines you know during covid you can't get covid over zoom so you know I kept doing all my randos conversations and all my videos etc etc but other spirits are definitely moving through these lines and they're not forming churches but there's going to be this this daniel k williams piece that was in the atlantic not too long ago now daniel k williams I believe also wrote a piece that I looked at a lot in terms of how how the civil rights movement impacted the mainline church this piece is about what really happens when americans stop going to church and basically what he said was that when when americans talks about that book the great de-churching when americans stopped going to church increasingly their religion became their church in other words that the form of church obviously impacts the elements of a religious movement and this this church impacts let's say the animating spirit of that group and when that animating spirit is no longer located within an irl community but now is mediated by the algorithmically algorithm agents that are mediating our relationships and our conversations with each other it's part of the reason that I like a lot of the direct conversations that we're doing on just chatting and in this little corner because part of the reason I didn't like text base connections let you get in reddit or or on discord but at least when we're talking over video we've got something and it's not when we're sort of conversing over youtube obviously it's more algorithmically mediated but but there's something about church so that again as this as this article talked about and as the great de-churching book talked about when when people would leave church there I would I would dare bet their formation is mostly then coming from probably mass media fox news or msnbc or cnn or the new york times or their local paper their local news so there's really something to how this stuff gets mediated holism subreddit and stuff like that they want to destroy all life on the planet so really we got to talk about that but but but now let's get back to what we think like what do we mean when we say that there is an elect group and an unelect group so we define elect in a number of different ways like there's a number of qualifying criteria to be among the elect right and it does not necessarily mean that you are a prophet prophets are individuals like jesus or something like that who received special revelation and of course now I get triggered when jesus gets demoted to prophet jesus of course prophet priest king jesus gets demoted to a prophet this is a this is actually a central concern of the gospels jesus does definitely fulfill a prophetic function he also fulfills a priestly function also a kingly function but when jesus is reduced to a prophet then jesus what jesus does is reduced to messaging and their revelation is made apparent to us both through their predictive capacity of future events that other people didn't predict and through the spread and efficacy of their message and improving an individual's quality of life so that's the that's that's how you determine prophets again we have the quality of life dead reckoning as if that isn't somehow situated within an entire narrative context the elect are different from prophets the elect are individuals who have a plan for their lives like this is what i plan to do to have this outcome on the world population this plan needs to one have been accurately executed so they do need to have the impact that they had planned on having and two be in line with the will of the agents of providence god's will now these these uh these descendants that manage to somehow transcend time it's interesting that the the elect are the elector now he's going to nuance this as it goes a little further but but the the mark of the elect is agency the mark of the elect isn't something let's say like fruit of the spirit um obedience to christ's commands i mean all of these things that you'll tend to find in in churches and christianity well you could say right all right so these these future entities will be the future that they're trying to bring about so it basically means that they are using you as a vessel to bring about the future that must come to pass now this gets more interesting because what this means is it means even if i end up having a big impact on history if it wasn't the impact that i intended to have then i am not a tool of the agents of providence i am more just like a tool that was used to carry out wider events in the world potentially on their behalf other spirits had colonized you in other words the elect is someone whose spiritual power mojo is so strong that in fact they can exert their will through time of which i have huge doubts because i think again reading history you find people are setting out to do all sorts of things and what they actually manage to accomplish is usually very different from what they intend but it wasn't what i wanted to have happen an example here could be someone like hitler like things definitely didn't turn out the way that he wanted to and yet it would be crazy to say that he's not one of the most influential people in world history and will not be remembered as is is one of the most important in terms of how he changed the path of history right like a lot of a lot of history pivoted around him yes but but this actually comes to another thing that it means to be among the elect because there are various degrees of the elect right and this is the impact that you have needs to be a differential impact that means if you do what somebody else would have done had you not existed this earlier in my career i had this managerial position open up at google and i was i had an offer from them and i was waiting and waiting waiting and they had accepted me but they hadn't employed me to a department and i ended up at one point i'm going to choose do i go work for this vc firm in korea with a young firm or do i end up going to google and i asked my wife about this and she goes malcolm and right there i thought did simone your second wife i'm not i'm not judging here but it was just like oh there's an interesting data point given the the whole backstory of finding a wife if you don't take that job at google they will replace you with somebody equally competent as you and you will have no real power to change the direction of the company or the direction of your product so now like even if you did get in there and even if you did make heterodox views you wouldn't be able to get them through given the way that their decision making worked at the level that you've been hired yeah and so this you know like if you're a politician and you're just surfing a sentimental wave you are very unlikely to be among the elect you need to be surfing a wave that you created and had you not been here somebody else wouldn't have created again agency and what strikes me about this definition and the religious payload of this definition is is how much it seems to very much be a part of vc managerial american business philosophy and and even expressive individualism the your the quality of your election is seen by your capacity it's almost nichian by your capacity to imprint history with your specific will not just to be significant in history but to drive history according to that's how you know you're elect is it fascinating it's fascinating so this is an example of like if hitler hadn't done what he did i think it's pretty unlikely anyone else would have done something that insane well here's a another like in terms of modern examples and this is really more relevant to an american audience but there's a united states senator named john fetterman who is not exactly on in our political camp but he shows signs of what we would say is someone who's elect why because recently he's done a lot of things that run counter to his party's view he's not towing the line he's doing stuff that's getting him in trouble with his party it's gonna make his life harder as a politician but american individualism i mean i gotta be me a whole a whole thousands of high school kids all being original in their in the same way but he is standing for his principles so he represents someone who to us what those things are oh for example like he he refused in in a pro israel protest slash parade to support palestine slash hamas i do believe it's important that we call it what it was you know they systematically used rape as a party young i have a test that i because some other things he's done where he like really is just standing for what he believes in a way that hurts him and runs counter to his party and i think that's interesting that ends up destroying his career then he's not among the elect i think a better yeah but but it has gotten him a lot this is just fascinating debating especially from a Calvinist background where i mean the Weber thesis a whole bunch of things getting into the question of you know who's elect am i elect and i am i am going to i'm going to have assurance of my salvation by the the agency but again salvation is different here too so participation in life to come in a more traditional christian imaginary but it's going to be impact in future until of course our descendants transcend time and become the the god that we pray to a lot of attention so maybe like maybe it will it's so hard to see and here's the other thing is when you go back and you look at other people who hold similar views of like the elect and not the elect puritans in the early colonies there are these hilarious diaries that for example are covered in albion's seed which of course we're obsessed with as a book where like people are you know one day they're so sure in their journal like i'm definitely among the elect like this is this is great i'm i'm going to be mean equal like the next day like i'm the most wretched person ever so like no one knows even at your dying moment you have no idea if you're among the elect or not you don't know if you're like a sapon or like the real deal and we cannot know when judging other people whether they're elect and that's another like sort of tenant of of Calvinism it's not like you know you you can't assume that someone who's lived the most wretched terrible life worst criminal ever they could still be among the elect we are it is it is basically up to god to decide god chooses the in our case you don't know within your own lifetime because you don't know the impact of the things that you did and so to give an example of a better politician that i was mentioning earlier would be Trump the the wave of political sentiment that Trump caused i mean he basically caused a total political realignment in our country that almost certainly would not have happened had he not run now we don't know if that alignment was of the will of the future police or if he was just sort of an NPC setting things up for somebody else right and this is another thing right so we did to Simone's point right so then there's this different category which is just being a good person and living a good life and what this means is that you have lived in accordance with your conscience and that conscience is a well-informed conscience and you attempted as best you could to make a important impact that led to humanity becoming a diverse and flourishing you know interstellar human empire one day right and you may be wrong about this you know there's a quote here that is from when wood reads the martyrdom of man a book that i quoted a lot in simone does not like me quoting too much so i'll keep it short but persons with feeble and untrained intellects may live according to their conscience but the conscience itself will be defective to cultivate the intellect is therefore a religious duty yeah and i think that that's really true you can live in accordance with your conscience but if that conscience is not a trained conscience it is very easy to live a bad life trained according to what towards what end and a life that ends up moving civilization in a direction that was counter to your goals and this is another thing about this concept of the elect that really you know comes from what someone is saying is we cannot judge we can judge people you know hundreds of years ago if they were likely among the elector not among the elect but we cannot judge people in our current time our peers very accurately if they are among the elector not among the elect and we certainly can't determine for ourselves and i think there are a lot of people out there who are so sure that they're on the righteous path one thing that i like about this limited atonement and you know whether you're elected or not you'll never know is that it really forces if they're not getting money from coke they should self-scrutiny and it forces like a huge amount of like self-consciousness and self-doubt which i think is ultimately extremely helpful you have to constantly sharpen yourself you have to constantly hold yourself accountable and when and again there's so much so that nexium cult with keith renier that that that degenerated into a sex cult which many cults do i mean so much so much of that was driven by the contemporary cult of success and it's interesting to see now these two are these two are not there but it's interesting to see sort of the spirit of success at work and they're in in the formation of their religion and how that then goes to define the terms this is fascinating a little bit more and then we'll stop you don't know i don't know i think i feel like it's a better tool for that yeah another thing i point out here is that the future the the agents of providence they will sometimes use people even even to have a big impact on history that are either meant to signal something to the elect or that are meant to strengthen the elect so it's so interesting so are so god i don't know why they're single not plural they're all in agreement and you know our descendants that somehow i mean this this sort of has just just prompts in my mind the imagination of how many hollywood movies that are trying to deal with uh different distinct and he actually time you know narrative threads he actually talks about that in a previous video which was which was interesting to listen to too but um why why in fact are our our descendants managing history that has already happened are they creating new timelines um again it's it's it's just fascinating so again my interest in this is not just the fascination with the the the clearly the development of a religion based on sort of the the pieces you know when the pc guys built the first piece ibm you know pulled pieces off the shelf and put together and pc well they're pulling pieces off calvinist shelves and a bunch of other shelves and new religion and this is this is how we save the world but of course there's all kinds of presuppositions beneath it in terms of their metaphysical presuppositions ontological presuppositions value presuppositions all of these things but it's just it's just fascinating to watch this and then now again back to douthat's observation the technology being used as that church it's instead these screens and networks because the church of course is a sort of network in in a certain medium which is you know time space physicality meat space etc etc so where this goes you know it probably won't be alive long enough to know it i've got a you know i'm 20 some years older than they are in some ways but um it's still it's still fascinating to watch and if not for the internet i would probably never know about them because they would be they would be in in texas having their little meetings writing their little books and their books would go out with their little networks and some people in other cities would sort of know them and there'd be a convention and they'd be doing all of that stuff sort of in in physical meat space so yeah anyway fascinating stuff uh leave a comment and um i'll yeah i now some of you i know are concerned because that's how you are you're concerned you're high in negative emotion you're more neurotic than i am and don't don't watch these people too much rest assured it's also watching some videos about autism and adhd and um some of that um i will i will probably lose interest with them at some point but they they sure are interesting as as many of you have testified so we'll we'll we will see what becomes of it but of course as they themselves said it's very difficult to evaluate them within any kind of time span that we have available to us we can evaluate the um that that fascinating book that i read a number of years ago and the oneida community just fascinating so anyway so yeah leave a comment let me know what you think