https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JdlyDmcLamw

 get a second chance. You don't get a second chance at recording. So that's great. Oh, go ahead. I just listened to your, uh, what you put out today and, uh, about your channel. Yeah. I thought it was time to put something out cause I regularly get comments about, you know, what, what, what's this guy doing? So I thought, well, maybe this will help some people understand what I'm doing. No, I think it's a great idea. It's really, really great. Well, why don't you tell me a little bit about your, something about yourself. You've got all this stuff behind you. You're almost got a pastor's office here. This is actually the book room. Um, this, this is, um, my, my husband doesn't have many vices, but one of them is collecting books. And, uh, so this is, uh, and these are generations of books. So he inherits books. And, uh, so, um, this is, um, uh, a bust of Einstein here that his grandfather, um, made at the, the myth is that from, from life. So, um, so we have a lot of books and a lot of art. Yeah. That's so cool. It's very cool. Some other time I'll have to tell you about, uh, his family, because it's, it's really quite amazing. Talk about, uh, splitting during the war and things like that. Just really, Oh, wow. You've, you've, you've wet my appetite already. He's, uh, he's actually taking a class at Columbia and he's on his way home right now. Um, because he wants to write his family history. And this part is about Turkey and his grandfather on the other side had to leave Germany because he wrote anti-Nazi tracks. He was an economics professor. Wow. And he, uh, he was, he was jailed. And then the second time he was going to be put in jail, he went to Turkey, which was modernizing at the time. Yeah. And anyway, it's, it's that fascinating stories. Yeah. Wow. Wow. Well, what stories do you have to tell me about you? I mean, how, I mean, you've been writing, you know, you've been dropping notes and, and stuff for a while. So, um, fill me in a little bit. So, um, so I wanted to say, you know, you talked about how people find you. So, um, I found you of course through Jordan Peterson, but I, um, it was, I found Jordan Peterson through the Babylon B. They have a meme that said Jordan Peterson becomes the first honorary Christian baptized by the Southern Baptist convention or something like that. Who this guy is. And, uh, and then after I listened to him for a lot of hours and I was Googling around, you know, Jordan Peterson and Christianity and so, and the apocalypse. So. Okay. Okay. Good stuff. Well, why, so you found Jordan through the Babylon B. What, what, why did you get interested in Peterson? Um, I mean, what, what about him sort of grabbed you? Um, well, part of it is that, um, you know, it has a little bit to do with my faith journey. So maybe I'll tell you about that and how it works. Cause I really believe, um, in some way, psychology has to figure in this a lot, you know, and I think he has very plain spoken ideas about how the world works and how relationships work. And so I just really resonated with him. But, um, so I was, I was raised in a Catholic family and we were real Catholic. So we all went to Catholic school, um, until I rebelled in high school and went to public school with the, with the pagans and stuff like that. I don't think I met people who weren't Catholic until just about until then. Um, my father was a, uh, was a lector. He read at church and, my mom wasn't too involved with doing that kind of stuff, but we went to church every Sunday and, uh, you know, we, we did the whole Catholic thing until, um, what is it? I don't know if it's Tim Keller or something, maybe CS Lewis who says, you know, people fall away from Christianity when they want to start doing the stuff that you're not supposed to do. Yeah. That's when I fell away, um, you know, and, and later in high school and then in college and I, um, and I got into, um, I got into a lot of stuff, you know, drugs and drinking and, you know, that whole thing, sex drugs and rock and roll as they say. Um, and, um, but I completed school. I'm a pharmacist. So, uh, amazing. Um, you know, I stopped doing some of that stuff in the middle, but when my professor handed me my diploma, I had to repeat a year by the way. He said, you said, I don't know how you did it. Hardly a ringing endorsement. But, um, but the thing was that, you know, years later when I said, you know, I don't, I don't know that I should have this job, you know, and, and a good friend of mine said, well, God must've wanted you to have this job. Otherwise you wouldn't have had it. So I, um, so I moved, you know, I also, I grew up in New Jersey. So that's another, um, common link that we have. In Scotch Plains is where I went, where I graduated from. So a little bit south of Patterson, um, it's, um, Union County, I guess that's Bergen County, right around Newark. So right, right. Oh, okay. Yep. Yep. And I went to Rutgers. So, um, okay. That was good. Um, but I, at that point I joke because I think, all my problems with that were that I was from New Jersey. Graduated from college and I, and I moved to, uh, first I, I did an internship on a, on a, um, on the Hopi Indian reservation. Oh, wow. And then I moved to California. Um, and, um, and there, you know, what, what we say in the 12 step recovery is I, you know, I hit my bottom out there and, uh, while still working, you know, not, not anything like that, but, um, but, um, so I went, so I'll tell you the real story. So I am, I was, there was a, I was living with this guy and for my background, I didn't think it was a good idea. So I, I met, there was a guy that I had been roommates with. There were two guys and me and one guy was a male exotic dancer. And the other guy was a born again, Christian. Wow. Oh man. So, so Tim Thomas, the born again, Christian, if he ever hears this, you know, he's part of my life invited, uh, my boyfriend and I at the time to go to a sunrise service at Calvary chapel on the, on the pier in Huntington beach. And I did. And, um, you know, I thought, I thought it was wonderful. And, and at that time, and then things started boiling, like, you know, this relationship wasn't going well, you know, all this stuff. Um, so I started going to Calvary chapel and, um, but I would go on Monday nights, not on Sunday. And I would go on Monday nights and they would have a band and all that kind of stuff. And as soon as whatever his name was started talking, I would leave and all I would do is stay for the music and cry. And then someone there said to me, I see you every week and you always leave. What, what are you avoiding? And I never went back. I'm avoiding you. I won't make this mistake twice. No, but, um, so, so, and this is the roundabout way of talking about Jordan Pearson because here I was, I would, so I left that boyfriend. I was, I was going to Calvary chapel and then I went, I can't remember some other place and I was trying to live a good life. Um, but I couldn't stop drinking and, um, I was baptized in the Pacific ocean, sunrise with the second worst hangover I ever had. And I didn't know what was wrong, you know? So part of it, what that was wrong is that I need to get sober. So that was, that was what I needed to do. But it also, not just to, in order to have any relationship with God that was going to work, there was a lot of stuff that needed to get cleaned out before then, because I, I believe most, most people who suffer with that, like I do are really so narcissistic at heart and closed off that all the words that come in are refracted in a way that that's not, that's not helpful. So either they're too harsh or they're too, you know, too, it just, it, it, nothing penetrated. That was going to, that was going to last. Yeah. So I think a lot of things had to be torn out and rebuilt over again. And a lot of that has to do with psychology. You know, a lot of it has to do with ego, brainy, you know, and things like that. And I do believe that the 12 step programs are the absolute, you know, if, if you want it, it's all there. Yeah. So that's spiritual kindergarten for me because I couldn't, you know, I would go off on wild tangents at church, you know, like I have to, you know, I have to quit my job and do this. So, you know, no, I have to be, I have to be my life, you know, anyway. So, so I went, then I went to a mega church, one of the earliest mega churches in the, in the late eighties. And then I got, I met my husband as a result of doing all this wonderful stuff. And, and I hope he never hears this because it was a bit of missionary dating. And you said that churches would be empty without missionary dating. There's a lot of truth to that. Really cleared up a lot of guilt. There's a lot of guilt. There's a fair amount of missionary dating and the pastors are all say, don't do it. But well, the truth is it's okay. The truth is that my husband is a better person than I am. He's a more moral person than I am. And, you know, it's, it's amazing. So we left California because he wanted to finish his training back here. And I was like, I'm going to go to college. I'm going to go to college. I wanted to finish his training back here. And we're in Connecticut. The leaves are changing. It's beautiful now, although I'd give anything to be back in California. But better weather. I've lived both places. Better in California. Yeah. So where was I? So we moved back and there are no. I went to a mega church that was evangelical, but the pastor's name was Tim Timmons and he was a wonderful. He you remind me of him because this idea that you couldn't put him in a box and you can't put you in a box either. So I think that that's that's really helpful. So we came back here. No mega churches can't really find what I'm looking for. There are now mega churches, but my husband was raised congregational and in New England, in New England. OK, OK. And and so we started going to a congregational church and he got very involved and, you know, is, you know, we're a we're a church going couple, which is just pretty neat. OK, OK. So but what I wanted to talk to you about was your conversation with Nick and the CRC, you know, why can't the CRC get along? Yeah. So this is what I emailed you about. I so there are two things I want to come back to. One is the. The idea of seeking God that he mentioned, right? And the other one is I want to ask you the question of how how much do you think children influence their parents? When it comes to stuff like this. Oh, wow. That's it's almost always the other way around, but that's a really good question. Because because in a sense, you don't know. As a parent, you get to fit into God's role. And that changes perspectives of us as children of God. And so I think I think I just read I just read an article. This divorce lawyer from someplace wrote two pieces in The New York Times, one in twenty nineteen, one and one just recently, basically the first piece. She basically said who was unapologetic about loving her career more than her children. I just saw that on Twitter. And then the other one about divorce, that it's like. OK, I guess your children didn't change you much. And that, I think, has been. True often for men, because men have sort of delegated parenting and relating to the children, to the mothers and wives for years. And. But that has sort of there's been a revolution against that. And now for a father to not be involved is a violation against all sorts of things now. So men are quite a bit more involved. And I think I think that's healthy all the way around. But children do change us. They. Oh, gosh, we love them. Hopefully, they humble us all, they humble. I remember when. You know, I thought I thought getting married was a lesson in just how selfish I was, nothing like the kids, they they they were their most brutal teachers, because, you know, when we had one kid, it's like, you know, it's your turn, no, it's your turn. And then you have two kids. And so you have one for each of us. Then you have three kids. And after three, it's just all a lost cause. It's all hands on deck. So and then they. I mean, you do you love them, you say if you're a decent parent of any kind, you sacrifice for them, they defy you sometimes, sometimes when they don't defy you and you recognize maybe they should have, that really breaks your heart because you find out what a what a crappy God your children have. And and then, of course, they grow up and they're going to do their own things. And, you know, some are going to rebel in their own way to one degree or another. It's it's. I. I've been wanting to make a video for a while about this to one degree or another, because. I. I don't know. If I try to imagine not having had children. I don't know what that would be like. It's it's one of the most challenging, difficult, meaningful. Things that has been a part of my life, and I'm not saying you can't be fully human if you haven't had it by by no means, but. Wow, so, yeah, children influence their parents. Yeah, I was. I was thinking, I mean, I know my daughter's influenced me, you know, changed my life really dramatically, but I was thinking of, I was telling you all those wild stories about my my youth, you know, and and. I my parents got divorced and and so and there's an interesting story about that. I want to tell you so. And in so my dad was, you know, he was in the Navy and stuff like that. And he always wore like khaki pants and a T-shirt and stuff. And so we were like, Dad, you need to get like a cowboy hat and jeans. And we were trying to do a makeover on and stuff like that. And, you know, I had I mean, it was my life was. Full of pleasure and, you know, I mean, I was just I was out. I was out there living life and they were very fifties kind of people. And when when all of the brothers and when we were all in college. He left my mom for another woman and only lately have I thought. I wonder, I wonder if I had anything to do with like opening that Pandora's box, you know, and I'm thinking now about the things about like what what what you and Nick talked about, the idea of I know that was a sibling, but I know a lot in our church, it's it's kids who, you know, and their journeys that change the parents. Yeah. But I want I want to tell you what happened. I wrote a little about this, but this woman said in the thing that you just said in the Times that something like she couldn't live her full life if she was still married. And my father, who's very Catholic. Said. He said, I don't care if I go to hell. That's what I said. So so he married this other woman and and it was a real, really contentious divorce. It was. You know, my mother did not want to get divorced. And and but, you know, he moved on and, you know, and she was older, you know, an older woman. So you didn't have other kids or anything. But. I want to say maybe eight years later or something like that. He maybe was 10 years later, he called and asked me and, you know, I'm not a Catholic anymore. You know, and he asked me, what do you think if I got an annulment? And I said, well, from the second marriage, from the first marriage, from my mother, they were divorced, you know, so that he could marry his his second wife in the church, in the church, so I said, well, you know, that so your kids are bastards. And he goes, no, it's not like that anymore. You know, and I said, well, you know, I think there are your rules and I don't think you should. After 23 years of marriage and three kids, you get an element. And and I also didn't think that it would be fair to put my mother through that thing. So so it came in the family lore that that I stopped them from getting it. So. Anyway, a couple of years go by and he dies. And at the funeral now, you know, if you're a Catholic, you can't receive communion. You can. He went to church. They went to church every Sunday. He was a reader, all kinds of stuff, but nothing. So. The Monsignor says to me, I don't know why. Well, you know, at the end, you know, we got your father, the communion. And I'm thinking, did you get a secret anomaly? What what happened? So my stepmother told me when I asked her, and it must have been a couple of years later, that. They had agreed to live celibately. In order to be received back into community. And. Most people would think that that was insane. I don't I don't tell many people. Yeah. But I was thinking about your conversation with Nick and this idea of seeking God, right, because my church would go out of business if the Catholic Church allowed divorced people. There would be no church. I believe it. Right. And but why would you do that? Why would why would a person do that? And and and I read a little bit of Nick's comments and it's like the prodigal son and all that kind of stuff, and he and he was in the Catholic Church, a prodigal son. But is but my stepmother said that he he knew he was going to die. And he died. In the back of the church, getting ready to process up the aisle to read during Mass. And he had he had a coronary. Oh, my God. Yeah. Yeah. So. Yeah. So. Would I do that? No, I didn't even go to that church. Yeah. You know. And. Now, this is part of. Why? You know, issues. And so, you know, your story illustrates nicely that. You know, the same sex marriage debate isn't the only issue that sort of. Confounds us on both sides, if you. If you take it slowly and seriously. And. Divorce and remarriage has been an issue like that for a very long time. And, you know, I I was probably flippant on Twitter, which is. You know, maybe I should get off Twitter because that's Twitter tempts you to flip and see. But, you know, even in even in just sort of the. Drawed up draw, jaw dropping. Brazenness of this woman's New York Times opinion pieces. You know that there are. Oh, I think your story of your father's story is. Is one like this, and I've seen I've seen stories not identical to it, but analogous in some ways of. Deeply believing people. You know, violating serious tenets of their faith. And persevering still. And are finding themselves in. In situations and traps. That. They and one way. They'll have to send in one direction or the other. Mm hmm. Mm hmm. And so they choose. And and then to. And then to then to, you know, seek God and aspire once again to faithfulness, even though you've taken a road that. Appears to lead to perdition. And these things happen around us, we see them, and if we if we have eyes to see them and we only see them. We only see them in people who. As your story nicely illustrated. You know, seek God with all their hearts, even as even as sinners. And, you know, I see this, this is. I did an interview with a guy just recently, it'll be out in a little while, I guess, about homeless people and. You know, I see this all the time with the homeless people who have. Serious problems, mental illness, serious, you know, they do not maintain sobriety at all. And often it doesn't look like they're even trying. But if you. Sit down with them and listen to them. Part of them hungers and thirst for righteousness and, you know. You just can't imagine they will ever see it in this world. That's a powerful story of your father. What did your mother make of this? I haven't told her. Well, no, she died. She's still alive. No. I haven't told my brothers or anyone. It seems so personal. Yeah. And you know, and what's interesting now is that while not having a relationship with my stepmother, I mean, it's cordial relationship. I'm. I'm now in charge of her health care and finances and things like that. It's really, really interesting. My. The divorce is very bad and my my mother. Really. Pushed us to take sides and we were adults. You know, we were in college and it was awful. Um. So. So I. Yeah. I almost think you can't even figure this stuff out until you've lived a long time and then you can't even figure it out, just yeah. Ignorance breeds a sort of clarity that unfortunately is handed a megaphone. Too many times in this world, partly because right now, megaphones are so abundantly available to anyone with a social media account. Oh, oh, you know, and. You know, even even just. You know, the psychology of. You know, even just the psychology of an affair and a betrayal and, you know, they they're often they often talk about, you know, marriages being, you know, they're they're basically a mysterious country only of two. And, you know, even the two that are in it by no means understand it. I mean, I've I've been married 33 years and, you know, it's it's it's amazing sometimes how even couples who have been married for a very long time just continue to surprise and confound and bewilder each other. But that's I see couples of 60 plus years doing it. I I hope to be among that. I mean, I'm not going to live that long because I got married later. But I but I hope that that's the case because it and I, you know. I keep getting surprised, which is amazing. You know, another thing about my husband, we have we have his sister is schizophrenic and and he is well, we're both, but he's been her conservator since his mom died and, you know, and that's. It's tough and she's but she's, you know, he he keeps a roof over her head and all kinds of stuff, you know, it's very she doesn't live with us. And thank God she never she doesn't do drugs or anything like that. But it's tough, really tough. Yeah, there was a woman in this church who. She was here before I got here and. She passed away maybe 10, 15 years ago now, so she was in the church quite a while when I was here, I never quite understood what exactly was going on with her, but she was she was a schizophrenic. She took her medication mostly through the help of many of the women in this church managed to achieve the ability to live on her own, the women in this church and her brother. She had a brother who really looked out for her and took care of her when the parents died, similar story and. And then when she died, you know, that I had never met her brother until she died. And then he came up here to sort of manage things and had a chance to talk to him and. I know so many schizophrenics and their families and. It doesn't, you know. Again, there's so much in this world that for all of the pretense of our power and our ability to somehow fix things. It's just abundant examples that we can't that we don't. You know, I've listened to. I think he did something on people were talking with you about homelessness and about mental illness and things, and it was so interesting when people you can tell people have no idea. Just give you know, well, you should do this, you should do that. And it's like, no, you don't. You don't get it. You don't know there's, you know, and people will say, well, why don't you put her somewhere? And I'm like, would that there were a place? Yeah. But that's long gone. And I'll tell you what I learned from her early on. Is that we must have a soul. Because I know that God loves her as much as he loves me, but it can't be through her brain, it can't be, so it's got to be something else. But it was very comforting to me. We had we had there was a family that was another so where I grew up in New Jersey when I was growing up, there were a pretty good healthy cluster of Christian informed churches, and so ministers families are always sort of different because in the community, the pastors are different. And so there was another minister's family had three daughters and the oldest daughter, she was in high school and she was she was about a year ahead of me or so, and she was very boisterous, charismatic, fun. And everybody knew it was a very large high school, Eastern Christian. Everybody knew her and I knew I knew the middle sister the best and then the youngest sister I got to know, too. We're all involved in drama. And then Facebook came on came about and suddenly you get reconnected with people I hadn't talked to for 20 years and I found my friends and then I asked about the other siblings. So what happened to what happened to your oldest sister? And she just said, you know, after when she was in college, she came down with schizophrenia and she and then I, of course, having done all that I've done here, I just and I knew I knew I had a picture of what that family went through and how there were no solutions and how. No matter what you try, everything you try to to express love to her and to make her life better, it's a half measure at best. And, you know, maybe just maybe she'll stay on the medications and that will that will help to a degree, you know, it it'll help to a degree. Usually a lot of the medications will or your pharmacist, a lot of the medications basically. Sort of take the edge off and. Achieve a degree of. Of sociality in the person doesn't mean necessarily that they're going to flourish, but just that they won't be quite so chaotic to their loved ones who desperately want to do something for them. And schizophrenia is can sometimes be just such a totalizing disability. Absolutely, absolutely. We have we have a caregiver who goes in a couple of times a week, but the. It has to be a very special person, obviously. And the other thing is that the only thing you can't touch anything in the house, you know, the only thing we want is for people to be in touch with her and take her shopping and because it can't trying to make things better, makes things worse a lot of times. But she's she's been able to live on her own for 10 years now, which is really quite amazing. Wow. Yeah, that's wonderful. But she's also 68 years old. So, yeah, yeah. And when they get older, you know, I've seen that, too. Well, like you said, the one who's living on the street, that's. That's yeah. It takes its toll as you get older, a lot more than when you're younger. Yeah, yeah. The woman in this church, she basically she died, she was living alone. She she had to take her medication just sort of in the right way, otherwise certain side effects would come up. And she basically. She basically fell and sort of was immobilized and, you know, died on the floor of her apartment. And she didn't she actually didn't die. Neighbors noticed she wasn't, you know, called the police. They came in. But by that point, she had been hot. She was then hospitalized for a couple of weeks and then she passed. She could never recover. But and it's what's so difficult about this is. So then, you know, the brother contacted me and we had some good conversations and we put together the service for her. And it was a lovely service. And the stories came out that I had never heard before. And but but you're always just so. I don't know how people who are not Christians deal with this, frankly, because. So on one hand, with her death, there's a sense of relief that her loved ones have because they know her suffering and with her death, they sense, OK, her suffering is over, they're still grieving, they still miss her. But. You know, at least for her, like you say, I mean, all of us believed, you know, for all of her slightly crazy ideas about God and us, she still came to church very faithfully. But. You know, for we all believe that at this point now she is relieved. Of her disorder, and she is flourishing like she never has. And with the resurrection, that is only going to get more. And so, you know, I can tell this story. And I can remember her and her struggles. But it's such a hopeful memory, because I believe when I see her again, I will not I will I will see a creature very different from the one I saw here. Absolutely. We had a we had an a family in the church that had a little boy with severe autism and the church for many years did their best to, you know, they kept him at home. And, you know, the whole thing. And I remember having a dream one night of his name is Jacob and having a conversation with Jacob and, you know, because he couldn't talk and. You know, again, I. You know, people, people in this crazy YouTube land sometimes wonder, you know, how I can see so much of the rough parts of the world and and still be a Christian, I just look at it the other way. How can you how can you see this world and tolerate it without being a Christian that I don't understand? Because I have hope. Yeah. You know, I. If there's one part about being a Catholic that I miss, it's Catholic funerals because. They're all about. Resurrection and what is to come. And. And if there's one thing. About at least the church I'm going to now, I don't want a bad mouth. I've written to you that you're the one who keeps me in my church. What I love is that you know. You know, to be a part of it and that's and I am. I've been here, you know, been in 27 years and I've done a lot of things in the church, but. Where, you know, as you know, we're the very liberal denomination. We might be the most liberal denomination, but my church is a is a conservative enclave in that, although that's that's breaking apart now. And. And I would go. With almost. Any of the progressive stuff that they want to do, if they would keep Jesus in the center and the resurrection, you know, and I mentioned that to one pastor and. And. The response was, well, I don't want to talk about, you know, in the sky by and by, we have to talk about here. And I thought. Everything else is talking about here. And I don't. The only thing that. Makes any sense is what you said. The only thing that makes sense otherwise, there's no and. And when you see progress, you don't know what the future is. You don't know what that progress is going to leave. Just Chester to expense, right? You don't know. And the best intentions of all that without. Jesus and the resurrection, however you know, you know, that you're saved or however that works out. Um. That's the point that's missing for me in all of this discussion. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I. I guess part of what I learned, you know, right after seminary, my wife and I went to the Dominican Republic and I spent six years there working with Haitians and part of what I learned there was. All of our best intentioned efforts fall so far short. And I'm I'm blessed to be able to work in. To be able to live and work my whole life in contexts where in some ways the deceptions. Of all of our solutions. Are exposed as. You know, if this is what we got. You know, praise God for it. You know, God for it. But it's I I do again, I do believe that I do believe that we are meant and this world is meant for so much more and to to just call that a myth, an inspiring myth. To me is is insufficient, so. That's how I feel. I have one more Catholic story to tell you and then I'll let you go. OK, so. So my daughter and we live three years in Germany, so we worked for the army in Germany and and my daughter and I took a trip to Rome. And so we went to St. Peter's and and they have confessional set up all over. So my daughter says, hey, mom, you're Catholic. Why don't you go? Why don't you go to confession? So I'm like, yeah, I still have some anger at my mother. Maybe I'll go to confession. So I go to the English speaking one and. Oh, you know, this is one of the most beautiful phrases in the whole world. Bless me, Father, for I have sinned. Bless me because I've sinned. Oh, my gosh. So I go in and I say, yeah, you know, I'm. Angry had this resentment against my mother and says, well. You go to church and go, no, I don't. And, you know, I am I go to congregational church and it goes, well, you need to come back to the church. And I said, well, you know, my husband and my daughter and he said, do you think this is a joke? And I thought to myself. He's right. What am I doing here? You know, and like my father, you know, the idea that the communion was so important to him and I was just playing around. And I think most people, if you said that, would get really indignant. And I was like, no, it's right. Yeah. And I left no longer a Catholic. You know, my stepmother said to me one time when I went up to communion, meanwhile, they can't go to communion. But what do I do? I go to communion. Yeah. You know, I just think we talk a lot about respect and all that stuff. And I was like, no, you can't exclude. No, no, you don't belong here anymore. So. Yeah, but you can't take the Catholic out of the girl. No, I've seen that before. Just like if you watch any of Paul Schrader's movie, you can't take the Christi Farb Church out of the boy. I have a friend who will not watch movies with me because we watched a Paul Schrader movie. And the one about the couple in Europe who get drugged. Never see this movie. Oh, it's so awful. Yeah. So he's. Yeah. He's got a lot of issues. And this last one was just. The one about the minister. First reformed. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Have you seen what was the one Calvary? Have you ever seen Calvary? No, it's on my list. I've not watched it yet. You have to see this movie and you've got to do something because. My husband hated it because the people don't seem real, but I think you'll like it. It's a wonderful movie. It's on the list. It comes up in one of these times. I have to watch it. I have to. Most of my media viewing is if I can't find another family member to agree to something, it almost doesn't get watched. So I wind up watching Bachelor in Paradise and things like this, which is it's cultural literacy. Absolutely. Absolutely. It wasn't for my daughter. I wouldn't know anything about Tik Tok. That's right. That's right. Yeah. Well, this was this was certainly a treat. I will send you the link to this video and you can look at it and you can show it to anyone you want. If you'd like me to share it, I'd be happy to share it. If you don't want to do anything with it, that's fine, too. I will let you know. That's the routine. OK, well, I just, you know, I. It's you're amazing and and and I want you to know that you really you have made me I'm a very poor Christian, but you've made me a better Christian. So I appreciate that. Thank you. That means a lot to me. Bye bye.