https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=k9ACXtG_B1A

 Hi, this is Paul. Last week a podcast got my attention. I've been obviously interested in the work of Peter Boghossian, James Lindsay, and Helen Pluckrose in their Sokol hoax effort to unmask some of what's been going, the woozling going on behind some what they call grievance journals. And so Peter Boghossian did a podcast and he explored what he called on the intellectual podcasters, the great realignment. And I heard that and immediately knew it very much crossed the paths of a lot of the other work that I've been doing. And so I wanted to put some commentary on this. So let's hear Peter on the podcast explain what he's doing. And I want to throw an idea out that I've been thinking about for quite a while. I'm not sure that it's true. I've asked people, some extremely smart public intellectuals who agree and some extremely smart public intellectuals who disagree. And hopefully I can work out some of these thoughts with you in this conversation. So I'm going to give you some data points and let's think through this together. OK, so around three years ago, I started to really think about social justice, diversity, equity, inclusion, and their trappings in academia, trigger warning, safe spaces, microaggressions, et cetera. And I started by asking the question, the sarptease question, how do you know that? How do you know that? Is it based on evidence? What is your evidence for that? And I was very surprised when I asked my colleagues that they didn't have any evidence. Or if they did have evidence, it was testimonial evidence as opposed to or anecdotal evidence. So I was also surprised when I started asking that question how upset people would become. And I know from you had Anthony Magnus Bosque going, when I did street epistemology, nobody ever became upset with me when I asked them how they knew their faith was a reliable guide to truth. So now I'm going to start giving you data points, OK? So I have had speakers come to Portland State University who self-describe as liberals. And those speakers were sponsored by the two most conservative groups on campus, Turning Point and the Republicans. And just to be clear with you, I've never lied to anybody about what I believe. I am a liberal. I've never voted for Republican. And I am a very out atheist. So why do you think the two conservative groups on campus put up, for example, Brett and Heather? Brett is a Bernie supporter for the record. Right. And by put up, you mean kind of hosted them or? Sponsored our events. Sponsored events. I can take a moment to guess, but do you want to tell me? No, I don't. But I want to give you more data points. OK. So and hopefully me giving you these data points is going to fill in a picture of something I've been fascinated by and thinking about for quite some time now. So let's fast forward to the Grievance Studies Affair. We published our God Accepted to Be published seven papers and peer review journals. The Wall Street Journal caught us. We had seven more under review and we had retired six at that point. So we had seven and we were well on our way to 13 or 14. Right. The people who excoriated me for that were my leftist colleagues. My the administration was not happy about that. And then I started receiving emails. I remember my for my feeling the first time I received this email, I was. I was, you know, the Greeks called a poria. I was perplexed. Yet I was also blown away. And the email, the first one that came in, read something like this. I know that it is very odd for an evangelical Christian to be emailing you an atheist to thank you for what you did. But I really want to thank you. And then it went on. And then they started pouring in support from evangelical Christians and to further contextualize this for you. I've been all around pretty much all around the world giving tours about how to talk people out of their faith. I wrote a book called The Manual for Creating Atheists. I published about this stuff. And Christians in particular, but religious people in general, were writing me in droves to support me. What do you make of that? It's like your enemy is my enemy. So it makes us friends. OK. And what do you think that and who is that enemy? In this case, I imagine it's the people who are the NIDUS of the Grievance Studies or whatever kind of whatever label you want to put on that meanplex. So where did you use the NIDUS? The NIDUS, yeah. OK. So. And this is just my first speculation. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know this is there's so many moving parts to this. It's so complicated. Excuse me. So. I started thinking about this utterly fascinated by it. And then I started thinking, so let's go to let's go with this enemy of my enemy thing. I originally used to think that here we have a thousand, two thousand year feud between. Atheists and. Religious folks. Now that right away caught my attention because the two thousand year fluid between atheists and religious folks. How many actual atheists can you find apart from perhaps because if you read, let's say, Plato, he's always talking about God or the gods. Plato obviously has his own conception, but apart from a few Greeks, perhaps a few atheists. Everyone else is religious all the way through. So no, no atheists all the way back then. No atheist for two thousand years. No atheist groups. Theists pretty much all over a varying different stripes. We'll get into some of those questions a little bit later, but let's keep going. And then the aliens come down. Right. So the aliens come down and they start taking atheists and excuse me and religious folks wholesale. And, you know, probing them before medical experiments, killing them by a thousand. I used to think it was something. It's so funny. He gets all Alex Jones on us. Oops. I think it was something like that. And the aliens in this case would be intersectionality. And then I thought that's far too crude of a metaphor. It's not accurate. Let's let's take a quick peek at the breakup of the atheists and skeptical movement. So atheism and skepticism was ripped apart by the social justice. And when I talked to James Lindsay and go back and maybe I'll put the link in the show. When I talked to James Lindsay, that was the revelatory moment for me. I didn't know that I didn't. So here's a big problem. So you have all everything going on in an atheist community and everything going on in a Christian community. And obviously they don't know a lot about each other. So it's really helpful to listen and to talk to each other, to learn what's going on in each other's respective communities. And the social justice movement broadly was composed of individuals. You know, you saw the Atheism Plus movement. You saw the move toward. This was before intersectionality was really a hot thing. It was toward oppressed groups, toward minorities. And you have things like the progressive stack, which is selecting like at a concert of progressives. It came up from the Occupy Wall Street movement. So if you had the most oppression variables, you would speak and those with the fewest oppression variables wouldn't speak in concerts, for example. Black lesbian women would come to the front of the concert, et cetera. This was in one of the papers we did. But what I didn't know until fairly recently was that just as the atheism and skeptical movements had its schisms, so too did evangelical Christianity is currently undergoing a schism. And that schism, the fault line in that schism is along the lines of intersectionality. Do you need something other than the Bible to interpret the Bible? Do you need an intersectional lens to look at the Bible? Right. So intersectional. So there's a schism in atheism and skepticism, broadly, those two factions. And there's a schism in evangelical Christianity. Now, here's the fascinating thing to me about that is that the schism, it's not about the exegesis of the text or how do you know hermeneutics. How do you interpret the fact that whatever the passage is, this happened or this happened. So imagine, I think this is best diagrammed, that there are two bubbles. And in one bubble, there's skepticism and atheism. And in the other bubble, it's evangelical Christianity or Christianity. Now, break those bubbles off so that there's a top bubble and a bottom bubble. So on the left, the atheism, skepticism bubble, on the top, there's atheists without a social agenda. And on the bottom, there are atheists with a progressive social agenda, intersectional atheists. So in the top, you have Michael Shermer, Richard Dawkins, Sam Harris, et cetera. Now, let's jump to the other bubble. The other bubble on top, you have maybe hardcore is the right word, but you have, I'm trying to think of what the word would be, maybe more fundamentalist or literalist isn't exactly the word. But maybe we don't need a word. You have, because I'm thinking through this myself as I tell you this. On the top, you have people who do not, evangelicals who do not believe you need intersectionality as a lens to view the Bible or Christian acts or faith. And then the bottom, you have people who do. Right. So you see how we have four bubbles? This is the thing I want to talk to you about. I call it the great realignment. And as I started saying, many people are many people I really respect intellectually disagree with this. Those whom I've spoken and many people agree. Excuse me. So the great realignment is that the people in the top bubble are closer to each other than they are to the people in the bubble immediately beneath them. So the realignment is between it and it's the explanatory process by which I receive emails from Christians who support my work scores. Because the great realignment realigns people in terms of a few things. It realigns them in terms of whether or not there's objective truth. The people on the bottom, and I don't say bottom in a meaning way, but the people in the second bubble have taken in philosophy we call a subjective turn. It's the turn towards subjectivity, whereas the people in the top, top bubble, the first bubble have objective truth. That's one commonality. They disagree on what that is. Okay, I can see right here that I've messed up my, my variables. So let me let me fix that a minute. If those of you who are watching the watching the YouTube. There it's fixed now it's correct. And what that is. But they agree that there's a world exists independently of them. And you can know that they also disagree on the methods that sometimes they disagree on the methods that use. But the second thing, which is extraordinarily interesting to me. Well, within that category you have truth claims like that the people in the top bubble believe that you can make a truth claim independent of your subjective position in the system. So, it doesn't matter in a social context. It doesn't matter if you're sis hetero, none of those variables matter you can still see this enlightenment project. Use reason and rationality as these critical tools and liver better life. Actually, I had it right the first time so I'll fix it again. Liver better life, independent of any oppression variables into it do not possess. Something else is really interesting to me about this. And when you dig deeper into the second thing you understand the speech wars, what college, you know, free speech on campus and disinvitations, you understand that those things are really proxies for something deeper. So, what that second thing is, is that it's the rules of engagement. It's the people at the top bubble agree to the rules of engagement. And the rules of engagement in this case are discourse and dialogue and not weaponizing institutions. They're not anti for people. They're not trying to rip down all systems and bring bull horns, for example, to give you a specific example to college classrooms if they don't like it below the bullhorn. They're not demanding that Camille Pagli or particular people get fired because they don't possess certain oppression variables. I call this whole thing, the great realignment. That's what I wanted to throw out to you today. And I wanted to not tell you because I wanted to, I'm working this out myself. And I wanted to throw this out to you and get feedback so that I could refine it and hear if you think there's something legitimate to this or not. Right. Okay. A couple observations right away. The people in the top tend to be modernist. And yes, they do share rules of engagement to a degree. But if we look a little bit ahead, and if you look at Peter's actual book, Manual for Creating Atheists, if you go ahead to chapter nine, he's got some pretty authoritarian institutional ideas in that chapter. Containment protocols use the word faith only for religious context. Faith is an unclassified cognitive illness disguised as a moral virtue. So I think Peter might pull back from some of these elements. So right away, one way to divide these groups, maybe I'll just make it on the slide a second. So there I just added to the slide. So the top, these people that Peter talking about, people that are not using the intersexual social agenda lens through which to see the world, I would call them modernist, and I would call their epistemology foundationalist. And generally speaking, this comes out of the Enlightenment. This is a rather Lockean view of knowledge and a rather Lockean view of the way we arrive at justifiable truth, publicly justifiable truth. Now the lower section would, I think, be postmodern, and this goes to Jordan Peterson's. This gets into the Jordan Peterson postmodern neo-Marxist complaint, but there is definitely a cultural postmodernity about it in terms of the suspicion of our capacity to know things because of our subjective experiences. So you basically have modernist, foundationalist, objectivists on the top and postmodernist, let's say perspectivalists on the bottom. So in that sense, I think Peter is on to something with this realignment because what we are seeing both in the atheist community, but also in the Christian community, even the evangelical community, part of how I would nuance Peter's critique would be to bring in, let's say, the main line, perspective of the main line, and other religious groups. There's a lot of Protestantism going on in some of this as well, and if you've watched my videos, you probably understand a little bit of what I'm saying. You can get at some of that in the Vervecki video that I'm going to play in a little while. So in terms of what Peter has going for his theory, I would say, yeah, you've got basically a modernist, postmodernist split going on here. But I think there's something a lot deeper going on, and I think it has a lot to do with the Jordan Peterson moment. And actually, this comes out of a conversation that I had at the end of that I had last week, which I thought was very germane to this. Now, I've been queuing up my conversations because I'm going to go on vacation and I don't want to leave my channel blank while I go on vacation. So while I'm on vacation, there'll be a lot of conversations that I'll be posting on my channel. But I had this conversation with a doctor who had contacted me, and we had quite a good conversation. And he had this theory about the rise of Jordan Peterson and has everything to do with with new atheism. And it has everything to do with, I think, the realization that people don't really that that there is a there's an implicit eschatology, which I'm going to talk about a lot in this video. There's an implicit eschatology, an implicit narrative within new atheism that has been at play and in fact has been receding. So here's the tape. I think the starting point of Jordan Peterson was the response to the new atheists and their claim that the commons, the kind of secular commons, had a metaphysical basis that everyone had to adopt in order to create a unified vision. And that's that's really important here that implicit in the new atheist project, implicit in Sam Harris's evangelical project. And it's in this way that evangelicals, modernist, foundationalist evangelicals and new atheists are very much birds of the same feather. They have very, they have very similar epistemological foundations. They work with their foundations in very similar ways. And that's why, you know, you often have this sort of squaring off style apologetics on both sides going after each other. But beneath this on both sides, evangelicals obviously are saying everyone should bow a knee to Jesus. New atheists also have an evangelistic claim that they are promoting in the world. And you can see that very clearly in Peter Boghossian's Manual for Creating Atheists. That's one of the most that's one of the most that's one of the most obvious atheist evangelistic tracks and methods. He actually has written an evangelism book for atheists. And so there's this narrative beneath new atheism that that has been going on since since 9 11. And that's and that secular their vision was that the secular foundation was reductive materialism and naturalism. And their proposal was that we needed to do away with the transcendent and get on board in seeing the same world as a unified, you know, world consciousness in order to get rid of these crazy religious types who were doing crazy things. And that didn't wash, partly because the partly because the argument that what the guys who flew those planes into those buildings did was reprehensible had already been agreed to by everybody. So the fact that they were making that argument in a very caustic and angry way, you know, kind of gets you a splash initially. But it's like, well, but we all agreed to that. We all agree with that. So that doesn't go anywhere. And then in the back of it was this metaphysical claim. That is to say, before the secular commons was respecting everybody's individual metaphysical commitments, including transcendent ones. And it was allowing those to exist. I mean, the Puritans didn't come to America to give up their Puritanism. No, they did not. Right. So, so, so that's the wrong vision of the commons. That is to say that we need to go to the to Tyson, the guy who did Cosmos very explicitly says this in that in that series that what we need is the common vision. And, and that and the source of that common vision is science is scientism. That's that's the common vision that will unify us that allow us to have conversations together and do good things. And that didn't wash because because reductive materialism naturalism and a non-transcendent worldview can't be sustained in any kind of, you know, in any kind of way. And so Jordan Peterson stepped into the breach of that. And then all of the believer all of these metaphysical commitments that have their own version of a transcendent element to them, religious, spiritual, philosophical types. They all said, hey, he's our guy. So what you've got is a kind of a pluralistic group who are standing kind of facing the new atheists in a certain sense and saying, no, you're wrong about this. And that's a unified sense. So that's the first phase here that people feel unified around Jordan Peterson. But the question that I have as we as we move forward is what are we going to do with the plurality of that group of people who are looking to Jordan Peterson as their as their voice as their unifical as their singular voice. And I don't have an answer to that. That's something I look for is what do you know, not to this my own religious tradition, but I mean, there is plurality in in Protestantism. And we can't offer the thing that the new atheists were offering. And that's singularity of viewpoint. Right. I'm not saying that's a good viewpoint. I'm just saying we what are we going to how are we going? Can we I don't know what do we do with that? I don't know. And that will be the conversation that I that I post at some point coming up. But I thought that ever since he made that point, it's been ringing in my head that that he he just articulated so clearly the the worldview, the the implicit narrative, not really that implicit, quite explicit because Sam Harris and Matt Dillahunty and the attack on any any system that had a transcendent world view had within it the promise that without this without this transcendent without this archaic superstitious these are the words that they use archaic superstitious nonsense, then we would all be moral. And of course, when you see Peterson and Harris talk in their debate, Peterson just says that's hogwash. You you eliminate people sense of the transcendent. They don't just suddenly become rational and moral and and reasonable according to your terms. They, in fact, become other things. And in fact, I think part of what we're seeing in what I think is behind critical theory intersectionality as Peter Boghossian talks about it, the postmodern neo Marxism is in fact that and I'm going to make this point a little bit later on. Part of what the new atheist slack was really an engaging, attractive, a sufficiently attractive vision that hit enough people where they were at. And so people will grab on to they will grab on to shiny moral things in order to improve their status and they will do so very quickly. And and this is why we have this, you know, over the last number of years we've had the the this meme virtue signaling arise and we should talk and think a lot more about why we virtue signal what we get out of virtue signaling. You know, I just had a conversation, another one that I'll probably likely play coming up where where someone was making the point that this this person descended into nihilism and was reflecting on the the ways he was enjoying nihilism and and deriving status from nihilism. And and you would think, how could you derive enjoyment from something like that? Well, there's a certain pride to it that goes along. Now, now you'll find unbelievable, which which is a terrific program, something that I put their podcast or radio show in England. I've listened to them for years. I love the I love the work that they're doing. Peter Boghossian had a very interesting conversation with Tim McGrew. Tim McGrew teaches in Michigan and he's a philosopher. And they basically they basically took on the points that Peter Boghossian had made to Phil Vischer. Peter, Peter Boghossian had a definition of faith which didn't seem to make much sense to me nor to Tim McGrew nor to just about any Christian because part of the basic and I guess Peter's working on a book about people talking across boundaries. Well, one of the things that that one of the one of the skills that you should look for when you're talking across boundaries is if you're going to use a definition of somebody else's viewpoint, it's really helpful if both sides agree on the definition, especially if you're saying this is what you believe. Well, find out if that's what they really believe. But so Peter's I think Peter was quite confused on how Christians work and in some ways on how people work. And this is one of my larger critiques about the new atheists. I don't find people actually working that way. I find people being much more irrational in their normal lives. Tim McGrew make it a good point that faith involves a wager on a on the limited presentation of knowledge and evidence that people have. And this is how most of us live our lives. None of us have enough information to go through the day. None of us know what's going to happen today. Most of us deal with other people on a in many ways a faith based relationship. Jordan Peterson talks about the emergence of eBay and you know when eBay started everyone assumed well people would lie about the products they sell and they try and not pay the money for it. And so the whole thing would collapse. And Jordan Peterson makes the point that people have noticed that a foundational element of successful cultures is the degree to which people can extend trust to strangers. And that makes a lot of sense in terms of economics because if I have to check every single piece, every single bill for counterfeit or if I'm if transactions can't happen smoothly, if I don't send away to Amazon or to eBay or some other place and imagine that in a few days I will receive my goods and if the goods aren't as promised I can return them. There's a high degree of trust that's built in and this pistis in Greek means faith or trust. And in fact trust is often the better translation for it than faith. As I mentioned some of the later chapters of Peter's book were fairly authoritarian and if Peter and I talk about it maybe I'll see if he's still up on that kind of thing because I think what he's feeling now is in fact that someone else is taking the reins of power. And I think Peter has a point in terms of his rules of engagement have changed. Too often however those who are the minority want the libertarian rules and the liberties which is part of the reason why the United States was founded by individuals that were on the short end of the stick in terms of the British Empire. And part of the reason that the Bill of Rights developed as it did and the American system developed as it did was the sense that the majorities can become tyrannical and so there needs to there need to be in a system protections of minorities and it's disturbing in our political system to see, even though we've only got two parties to see this continuing to develop in the Senate and the House in terms of their rules. Rules, when you're in the majority you should continue to respect rules that protect the minority because quite likely in two or four or six years you will be in the minority and things change hands quickly. And so Christians will agree with Peter Boghossian because the new atheists now where they used to imagine that they were in an ascendant position now find themselves their own house divided in terms of atheists and they're in a losing position. And in fact, a lot later on in the podcast they'll talk about the losing the culture war not only have evangelical Christians lost the culture war, but I think Sam Harris, Peter Boghossian, James Lindsay and a number of other atheists feel themselves losing the culture war and that's why they're speaking out. And suddenly religious liberty, atheists might desire claims on legislation for religious liberty now, whereas prior when they felt that they were winning those didn't seem quite as important and exactly the same thing can be said of Christians and atheists who feel that they have lost a position of preeminence in the culture. So there's there's a lot going on there politically and socially. Now I'm not going to talk a whole lot about faith or discuss this element of Peter's book. He used the definition of faith, he used two definitions of faith, believing without evidence and pretending to know things you don't know. And Tim McGrew rightly contested both of those both of those definitions of faith and if you look at the English Oxford dictionary, for example, the first definition complete trust and confidence in someone or something. It's not a particularly religious word and in fact most of the examples aren't religious. American political culture has a strong faith in the efficacy of markets and skepticism in the competence of government. Every single worry about how we socialize children is laid open to questions until one wonders if society has lost faith in our ability to socialize children and all. In an era when so many young people are falling victim to drink and drug scourge that is sweeping across the country like a typhoon, I had lost a lot of faith in our youth restored last week. We use this word faith for all kinds of things and you know one of the most important synonyms that we have for it is in fact trust, which is the first one given, belief, confidence, conviction. I don't think anyone really wants to banish the word faith or basically make faith the exclusive purview of Christian language. Now the second definition has a specifically religious aspect to it, strong belief in the doctrines of a religion based on a spiritual conviction rather than proof. I don't particularly, I'm not, I'm not, I'm a little skeptical about that definition. It is the second definition and I understand where it's coming from. The 2.1 the Christian faith only once in the New Testament is the Christian faith referred to as such. That's a later adaptation. Most of the time in the New Testament when you see the word translated in English as faith, pistis, it could easily and sometimes better be translated as trust. So, but I think what we're really talking about is not so much faith but really knowledge and two ways of approaching the world. And as I've said many times the maps of meaning begins with two perspectives on the world and I think the good Dr. James is dead on right that it's, it's, this is where Jordan Peterson really engages the atheist. Because he says, you know, there's a space even though he himself, you know, acts as if God is real. The world can be conceived of in two ways, a space of objects where there's a knower or perceiver sees objects as they are. This is what I often call a monarchical vision. You lose the subject and you crowd source objectivity. And my complaint with this monarchical vision is that once a human being actually attempts to wield it or operate within it, it's like a clean room that they contaminate because subjectivity obviously comes flooding in. The difficulty that we have with a world of objects is that there are near infinite number of objects or aspects to do so. And so this theory of knowledge as an exclusive theory of knowledge really breaks down. And that's where Peterson comes in with his form for action. And faith, you know, apart from even a religious use of the term, is much more a function of this approach because we cannot know all of the objects in the world and we cannot know enough of the world. So we have to proceed on limited knowledge and act in the world even when we don't know what all of the outcomes were be or whether we desire those outcomes. And we see this displayed in the four, really six talks that Jordan Peterson does with Sam Harris. That Sam Harris keeps wanting to put forward this idea that we are simply, that we can have an objective view of the world. And Peterson says, objective view of which elements of the world, that in fact throughout human evolution we have developed an a priori structure. Now, once I get the video of the second session back from the conference that I did in Australia on this subject, I'll make the point that in a sense what Jordan Peterson does is concedes Darwin's point. Well, maybe you don't need God for to explain the origins of the world. Now, that obviously is contested by many Christians and many other people, in fact. But Jordan will say you very much need a sort of God and I call this God number one. You very much need a sort of God which is a structural filter, an a priori filter in order to have human psychology or human civilization. The filters are usually arranged in stories and they're arranged in stories because this is in many ways what we are. And the way that we engage with the world, it is not so much just a set of facts in syllogism or a set of facts built up upon, built up on a foundation to achieve certainty. We are in fact autobiographies. That is the best definition really of I think what we would call a soul or what we are. This is how we imagine ourselves to be. And we have value hierarchies nested within these stories. And because the world is so complicated, we use hierarchies and we use stories that have value hierarchies nested within them. And this is in fact what we're seeing from the postmodernists that the intersectionality people are using this progressive stack. There's a nice little bit of language I picked up from Peter Bogosian in this. Use this progressive stack as a sort of a value hierarchy, but it's always nested in and communicated with a story. And the reason for this is that we don't really see objects. Now this is one of the early things I caught in Jordan Peterson's Maps of Meaning classes and this is actually from one of his earlier classes. But he's dead on right here. Okay, so the other way of looking at it is when you're, so there's lots of ways of conceptualizing what you encounter when you move into the world. So we said well. So what you encounter in terms of all of these objects, all of these facts, all of these things. There's lots of ways, there's lots of ways that in fact it isn't just when I walk into my office, I don't simply see everything in my office. In fact, before I see anything by virtue of this, this posture for action, I am in fact training my eyes what to see. My mind, my unconscious mind will select for me to pay attention to that which is most relevant or relevant or salient for me when I come into the office. In fact, I don't see objects in the office. Well, Peterson will get this and then we'll get to Vervecky. You know, there's positive things you encounter, negative things, there's expected things and unexpected things, there's desired things and undesired things. And another way of thinking about it, which is more, in some sense it's more empirical, is that you encounter tools and obstacles. Right? And tools move you forward. And tools are a funny thing because they're sort of half objective and half subjective. Right? They're a thing. But the thing is defined by their use. But weirdly enough, we tend to define thing by use. You know, and I mentioned this before, so most people when they're thinking about language think that you use words to label things. But it seems much more likely that we use categories as tools to act in the world. And so we don't see things. We see the use of things or the fact that they get in our way. And so you're trying to set up the world so that what surrounds you are entities that you can use to get what you desire and to eliminate obstacles. And in fact, that's what you generally do if you're a good manager. Right? A big part of being a good manager is to, first of all, lay out a plan for people that's hierarchy and where the hierarchical levels don't conflict. And the second thing is you get rid of obstacles for them so that they can come to you and say, well, I can't do this because this isn't the way. Your job is to get it out of the way so that they can move forward. So it's a very good way of conceptualizing yourself as a manager. So now part of there's obstacles that you understand, and those would correspond to the micro levels of the hierarchy. Right? And then there's obstacles that you don't understand. And when they come up, they just blow apart your whole plan. So now associated with that expected, unexpected, desired, undesired, tool, obstacle is a corollary, which is all the things that you're not conceptualizing as tools or obstacles or as things you don't know, they're irrelevant. And that's a really useful thing to know because it means that whenever you're looking at the world, it's like the world is a sea of snakes. And you're only concentrating on one snake at a time. But then if you make a mistake dealing with that single snake, what happens is you're neck deep in snakes. Because all of the thing is when you make a mistake, and this is a critical issue, when you make a mistake and you blow the framework within which you're construing the world, the framework that narrows it for you, what happens is that all the things that you've been ignoring become potentially relevant. And that's overwhelming. And that's partly why your body reacts as if it's under tremendous stress. So, for example, you know how these things work. And again, I think betrayal is the best example. If you have a partner and they betray you, then all the things that you thought were true about them aren't. And all those things you ignored as irrelevant turned out not to be irrelevant at all. So, you know, maybe the person told you on a twice weekly basis that they were too busy studying to spend any time with you. And, you know, you just put that down into the irrelevant zone after some coming to terms with it. And then you find out, well, that isn't what they were doing during that time. And then the next question is, well, what else did they tell you that wasn't the way it was? And the answer to that is, could it be anything? It means every single thing about your relationship, past, present, and future, has now been cast into the realm of potential relevance. And almost all the relevance is negative. And that's the descent into chaos. So that's the best way to conceptualize chaos is because what happens is that your plan is what narrows the world for you and constrains it, makes most of it irrelevant. The parts that aren't relevant positive and the negative elements relatively rare. That's what the intact hierarchical plan does. If you blow the hierarchical plan, then all your nice little subdivisions are now irrelevant and every little monster comes up to face you. And I would say you could see that with, well, when you have the split, the betrayal of atheists from their tribe and the betrayal of evangelicals from their tribe, because you neatly organize the world in people who believe in God like we do and people who don't. Okay, that's nice. Two categories. Or people who don't believe in God like we do and people who do. Well, there's nice two categories. And so now what happens is, well, now you've got four bubbles. And in fact, you've got all kinds of different bubbles going on. And now you're looking over at the evangelicals, if you're Peter Bogosian, who are also modernist, foundationalist. And you say, well, these are our allies because we all believe in facts. And so based on playing this video, now I might be an enemy. But I'm not a critical theorist promoter. In fact, I'm quite critical of critical theory. And even though I'm not very much of a modernist foundationalist, well, I might be an ally. And so suddenly the whole world gets more complex. But the point here is that in fact we see tools and obstacles. And we are highly attuned to status because of the great affordance it gives of opportunities. And so while we're, you know, so then we're looking at the world. And again, this is pre-conscious. Our mind is sorting this world and bringing all of the salience things up for us. And we are doing this all on the basis of status. And now, again, I've been a, that's all, I am not someone who tends to, I am not someone who tends to overlook the consequences of racism or sexism or any other kind of discrimination in this world. These things are shot through for the very reason that Peterson just decided. We are all incredibly biased for ourselves and then after ourselves for our family and for our tribe and for whatever group of people we think are all around us. This is how we proceed in the world. And we can't help but do so. And this floods into everything that we do. Now, the problem that I have with critical theory is I don't think they get it right. Are there big problems? Yes, but those aren't the only problems. And this is where intersectionality destroys itself because you can, as Peterson says, you can just keep dividing the world until actually you are at the level of individual and then you have to start over. But now, one of the things that I really liked was, Vervecky did a video interview. It's going to be, I guess, a part of a bigger video that this group is doing. But part of what's going on here is I think the idea of truth. Because when I listen to the celebrity atheists, I hear propositional truth, propositional truth. What's interesting is that that's something I heard 50 years ago a lot of. You can still find the groups today. But 40, 50 years ago, heard that a lot from different Christian camps. And this is why this modernist approach to knowledge is, in fact, in many ways, passe because of a lot of what psychology has noticed. And you'll get a good course in this from John Vervecky's Meaning Crisis course. But in this video, he walks through a bunch of it quite well. We think we're perceiving, we're primarily perceiving objects. And it's a very sort of model, it's a model very similar to what you see in Locke, sort of the idea that we get these impression of objects and then we form ideas around them. And when I listen to Peter Boghossian talk about this way of, these fact-based or evidence-based, evidence isn't objects. And when I listen to them, I hear a lot of this object propositional procedure. I'm going to play quite a bit of this video, actually, because the whole thing is really excellent. And then Gibson argued that, no, the objects come later. There's sort of abstractions out of what we're actually perceiving are affordances. And so, for example, this object is graspable. OK, so that, right, that to see, to experience it, to perceive it as graspable, is that, is it being graspable a property of the bottle? Well, no, not really, because for many creatures, praying mantis, this isn't graspable. Is it a property just of me? Is it a subjective property? Well, no, because not everything I want to be graspable is graspable. It's actually a relational property. It's a real relational property. It's that there's properties of this object and properties of my hand, for example, that can be causally coupled together such that my hand can fit and make use of the objects in this object in certain ways. So the object affords grasping. This desk affords me placing things on it, right? So that's what you see first, and then the objects are inferred afterwards. Right, because what, and this is part of the whole idea. And you can actually see people practice this. If you ever see someone in a fight and they pick up something to throw at you, they're not paying attention to what the object is. All they're looking at is graspability and throwability. And we see that all the time. Yeah, of embodied cognition. It's instead of thinking of yourself as sort of a passive receiver, that's the Lockian model, right? Of these impressions. Think of the word pressing on you, right? Instead of thinking of, instead of thinking yourself that way, think instead, no, this is what you're actually doing. And that it's your perception and your action are always deeply interpenetrating and conditioning and coupling each other. So I'm seeing that as I'm moving towards it, trying to make use of it. You say, well, sometimes I sit still. Even when you're sitting still, you're usually shifting your attention around it. Your eyes are saccading. Right. And what you're often doing, right, is you're trying to get to a place where Marlo Ponti talks about this. And Dreyfus and others, where you get what's called an optimal grip on it. I'm trying to get to the place where I get the sort of... That's only if you want to pick it up. Or doesn't it just happen even if you're just writing a paper? First of all, we want to know what it is. Right? But of course, those are not disconnected. I don't want to know everything about this. I want to know things that I can interact with it in terms of, like it's graspable or perhaps it's throwable. And that would be something different for me, right? You know, there's an, oh, no, and I need to throw it. Right? And so what it means is, OK, there's trade-off relationships. If I get too close to the object, I'm missing... I can't get... I'm not getting a lot of the structure. I might get some details here. Right? But if I get too far back and are static, I'm missing some of the details and I'm missing some of the, you know, the curvature of the... So to get the cup, I have to move around. And notice getting the cup, getting a grip on the cup, it's dependent again, like I said, on what I need. I might need the details. You know, maybe, you know, I'm Sherlock, you know, oh, I need this very... I need the fingerprint. I have to get in. Right? Or, right, I might just need it as a heavy object and then I don't need... But if it's graspable, you see how... What I'm trying to do with the thing is going to affect, right, how I'm moving around it so that I get the optimal grip that is relevant to the cup. That is relevant to the task or the problem at hand for me. And so sensation and perception, sensory motor loop, are bound up together. They're interpenetrating. And what's happening is, right, I'm sort of being shaped as the object is being shaped in the sense of different features, different aspects of it are being foregrounded or backgrounded for me. Okay. What does that have to do with meaning? Well, I mean, that's a long question. But what I think that has to do with meaning is when we talk about meaning in meaning in life. So let's be clear. I'm not talking about what people talk about in like ultimately in semantics, like the meaning of sentences or things like that. Right. I'm talking because when we use that term for talking about our life, we're using it as... So we should be using different words. We're using meaning and then the meaning of life and then the meaning of a sentence. Meaning of a sentence, we should say meaning A of life or meaning B of a sentence. Yeah. Philosophers will often distinguish between like semantic meaning and existential meaning or something like that. So right now you're talking about existential meaning. Very much so. And the way to think of the core of existentialism, at least one way of understanding it, is our meaning making in this sense of the modes that I get into. So, right. I want to be careful how your viewers are understanding this, but I'm creating an identity for this as I'm creating an identity for myself. They're being co-created together. I am becoming a grasper as this is becoming a graspable thing. Right. As this is becoming a graspable, did that not exist beforehand? It existed, but to think that the graspability is in it as a property, you won't find that, for example, as a property in your physics ontology. Because it's not an invariant property of this. As I said, this is graspable by me. It's not graspable by all. Yeah, but you can just say it's graspable by me without saying as it becomes graspable. Well, because I might not be using it that way, right? So I may never grasp it. See, I don't get it. It's as if what you're saying is you have some motivation, you have some reason you want to pick it up, you have something you want to do with it. But the object itself, from a physics point of view, let's say, from a materialistic point of view, doesn't change because of what you want to do. Well, I think that's unfair. Here's why I think it's unfair. You're thinking that the properties of this object are somehow inherent in it, like its chemical structure, where many of its properties are interactional properties that are only refilled or disclosed by it as it interacts with other objects or other things. So many of the real properties of things are relational properties. So if I say to you that sugar is soluble, is that a property in the sugar? No, it's a property that the sugar has in relationship to its interaction with water, right? And so many of the properties that we want to talk about things, we shouldn't think of them as adhering in the object. They are disclosed in terms of how the object interacts with other things. One of those things that the cup can interact with is me and the way I will, you know, shape it either physically or at least cognitively in terms of what aspects of it stand out for me or important to me. OK, I don't want to get bogged down in this, but I'm just going to play the devil's advocate because most people are materialists, or at least that's how they're trained to think that they see the world. That's a mistake, right? They shouldn't be materialists. I know, they shouldn't be. No, no, no. What I mean is they should be physicalists. I mean, there's a big difference between those. Materialism is an 18th century view, right? Materialism is the view that all that exists is matter. I mean, and that's a ridiculous view because it's unscientific. You should be a physicalist. You should believe that in addition to matter, there's energy, there's space, there's time, there's causal properties, there's fundamental forces, right? There's the curvature of space, there's relativity, there's, right? You should be including all of those in your ontology, and many physicists are leaning towards the idea that, you know, information should be thought of as physical and part of the fundamental. That's what we should be talking about. OK, so let's say physicalist. Well, that's important, I think. So then what a physicalist might say is that sugar, dissolvability of sugar is an inherent property of the sugar, that that exists independent of whether or not water exists. How did you know that? Because you can, with a calculation, like you make up a hypothetical, we can make up hypotheticals in physics all the time. We can make up hypotheticals about what would happen if this hit the wall, and it doesn't have to hit the wall, and we can calculate it. I think the question here is why would you do that? Because then we're back into a form for action, because every, there are limitless potentialities, and what action does, as Peterson said, what action does, what subjectivity does is take the world of the infinite and make it actual. And that's where these things come together. And that's finally the problem with this modernist approach. We test it out and it turns out to be correct. It could also turn out to be wrong. Then we update our models. Right, so you should, right? And so all of your ways of actually obtaining your knowledge are actually dependent on getting things to interact together. Yes, you could try and a priori calculate all of this, but that's not how we actually do science. Right? And in fact, we can't do science because that way, because time, because again, this is what we're what we're barking at with all of this stuff is that the modernity arrived at many of its wonderful blessings that it has given us through science and technology by removing the subject. And we've gotten to the end of that and realizing the subject needs to come back in. Well, this is, in a sense, part of the critique of the postmodernist, and they have a point. But you can't take that point too far because there's still the other side. So this is where this question of knowledge comes in. That's not a fair representation of how we do science. And to say that the like the if you had no knowledge of water's ability to dissolve things, how would you determine, you know, your hypothetical? Well, that's right. So does it exist independent of our knowability? And in fact, let's say a unicorn unicorn P does solve, does solve, dissolve in unicorn P. Well, maybe you're going to have to run the calculation where you're going to have to figure out what unicorn P is made out of. Maybe it's made of, you know, pixie dust and rainbows. And who knows what what unicorn P is made of. But this is part of the positive. This is part of the problem. There's no such things as unicorns. So there's no such things as unicorn P and so on and so forth. Well, I mean, you would have to tree falling in the woods now. Well, now it's not quite knowability. It's right. There's a difference between knowability and whether or not it's a real property. I assume that sugar dissolved in water way before there were cognitive agents or life wouldn't have evolved the way it did. So I don't think this is dependent on there being, you know, cognitive agents with consciousness knowing that sugar dissolves in water in order for sugar to be soluble. But what I what it does depend is it depends crucially on a real relation between sugar and water and not something that is just belongs to water as a property itself. So you're using the word relation and interaction interchangeably in this. Yeah, because I mean, interaction is a species of relation. Yeah. OK, so let's get bogged down a little bit further. Like Sam Harris and Peterson. Yeah. What is the notion? What is your notion of truth? So that's a long question. And I think it's fair to say that one of my criticisms is we have a notion of truth that is too separate from the different ways in which we obtain knowledge about the world. So our standard way of understanding truth and the interesting thing about the Greeks, for example, is they had four different terms for talking about this. So the model we have, the dominant model we have is propositional truth. So we have propositions and then we determine if they're accurate or they correspond. Of course, there's a lot of philosophical debate, right? But some notion of they correspond to reality in one way. And that's that's our epistemic sense of truth. And I think if I understand him correctly, because it's very hard to pin Harris down because he always claims to be misunderstood when people try to criticize him. But anyways, I think that the form, the notion of truth he is advocating is exactly that notion. And he thinks that's the sole notion of truth. What do you think Jordan to be? And and see. So when I look at Peter Boghossian relating to this certain class of evangelicals, that's what they tend to have in common, that this is the sole notion of truth, except that what has happened is that atheists have said, well, it's all these things out here in the material, the physical world. This is our truth. And then you have certain classes. And this is why Peter Boghossian in his great alignment named fundamentalists, because there are certain individuals like Ken Ham, who will say. And see, so what happened in the modernist fundamentalist fight is that fundamentalists just slid the Bible in there and said, well, this is the Bible is our foundation of truth. And that's why I ask people if you if you must have a biblical cosmology, must you also have a biblical anatomy? Must you must you look to the Bible for all of your medical decisions? Because the problem I have is not the truth of the Bible. The problem I have is the conception of truth that these two groups are using for their ideas of truth. And so that's that's where my complaint is in terms of what they're doing doing with his notion of pragmatic notion of truth. I think he's conflating a bunch of different things together in his own little Peter Sonian form of truth. Yeah, because he talks about, you know, the the the the truth in the world of action. Right. And he talks about this in terms of pragmatism. And I take him to be using something like a Jamesian notion of pragmatism. Let me try and get at that. There's there's so in addition to knowing that things are the case, like knowing that that is a cup. Right. And that's proposition knowing there's procedural knowing, which and I think that's part of what Jordan's talking about. So I know how to catch a ball. I know how to ride a bicycle. That's a skill. It's not a theory. It's a skill. Right. And you know, it's even, you know, realized in different functions, areas of the brain, sectors. In a form for action affords that much better than a space of objects, things like that. So when I talk about skills, I don't talk about them being true or false. Right. I talk about them being apt or inept. And that's pragmatic. That's part of what pragmatism means. I think because to be apt or inept means that you have some goal. There's some goal, but it's also the appropriateness or the fittedness of the action. So the standard there isn't really a standard of truth. So let me let me try it this way. I think all the knowledges have a different way of talking about ways in which we find things to be real. One way is propositional truth. Then another what skills give us is they give us a sense of realness in terms of power. Right. How much power we are able to wield. How much our actions can intervene and alter the course of things. And that's definitely what's being emphasized by certain forms of pragmatism. And you can even see it in some postmodernisms when Foucault was talking about the relationships between knowledge and power. Right. And I think but I think there's another notion. So the Greeks have episteme for theoretical truth, propositional truth. They have techne for this procedural ability. Techne is where we get our technology from. This is the this is the knowing how to do things like. Is that related to perspectival knowledge? No, I would say that that's a different thing. And so I think the Greek word that corresponds to that is noesis. And so this is closer to our word for like noticing. And so what perspectival knowing is like knowing what it's like to have a particular salience landscape, knowing what it's like to be here now with these things salient to me and these things backgrounded, these things foregrounded. I'm offended that you refer to me as these things. No, I have a bunch of things. Sorry. What relationship does the perspectival knowledge have to truth? And also, let's just get to your notion of truth, because right now you're reiterating what you think Peterson's notion of truth is or Sam Harris. Well, I am. So, well, I'm trying to get to my notion by distinguishing and contrasting mine with both Harris and Peterson. So unlike Harris, I think that there I think truth belongs to a family of ways of deciding how things are real for us. And then I think Jordan is calling what Jordan is talking about. He's talking about some aspect of our procedural knowing, our techne. And one way things strike us, a criterion we use for determining things are real is their power, which is different from the accuracy of our propositions. The perspectival knowing, studying this right now with Dan Schiappi, it has a different sense of realness to it. It comes with this notion of presence. So let me give you an example of what I'm talking about. We're currently studying scientists who do work with like the rovers on Mars. And what's interesting there is this notion of telepresence being on Mars. Right. And yet it's important that you know that the rovers are not joystick controlled. You can't in fact you can't do that because the time delays too great. So what you do is you get batch, you get all these photos and all this data and then you sort of process it. And then you set up a set of instructions like to curiosity or things like that. Now, what's interesting is you look at these people and you can see similar things when people are trying to do VR, right. Virtual reality. They talk about being on Mars. They have this perspectival sense of being on Mars. And they they they'll do things like they'll like, you know, OK, so, you know, the rover needs. Here's my cat. And they'll say, you know, I need to. And they'll say they'll do that. They'll do first person perspective. First person perspective. I need to turn this way. I need to turn this way. Right. Because the light the light's going to be here. And if I if I don't turn this way, if I turn this, I won't I won't be able to get what I need. And they do all this perspectival adjustment from the first person perspective. Right. And so what what's really important to them. Right. And they look for it in the people that are trying to join the team is that sense of being on Mars. Being there, that sense of presence. And it's also a constant notice that we're really use virtual reality. It becomes more real to us when we get a sense of presence, we get that sense of immersion. We get that sense that we're we have a perspectival salience landscape that is working for us. So perspectival knowing no we says as this sense of presence. And then I think there's a third or there's a fourth one. And you can see it also a bit in what I was talking about with the scientists. Right. There's a participatory knowing this is this is and this goes to Gnosis as a Greek term. This is knowing by sharing a fundamental identity with things. And so, for example, the scientists are identifying with the rover. That's why they'll say I. And when you when you write to identify with your pen, is that similar? Well, I think that's part of it. I mean, so when I'm writing, I think part of there's two parts to the identification process. Part of it when when I'm identifying with something is I'm doing with Polanyi calls in dwelling. Like I'm actually not sensing it. I'm sensing through it. Right. And you're actually you're typically not paying attention to the pen when you're writing. You're paying attention to it. So that's one way. But you also do something else that you probably aren't doing with the pen as much. You do internalization. So, for example, you have metacognition. You are able to reflect on your own thinking. You don't come with that. Right. You get that by imitating adults. And when you're a kid taking a perspective on you and so you imitate them taking a perspective on you until eventually you can do that for yourself. You internalize other people's perspectives onto you. And that's partially also how you get inculturated. So we identify things. And this is what you can see them as. So we identify things. And this is what you can see them doing with the rover. They're sort of indwelling. They're seeing through the rover. But they're also internalizing it into, you know, sort of becoming the rover. And we have lots of ways in which we have this kind of participatory knowing. So a really important way. And I think this goes towards some of Jordan's concern with narrative, although narrative also involves perspective. But we think of ourselves as temporally extended selves like, you know, here's my past. Here's my future. And so we have this sort of autobiographical sense of our of ourself as extended in time. Right. That, again, isn't isn't sort of natural to us. We acquire that and we acquire it through constantly practicing narrative. And this is some of Daniel Hutto's work on the narrative practice hypothesis. We again think that thinking a narrative is natural to us. But notice that we spend so much bloody time practicing it and we practice it all the time with each other. Like how? You meet somebody at a party and they want to know who you are. What do you do? You tell them your story. You go to home at the end of the day. People want to know how did your day go? You tell them your story. But we wouldn't think of that as practicing, but we are. But we are. And notice what you do when you have a kid. What do you do? You have to practice narrative. And do you do? Do they get narrative right away? Can they tell or understand jokes right away? No. And if you ask them to tell a story when they're really. Yeah. So what do we do? We we we have had two kids. I had to go through this. You know, you you you watch the Teletubbies. So narrative is not innate, but it's useful. It's it's it's and it's culturally universal. And like so that's that's to me. So it's not innate, but it's culturally universal. Yes. Because we usually look across cultures to see do we all smile when we're happy. And then we say, oh, OK, we can infer that that's innate. Yeah. So you should use you know, I mean, universality is important. So I I don't usually make the inference directly from universality to innate. I make the inference usually to universal for having some fundamental function. Right. And those aren't the same thing as you just pointed out. Right. And so let's go back to the Teletubbies. We do this really, really simplified narrative and watch the show. It's horrific. Right. It is an adult because it's repetitive and repetitive. And we're doing this because we have to we have to repeat it and repeat it and repeat it and repeat it and slowly make it more complex until eventually we can do narrative. And then eventually we can indwell narrative. I can start to see the world as a story and then I can also start to internalize the world as a story. And I become a story. I'm a story and the world is a story. Now that's participatory knowing I'm a story participating in a story and that story is participating in me and that right. That's that's Gnosis. That's a con. That's another kind of knowing. And it gives you the realness of that ultimate sense of being right in tune attuned sort of one between you and the world. And so I think all of these are different ways in which we we make judgments about realness. And I think it's a mistake. So here's how I return back to both Harris and Jordan. I think it's a mistake to try and equate truth to any one of these. I think we should understand that truth which reserve it for what it's prototypically meant. The accuracy the correspondence between the content of our propositions in the world and we should think about it. I would disagree with that. But he's making a great point here. Our you think about presence and we should think I would I would disagree with that because in fact we use it more broadly than that and the language. And I think we could say propositional truth is what we're referring to. But you know you throw the your aim is true as Jordan says. And I don't think we're going to have the power to redefine the word faith the way Peter would like to. And language goes where it goes. And yeah the world the accuracy the correspondence between the content of our propositions in the world and we should think about power. You think about presence and we should think about attunement as additional ways in which we connect up to realness. And now I can now answer your question. Those ways in which we connect up to realness especially the procedural the perspective on the participatory. That's where a lot of the meaning that goes into meaning in life is to be found. And I would assert as we you know we're dealing with Peter Boghossian's great realignment and when we get into critique of that and ask the question well why are people whether they be atheists or evangelicals. Why are they moving to this critical theory posture and embracing this critical theory perspective. Why is that. Well it's meaningful. Well why is it meaningful. We're going to have to get there. What would Peterson say to that. What would his objection to that be because he would say he has a strong belief in his notion of truth. OK. Well we'll leave we'll leave them there. But you have the you have the propositional truth you have the procedural or the power the technique of the perspective on the participatory. And actually when it comes to I would argue that new atheists have this have this participatory motivation when they are motivated by we tend to be motivated. We tend to be drawn into our eschatology we're drawn into our our telos our ends and behind the new atheists was this was this was this story this implicit story and it was imaginative this vision of well it's John Lennon. Imagine there's no religion and so on and so forth and how well John Lennon's vision would square with Peter Boghossian's or Sam Harris's I don't know. But but there's this vision of well it's a unifying vision and in that sense it's quite hegelian that well there won't be any more fighting because we'll all agree. And now you'll find this in in the biblical narrative as well. You can find it in the book of Jeremiah. You know everyone will know the Lord and the knowledge of the Lord will be as the waters cover the sea. And so this this this idea that finally strife between groups and between people will be will be gotten away with because all will know the truth directly. Difficulty is that the truth is much more complex than just objects in space. Now let's talk a little bit about this axial world division because again again Verbecky Verbecky has talked about this and there have been some pushback from some people in terms of Christianity and Axial age religion. Well when I'm using it here I'm talking about this. The Bible is the story of the reconciliation of heaven and earth. That's what the that's what the Bible is is really the story of. And so this is an axial style. This is an axial style division in which heaven is a place is a place. OK. It's a forum. It's a place. But you know is it temporal spatial like ours is. Well that's you know that's very debatable especially the more we know about physics. You know a timeless place is it tends to be more what heaven is it's a place without time. So it's not necessarily this geographical space space like we have here space where the world is the way it should be. And there's an imaginative exercise of projecting value encapsulated in story and it's seen as a place. And if you if you look if you look at Peterson's work where he talks about you know how we you know we've got all this cognitive capacity that we use for our eyes that that we now see things. So we talk about the modernist vision of what we get rid of all superstition and all of this what what Sam Harris would call bad information that we get from the Bible or this bad language or this these things that we get rid of. Bad information that we get from the Bible or this bad language or this these iron age rules we get rid of all of these things and reason will then it's very interesting the way the word reason functions in there and you can have a long conversation as to exactly what reason is. And suddenly now reason will show us will show us what because the part of the problem that I keep pointing out is that you have reason doesn't give you ends. It doesn't give you presuppositions which is beginnings and it doesn't give you tell us which is ends reason basically says gives you procedural knowledge about how you can get from A to B but it doesn't actually give you a and it doesn't actually give you B. Now Sam Harris tries to crowdsource B by saying the good is all the possible good you can think of. But that's too simplistic it's too flat and we know that it's too flat because we simply don't work that way. So in an actual age division you have a two world division you have heaven which is the way things are supposed to be we imagine as a place we imagine it as something we can see and all of the biblical symbolism and imagery you have the new heavens and the new earth you have the new Jerusalem of all of that and earth is how things actually are. A place of confusion a place of suffering a place of decay a place of loss of agency a place of death. So that's the actual age division. Now part of again Vervecky and the actual age theory about you know how this stuff how this stuff came about as we manage the suffering of earth with stories of a connected but alternate reality. And many have noted such as NT Wright that heaven and earth are very much connected and really sacraments are the places where heaven and earth connect and that's you know you get that you can get that in terms of in terms of theology. So we're managing suffering by stories of a connected alternative reality and this is very natural of people. You know you listen to the depression era song the Big Rock Candy Mountain. This is a fun song just just look it up on YouTube Big Rock Candy Mountain that it's you know where the where everything's great well here's your two world you know you got a hobo singing this is just imagining what everything would be you know the Big Rock Candy Mountain. Christianity is about the reconciliation of these two realms it's about heaven and earth coming back together. The heaven and earth were were separated the Garden of Eden was the Royal Garden of Genesis one is very much a temple narrative and Genesis two is in a sense the the Royal Garden and then there's a divorce and what God does is he he kicks Adam and Eve out of the garden. All right and they're out now into the field and so there's a separation between heaven and earth and you might notice in many medieval maps they would they would put they would put the Garden of Eden on the map it was very much a part of their a part of their reality. So and if you and if you and if you think about why our current maps don't have it on it you might do some real thinking about well how are we conceiving of reality how have we made the changes that we've made and so Christians are about the reconciliation of heaven and earth and the book of Revelation which I'm preaching through now is is actually about what what's it going to take for heaven and earth to be reconciled because you have to do something about it. So you have to do something with all of the moving pieces like you get a lake of fire so you know whole bunch go in the lake of fire and then you've got the new heavens and the new earth but but throughout the Bible I mean all of these are symbolic representations you have outer darkness where there's there's both flame and darkness and there's weeping and gnashing of teeth. So I think that's a great comment someone comes up to him one time and ask you know is is is hell really like you know the descriptions that the Bible has and he says something well those are basically those are symbolic descriptions it's probably far worse. Secularists actually functionally do the same thing they don't do it in terms of space but they do it in terms of time now that you notice that Christians do it both in terms of space and time so you have heaven and earth as separate and then in the future heaven and earth will be reconciled. So you have space and time secularists don't have space but they do have time and if you listen to them that's how they use it so the future is heaven for progressive secularists it's imaginatively projecting securing of values resolution of obstacles victory of political and ideological agendas etc. And this is where Dr. James and his observation about the the new atheist was dead on correct he believed that you know they've got this story implicit which is exactly what they're promoting this story about the world and it isn't a story of heaven and earth it's a story of present and future and future is the eschaton. Future is heaven potentially again but now it's it's very much a a a heaven that must be human created and that's why it's humanist it's something that we must achieve it's something we must secure and this in fact draws a whole lot of pressure into the world because as I said well if we must secure heaven then those who are standing as obstacles for the securing of heaven are now the future. And now in a sense if you translate it to Christian language devils and you'll hear people use that language in fact demonic because they're standing in the way of you getting to heaven you can take all of this secular language and convert it into Christian language and for the most part it all works just as well. So you have the future which is an imaginatively imaginatively project secure of values resolution of obstacles victory of political and ideological genders etc. And you have the present the way things actually are confusion of ideas strife death decay impermanence the one of the big differences between let's say a Christian conception of eschatology is that individuals get to participate in it. If you're in fact a secularist you will die before cancer is cured or death is eradicated or the the climate global climate change is fixed so on and so forth. In fact we may never get there but you definitely will never get there. Christians of course have a belief that they as individuals even if they die within this space and this is why within this space and time this is why space is actually a fairly helpful thing for Christian ideology because they can go some place and they're in a sense secured in heaven with their inheritance and then at the last day they come with their inheritance. And Christians as individuals as their own stories can actually connect up into the full story. But if you're a secularist you might be able to participate in it. But alas Bertrand Russell never sees the world he imagined he himself never gets to see the future because he dies and goes boop into nothing. All right secularists lack the second story functionality of heaven and earth and again as I've said a number of times that's really important because what tends to happen as Miroslav Volf noticed in the in the Yugoslav civil war after the breakdown of the after the fall of communism is that those who must bring heaven to earth usually bring hell up for the devils. And so you will have devils and hell and all of those and you will have those who in fact step out of line with your heavenly project and those who are watching now the new authoritarian left are seeing that and this is part of the point that Jordan Peterson has made over and over again is that there's something that happens. There's something that must happen when you work on this sort of purity and so heaven and hell secularists lack the second story functionality of heaven and earth. So they tend to use a time exclusively Christians as I said do too they also use time but in conjunction with the second story as their functional two story system. Someday we will cure cancer someday we will beat death so on and so forth so both secularists Peter Boghossian has an eschatology and he doesn't have heaven he just has time he just has future. Christians have both heaven where the individual can await the eschaton where in fact everything will come and again the structure of secularism this is why I often say secularism is in many ways late stage Protestantism. Okay and I say that as a Protestant I know a lot of Roman Catholics are going to hear that say yes and a lot of you know Jonathan Pigeot has made similar points it's in a sense late stage Protestantism and you're just taking apart the pieces but the basic formulation is still the same. So you have this continual secular drift in evangelicalism too. Now you have progressive evangelicalism which so you have the seeker movement out of the seeker movement came the emergence and the emergent church split into the at least two. One branch was the young restless and reformed and the other branch were the progressive evangelicals. Now two guys born the same year both planted Mars Hill churches one of those was Mark Driscoll in Seattle a very progressive place he plants a young restless and reformed church. The other is the other is oh no I can't think of his name. Love wins. Well you know oh I gotta pause I can't think of his name I'm not going to do this without thinking of his name. Rob Bell. Super soul Sunday with Oprah. Rob Bell also plants a Mars Hill church his Mars Hill church is in conservative reformed Western Michigan Grandville he takes over Grand Village Mall and plants Mars Hill church there which is progressive evangelical. Mark Driscoll goes to Seattle plants Mars Hill in blue state Seattle which is young restless and reformed. So progressive evangelicalism has basically been tracking with the social justice warriors. And progressive evangelicalism increasingly looks to bring in the eschaton now and that's why I see progressive evangelicalism as a basically as in secularism is increasingly pressed on. So secularism the rise of the nuns and as I as I'll talk about in that second lecture that I did in Australia you have this you have this split as nuns tend to get either atheistic or pantheistic. Those tend to be the two movements they go in. Okay they get atheistic or they get pantheistic. They get they don't get irreligious they get spiritual but not religious. They don't get more rational as Sam Harris imagines rationality. Now they'll you know they'll they'll do a whole bunch of other spiritual things they're not going to give it give up on spirituality and think a lot about that word spiritual and what it means. So so what happens with progressive evangelicals is that progressive Alan gel evangelicals get more secular. Well what does that mean as they get more secular they get less and less. They don't fully give up heaven. They kind of you know that's heaven's really useful in terms of afterlife. Heaven's really useful in terms of individual participation. But they tend to along with other secularists want to bring the kingdom now want to bring the eschaton now and and that movement. This is why you know Jordan Peterson sacrament of meaning can be pointed in many different directions. It's very meaningful to be part of a movement to be part of a mission to be part of a great calling. It's that that meaning itself doesn't necessarily orient you in the right direction in terms of what is good but it will orient you in terms of what feels satisfying in terms of achieving. So evangelicals have always had a realized eschatology which is the now and the not yet. It's very much a part of Christian theology and it's always been on a spectrum. But now you can hear progressive evangelicals more and more talking about bringing in the kingdom. Now I usually use bearing witness to the kingdom because generally speaking I think in terms of my own theology within the age of decay. Any witness of Christ will be cruciform and so the cross is fundamental in terms of what that means and that gets into this the dynamics of eschatology. But what the progressive evangelicals have tended to do is they have that much more realized eschatology. We're going to bring in the kingdom now and this actually has if you look at the history of the main line church you have the history of the different the different eschatological theologies you have premillennialism which was in fact the Christian expression of modernity at the height of modernity it was post millennial in terms of we're bringing in the kingdom now. So you have this implicit post millennial movement in the progressive evangelicals and notice how these are aligned how these arguments are used along the lines of their social agenda and gender issues. Now it's important in American history to appreciate the role of the civil rights movement and the connection between the civil rights movement and progressivism at the end of the 20th century. If you've ever listened to the battle hymn of the republic it is a post millennial eschatological hymn. Here's John Brown and he has his Bible open and I think it's Alpha and Omega and just recently I read a really terrific new biography of John Brown. Very very interesting figure but the war between the north and the south in the battle hymn of the republic is posed in eschatological terms and you will find terms used in the book of Revelation right there. This was the coming of the kingdom to free the slaves. I've been preaching through the book of Revelation so you have the visions from Revelation 5 and Revelation 7 and they're very diverse. People from every nation, tribe and tongue so therefore every color and these are however these are the Christian people who have suffered for the cause. The civil rights movement in the United States was a revelation to secular America too and it was the kind of revelation that they could get down with, that they could agree with, that they could participate in, that could come close to their heart. Difficulty and if you watch one of my favorite channels, if you listen to John McWhorter and Glenn Lowry talk about race, I think those are some of the best conversations you can find on the internet about race. The civil rights progress stalled in the 1970s. Why? And a lot of what we're seeing is because of that stalling. Well basically what happened was a lot of the low-hanging fruit was resolved. A lot of the racism built into American law could be undone and that view of racism said well so we're going to, it's basically Martin Luther King Jr.'s vision from his famous 1963 from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. It's the content of people's characters, not the color of their skin and you'll notice that this is now very much under threat by what I call progressive liberationism. But let's pause here and ask a question that I find so seldom asked with all of the charges of racism, how exactly do you do it? But let's pause here and ask a question that I find so seldom asked with all of the charges of racism, how exactly do you do you define racism? So you had reasonable progression on race in terms of how racism was taken out of the laws in terms of the Jim Crow South. But what exactly is racism? And one of my go-to things on this is a blog post on Slate Star Codex, Scott Alexander, entitled Against Murderism. And he said well, as usual the answer that racism is a confused word, is that racism is a confused word that serves as a mishmash of unlike concepts. Here are some of the definitions people use for racism. Number one, definition by motives, an irrational feeling of hatred towards some race that causes someone to want to hurt or discriminate against them. So it's an irrational feeling or a motive. All right. Definition two, definition by belief, a belief that some race has negative qualities or is inferior, that would have to be within an aspect, especially if it is innate or genetic. And this is why the race and IQ debate is so very, very hot. Number three, definition by consequence, anything whose consequence is harmful to minorities or promotion of white supremacy, regardless of whether or not it is intentional. And what you'll notice is that in terms of critical theory, definition number three comes to the fore. The difficulty that you have, which is pointed out by Jordan Peterson and many, many others, is that reality is so enormously complex that there is generally not just one set of cause and effect or consequence. And in fact, when you listen to the term racism being bandied about, if you just pause and ask someone, what do you mean by racism? Can you define it? You'll find people stumbling around. Now, racism impacts institutions. Of course it does. Outcomes are one of the most objective ways that we can measure. Certainly there. We can count how many people are of what race or what sex or what progressive stack element are within a particular group. And this was the James DeMore business. How to address racism in systems is enormously difficult because you don't know, generally speaking, everyone's pointing at number three, but they're insinuating number one and number two. And the truth is dealing with these outcomes is enormously difficult. And we don't even necessarily know whether it's wanted. I find nobody addressing the fact that how many garbage people, garbage collectors in America are of such and such a race. How many low status jobs are of such and such a race or such and such a gender, so on and so forth. Are we really going to have equal distribution all along the way? Are we going to have firefighters who are in wheelchairs and disabled? Well, they've got to be a firefighter even if they can't climb a ladder. So this is where the competence argument that comes in that Jordan Peterson produces. You have the unresolved complexity to racism as a concept, as a concept here in Against Murderism. And I highly recommend that article to read. You have bias in human nature. Now, again, as we looked at both Jordan Peterson's and John Verveckis presentations in this, biases form within us because of salience. Infants learn the face of their parents. Infants have positive or negative experiences with some things and not other things. Foods, animals, people, aspects of people, so on and so forth. This gets built into us. You might call this implicit. This can't simply be unprogrammed, nor is it necessarily desirable that we unprogram it. So you have bias in human nature. Religious people tend to use their geographic plus time eschatology. And this is how bias will be dealt with. Secular people tend to use time based. Notice how we often refer to the year. Well, it's 2019 and we're still name your oppression narrative. Well, here's the difficulty that you have if you're a secularist. There's no way to unprogram people. They're cooked. It's set. So are you just going to wait for all the bigots to die? And you imagine that in your new process, there won't be as many bigots. There's actually been dramatic strides made against racism in America. Part of my complaint about the current strategy is that I suspect it will actually make America more racist by focusing our attention on it. Let's imagine you have a young, let's take a black boy and a Jewish girl. Let's imagine that you tell both of these people, you know, the reason that you have any suffering in life is because the anti-Semitism or the misogyny or the racism that this other group of easily identifiable by color group is exerting on you. Just keep pumping that into people. What are you going to get? You're going to get the same thing you had in Germany when you had the entire government telling people, you know, the reason that things after the after First World didn't call the first one after the Great War was given away. It's because of the Jews. Just keep telling people that you know what you're going to get. You're going to get violence. It's going to be a mess. But yet we keep pumping more energy into identifying and blaming people based on the attributes of their race. And I look at what's happening now and I think we're just setting up the next generation of racists here, folks. Can't we expect to find bias in individuals? Always. How can that bias be exercised in Christian theology? It's rather mysterious, but the assumption is that Christians will somehow be translated and perfected because Christians, most Christians now, Christianity is very diverse. Most Christians assert that we will continue to be sinners and practice sin and have these biases and do wrong until we die. And at that point, God's going to have to do something with us. But at least sinners are, in a sense, grandfathered in until they die. What's the solution in the secular realm? Well, you're going to wait till they die or you're going to make the kingdom come soon by a little bit of euthanasia for the old bigots or re-education camps until you learn that. Well, you know, after a certain age, after about 25, it's not a lot of re-education you're really going to do with people. And in fact, well, look at 1984. Go ahead and try and re-educate them. They'll probably lie to you plenty because, well, as you get into the Jordan Peterson stuff, once everybody starts lying, everything comes apart. Now you see the impact of secularism in evangelicalism, less confidence in the supernatural efficacy of God. One of the things that I've been noticing in evangelical missions is that it used to be that the focus tended to be on conversion. Okay. So spiritual conversion, helping people to profess Jesus. More and more Christian missions tend to be focused on secular values. That's not a bad thing. In the Christian Reformed Church, we have World Renew, which works on relief and development. That's helping the poor has always been a part of the Christian program right from the very beginning. You can find the Apostle Paul when he's talking to the elders in Jerusalem in Acts 15. And they said, well, here are some rules about blood and about Gentiles and continue to help the poor. And Paul says, I love helping the poor because in terms of Christian theology, love your neighbor, love your enemies, help the poor. Generosity to the poor is actually a common package of many world religions, part of Judaism, part of Islam, part of Buddhism, so on and so forth. That's not unusual. But Christians used to focus on conversion and what that did. Now I know that gets despised and mocked, but there's a transformation that happens there. That transformation is actually crucial and important. So I got to keep my eye on the time here. So Christians, I've been noticing, progressive evangelicals tend to increasingly no longer look at that. What does that mean? It means that these secularizing impulses are in fact coming more and more into play. And now, again, without the second story or the concern for the second story, everything gets focused on the timeline. And when everything gets focused on the timeline, we get itchy trigger fingers. We get itchy trigger fingers. I didn't say that very clearly. We tend to want to bring the eschaton now. And because the eschaton is a product of what we do, we are going to take increasingly more and more dramatic action to bring it in. Now, I often hear Republicans say things like, well, why do many black folks vote Democrat instead of Republican when the Republicans were the party of Lincoln? Well, that's true. About 10% of black folks vote Republican. But the Democrats are the party of LBJ. And LBJ flipped the script, flipped the political script on racism. And a lot of the progress, the progress against racism happened by getting rid of the laws that were discriminatory against African Americans in the American South. So if you have difficulty understanding why so many black folks voted for, vote Democrat, well, there's LBJ and how that works. But now, pay attention here. What happened during the Civil Rights Movement is that during the Civil War, a lot of denominations split along the lines of slavery. And so you tended to have northern denominations and southern denominations. And southern denominations tended to side with the Confederacy. And this is where, again, people are very complex. It's Peter Boghossian's initial idea of how people work that, well, here, some people work on the Bible and some people work on evidence. That's not how people work. People are multivariable creatures. And so you've got Christians in the north that are against slavery during the Civil War and Christians in the south that are for slavery. And read Mark Knoll. Mark Knoll is a member of the Christian Informed Church, teaches at Notre Dame. Read his book on the theological divide of the Civil War. And you can see all of these things happen. Well, there's a fair amount of racism under any of the categories that was still very much present in the United States in the 40s, 50s, 60s, and 70s. And that's what those laws were intended to address. Many evangelicals like my father. My father took a church in Patterson, New Jersey, I think partly because his new bride didn't want to be too far from her family in Whiteensville, Massachusetts. But down in the lower picture here is a picture of my father meeting with, in a room with all black guys, many of whom in that room were getting, were getting cleaned from heroin as heroin went through Patterson in the 60s and 70s. And there's my father and his clerical collar and his clergy, his clergy, his clergy get up and they're talking about the gospel and they're talking about getting clean and they're doing all that work, that 12 step type work of sobriety. And here my father as a guy who was raised in the Depression era, Midwest on the farms, is now learning how to live with black folks in Patterson, New Jersey. That's where I grew up. That was the, these were the biases that were built into me when I was a young man. And so this is where I'm from. And so what happened is that with the continual evangelical inferiority complex, evangelicals always feel 10 years behind the curve. And so on this way, evangelicals tend to be very anxious about virtue signaling with respect to race. And this is what you see happening, I think, Peter, in evangelicals, that they don't want to be behind the curve again. They were on the wrong side of history in the Civil War. They were on the wrong side of history in the Civil Rights Movement. They don't want to be on the wrong side of history on racism or sexism again. So they keep trying to keep up with the left. And this is why you tend to see exactly what Peter was talking about. And I don't really think it has a great deal to do with, with that evangelicals believe in the Bible and which is their data and atheists believe in the other. I think it has a lot more to do with a whole lot more sociology that's going on. And again, we see tools and obstacles. We value moral status. Anti-racism today is pretty cheap, okay? Seventy years ago, if you're an anti-racist living, let's say, in the American South, much more costly, even in the American North. Today, you can be anti-racist and be celebrated. It's a very cheap moral flag to buy. It costs you almost nothing. Secularism pushes us to bring the eschaton, which is the future for secularists, into our present frame. And especially if you're a secularist, if you're an atheist individual, you will never see your eschaton. The best you can hope for is the big sleep, okay? And so that's motivation to bring in that eschaton. And evangelicals that are getting increasingly secular are now feeling the same motivation. And so, they're, well, everybody's, well, who's not going to be against racism? Don't ask too many questions about, well, what exactly do you mean by racism? Will your project actually succeed in reducing racism, or are you trying to do something that the tool simply doesn't connect with? So where is critical theory going? Well, now we're seeing these funny relationships. When James Lindsay, who I talked with on my channel, had a conversation on Unbelievable, usually it's the Christians against the atheists. Now Unbelievable has Christians and atheists agreeing. And if you look, if you listen to the Neil Shenvy, Esther O'Reilly, James Lindsay episode of Unbelievable, they just keep agreeing on stuff. And when James Lindsay and I had a conversation on my channel, we had a great time. And I'm going to invite Peter, Peter Bogosian to have a conversation with me. We'll have a great time. He had a great time with Phil Vischer. And they disagreed with things. But as, and I think when Peter talks about their similar rules of engagement, I would argue that in fact these rules of engagement come to us via Christianity, at least in the West. I still have to dig this one up. But one day when Eric Weinstein was on the Rubin Report, I don't remember when he was there alone or if he was there with his brother Brett, but Eric made the point that in a sense you have to know that everything's going to be okay to maintain these rules of engagement. And this is exactly part of my critique about secularism, that if you don't have a two story, there's all this pressure to bring the kingdom now. Well, when that pressure to bring the kingdom now increases, your temptation to treat your political adversary as an existential threat also increases. And it's in those cases that you tend to find the pressure to do the kinds of things that Jordan Peterson laments what we saw in both Nazism and Communism. Because that's the pressure. Because you've taken away the second story. We must bring the kingdom in now. These people stand in the way of the kingdom. And I as an individual will never see the eschaton because there is no second story. So I would argue that in fact the rules of engagement and the belief that one way or another the future will be good, that confidence comes from Christianity. Now it's often critiqued by saying, well, that makes Christians lazy. Yep, sometimes it does. But the flip side of that is when you don't have that eschaton, well, that makes secular people murderous. Yes, it does. And for a reason. It's reasonable that they become murderous because they're trying to bring in the kingdom as they see it. I think that's a really important point. House divided cannot stand. I think critical theory will collapse. It's a coalition that breaks down quickly and you see it already in terms of the feminist versus the trans activists. And what you tend to see as what we saw with Jordan Peterson and the new the new atheist, as long as the other side, if one side seems to be gaining power, if the other side can create a coalition of all kinds of groups, they'll usually bring them down. It's a religious vision. But so is everything else, including I'd say the vision of the eschatological vision of the new atheist is a religious vision. It's a story that is built on premises and faith. It's an article of faith of new atheists. You don't have any data. In fact, I'd say the data is against you that, in fact, once people stop being religious, they will be rational in the way that Peter Boghossian or Sam Harris or Dawkins are rational. In fact, they don't get rational. They tend to get spiritual and they're getting religious and critical theory, which is offering basically offering cheap morality. That's where they're all going. And evangelicals are going there too as they get more secular. So almost two hours, but there's my answer.