https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ClL12esMFFM

 Weather in Santa Cruz getting a little, well your weather doesn't change that much. You guys kind of stay the same way all year round. Most part. A little bit more water in the winter, but it hasn't burned off. Yeah. I was just in San Diego last Friday and Saturday and I always forget the coastal front in the morning. It's overcast until it burns off and it's beautiful and it's gorgeous. That's our summer schedule for sure. Yeah. Yeah. So, what do you want to do? You want to keep going with the cults today? What's on your mind? That is my intention. I again have the most ridiculous list of notes. You know, it's really funny because I've played with the idea. More than played, I wanted to start a YouTube channel for a while. Really? But the problem I always run into is I can't nail down a context enough to know what to talk about. So, I just feel like I'm like talking into nothingness. And then when I try and plan what I'm going to talk with you about, it's like this never ending, expanding list of topics. Okay. Which is funny how that works. Well we left them, I mean the time before last, we left them with a cliffhanger. So, we got them off the cliffhanger. But then it's kind of like the Zizek debate. Last time we talked it, we wound up having a theological discussion. Which was cool. It might end up getting there again. We'll see. Yeah. Yeah. But there's something to that when you start a substantive debate. Not debate, but a conversation, things wind up theological. And it's the last layer we can hit at really. Yeah, it's true. It's true. It's true. So, where did we leave off last time? We left off with the long talk about the ineffable. And then I was trying to get into some of the cult four stuff, but there wasn't enough time. So, we just kind of threw random bits out there. Okay. So, explain to me this last cult you were in. Because it's, I mean the other kinds of physical cults, everyone kind of gets. Because we've seen documentaries about them. And there's a cult leader and he has a compound. And actually in one of our meetups, we were having the debate that cults either have to go to no sex or free sex. And usually either way winds up being self-destructive. But free sex is self-destructive faster than no sex. You know, kind of Oneida versus Shakers. The best is, yeah. The best is no sex for anyone except the guru. A very common form of it. That's right. Well, that's what was so, I don't know if you've ever read, there's a really good book on the Oneida community. And it's something like free love and a well-set table. I've talked about it in other videos. Yeah. Yeah, I've looked into the Oneida. Actually I've done a tremendous amount of cult research in the cult as part of being in the cult. You know, I read all the criticisms and there's a long book. I've got it somewhere on my computer. But it's just a guy going through every religious movement of like the last 200 years and just showing the failures of everyone that's been elevated to any idea of guru, whether it was within a well-established religion or not, which was pretty interesting. But yeah, I think it's a lot of people's inclination when you say something like, oh yeah, I've been in a cult or I've been in four cults especially. To be like, oh, they must be extremely naive or something or not be aware of how this type of stuff works. No, that's not the case. Oops, I'm in a cult again. How did this happen? Yeah, right. So why did you, okay, so you didn't just stumble into cult number four. You got into it intentionally and you'd been experienced in being in cults. Yes. Why, what happened? And this cult number four is kind of a different version of cult, you know, from our previous conversations. And it was largely, I mean, interestingly, this was a part I was going to bring up later, but the way it even became a cult was through an argument that the main guy had online, in weird Facebook, where the guy was blaming him of being a cult leader, because he wasn't before. He was just a guy running around with a book of ideas being like, more people should listen to me. And the guy was like telling him, you're just a cult leader. This was actually a major feature of it, is that any criticism it received, instead of deflecting it, it put it on. It would wear the criticism and then change the context around the criticism rather than trying to reject the label. Okay. So it literally became a cult from a person trying to destroy it. And then it was like, oh, I guess we're a cult now, so let's go on with it. Lots of really tricky, it's hard to explain how subtle those techniques can be and how they work to kind of eat their way into someone's perceptual systems. And I mean, it's not like it's foreign to many different things, more familiar systems that we interact with that we wouldn't label a cult. In my opinion, mistakenly not label them a cult. So what were some of the teachings that this individual was propagating? So I've been trying to think about how to set this up. I guess probably the most useful place to start, just to give some context for how it operated, would be to kind of look at the cultural landscape. And you know, I'm a Gen Z or X. Which one is millennial? Is it X? I forget. I think Z is millennial. Gen X is after the- Boomers. Boomers, busters. So I was born in 63, so I'm just at the end of the boomers and the beginning of the busters, but I think the busters are Gen X. Oh, but what I was, yeah. I was born into the meaning crisis, you might say. We're the generation of the meaning crisis. We're the ones that it kind of, you know, it wasn't, we didn't have the mores of our youth and to provide some amount of context or ground so that we could even contextualize the shift. And this is a bit of a stra- right, the postmodernists came out of the 60s, so the stuff had been for a while. But I would say that the millennials are probably the first generation that were born into this kind of cultural relativity as a, our starting point. So I wanted to talk a little bit about just what kind of characterizes that postmodern age and how, right, the way I would describe it the easiest is that we went from playing a game of truth to basically playing a gaslighting battle. So right, the postmodern context kind of came up because people stopped agreeing about what the game of truth was. So so long as everyone agrees that there's a kind of fundamental underlayer, the truth, and that it operates on certain rules, then we can all fairly battle our ideas in this realm. You know, a great interesting bit to show this was Sam Harris and Peterson's first podcast where it was like two hours long of them just fighting about what the game of truth is. And Harris had his definition and it followed these rules, and then Peterson had his definition and it followed these rules. They got locked there because they couldn't actually play any further game without agreeing on what the basic rules were. It's like if one guy's playing soccer and one's playing basketball, you know, there's no way to keep track. So having in a sense kind of undermined our our game of truth, if you will, what we've resorted to is a battle of gaslighting. So and this is actually I would say how we are defining truth in a postmodern age is which one can gaslight the other or you might call it colonize or right. So the cult took that as its prime mode of action, if you will, which is that instead of trying to convince people through some rational argument or through some, you know, more familiar system, it instead played a game of gaslighting. And again, you see this in many other places in the culture. This is what the pills are. You know, when a person when we say a person got red pill or a person got black pill or something like that, what's happening is that some stronger distortion of reality has undermined their previous conception. And then it has this really intense effect of literally feeling like a gaslight where your your entire conception of reality, as you thought of it before, suddenly vanishes and you enter into a different one. So my point is, is that the game of truth we're playing now is which of these can survive the best, which worldview can hold on to its own internal logical truth better than other systems, internal truths, which then takes me into what I brought up very briefly. At the end of the last one, which was the cult's use of trolling as pretty much the dominant mode of interaction. And when you look at what trolling is, it is largely playing in this realm of gaslighting. Well, you know, it's really and I don't love taking my videos in a political realm, but this is essentially how Donald Trump won the Republican nomination. Yes. And then the presidential campaign. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, no, that's been his entire thing. And he's already starting up on the Dems for 2020. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It's extremely effective. Much more so than we might like to admit. And to put another spin on it, you see forms of. Now it's tricky using the word trolling because people usually have a pretty confined definition of it. Where and it is certainly one point of it where the entire point is just to get the other person to react, to trigger them. Right. Right. Where basically they've got their whole reality distortion bubble and, you know, it's got its strong areas and then it's got its weak points. And what trolling is trying to do is hone in on those cracks and start poking at them. Right. Right. To expose, basically to expose the to gaslight them. But so gaslighting is kind of one metaphor of what you do. The other is just to expose them to mockery, ridicule, and they are no longer serious. So Jeb Bush has low energy. And I mean, Trump just lying Hillary. I mean, with his little labels, he just, you know, labels them. And his comment about age the other day, you know, he's Donald Trump at 72 years old as a robust young man, you know, against Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders. And, you know, and you just think you just think whatever you think of the guy's politics when it comes to this game. Oh, he's a master. He's a master. It really is. You got to give it to him. Yeah. And and to give it a different spin, you can tie this into like most major religious figures as well. Right. Like in a sense, the Buddha was a troll. Right. Jesus was certainly a troll. Now, again. Yeah. Different context because their intention isn't just to piss people off. It's to achieve a greater truth. Right. Or right. And to contextualize this a little bit for my Christian audience that probably you probably triggered them when you know when Jesus how watch how many times you read the Gospels, Jesus goes into a synagogue on the Sabbath and heals someone. Yeah. And it's like you couldn't have done it the day before or the day after you're making a point about the Son of Man and the Sabbath. And the Gospels are full of this stuff. Yeah. So, you know, I know some folks when you say Jesus was a troll, they're gonna they're gonna get triggered. But in the comment we brought up last time where he says, you know, if you knew Moses, then you'd recognize me. That's right. That's right. That form of argument is not meant to stand on some rational basis. That's right. It's literally meant to to incite something in the person to make it look at the world differently. That's right. Give to Caesar what is Caesar's give to God what is God's and it's like and it don't and again and again in the Gospels his critics walk away because anything they say they'll lose they'll be exposed. Yes, they just walk away. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So yes, this was the mode that the cult was functioning under. And oh man, I lost it. Gosh. It's not fair that minds work that way. Let's see. Oh, the other thing is that interacting this way, especially when you're going around calling yourself a cult is in many ways safer for the people you're interacting with than trying to go around saying I hold the keys of truth and are like the New Age kind of manipulation where it's like no, nothing's about me. I'm just here to promote the good in the world and to help you and right. They cut off their own selfishness and it makes it actually vastly more potentially manipulative. Yeah. Whereas when you're leading with the ugly foot, it's going to kick away most people. They're not going to write. You're honing in on a very specific audience at that point. Ones that either A can recognize the value of having their trigger points hit because they view the way I viewed it at least was, oh, these are weaknesses that other people can exploit against me. So I should want to be aware of them and want to deal with them before I have to take them out into battle, if you will. And another large part of that too is it wasn't trolling just to set people off and leave them there. And the way that this worked is that generally you'd be very blunt punching into someone's self-image, the game they're playing, particularly because this all took place on social media. So the inclination is just a world of self-image. Which is so the thing is already, I mean, if you're playing this game on social media, the context is already set up for it. So I mean, social media is all about presenting an image and these images are probably going to follow archetypes or tropes. So the troll is just, hey, you just lined them up. Start picking them off. Yeah. Oh, and you can, yeah, that's exactly right. You go around learning the different archetypes and then you can demolish. I mean, that's probably over 99% of the population by learning how to deal with maybe 15 different archetypes or whatever. It becomes really easy to hone in on the weak points of whatever. The other side of this though is it had a good cop, bad cop dichotomy going on. And this was actually, I mean, if you look at it, honestly, it's a way to control people's behavior. But if the person was being fake, you would just punch up against the wall, trying to crack their worldview. But the point wasn't just destruction. It was to then get the person to relate as a person rather than as a character. So vulnerability and honesty were extremely highly rewarded. And so you would have, even in a single conversation, the person, well, and I did it too, but you would be switching between these two kind of modes and be constantly reading the person you're interacting with to see where they're, are they relating as an actual person or are they trying to put on the show for you? And so, yeah, the whole point was basically going to this place where actual human interaction was starved, despite the fact that it's made out of human interaction, and try and get people to relate honestly. And again, this was in a weird part, subculture of the internet. And to explain a little bit of what weird Facebook is, one of the comments from the last video was like, oh, was there lots of Pepe memes? And weird Facebook is not the alt-right. So weird Facebook came out of a movement in 2012, maybe a little earlier, like pretty much 2012 to 2013 called alt-lit, which was alternative literature. And it was filled with a lot of unsafely characters. But you could argue that they were very far leftists that were pushing the boundary of what was socially acceptable. So kind of the original classic leftist before it got, that's not a good definition, but before it got into the SJW type behavior, more of a purity testing. So this was like the other direction of like anti-purity. And around end of 2013 or maybe 2014, most of the major figures of the alt-lit club were charged with a lot of sexual problems. It varied depending on the figure, but they basically all went under and the alt-lit collapsed because it was based out of sexual predators. The free sex link, that does you in. Highly unstable. Yeah, and again, if you're going with Hinduism or Taoism, that's the fundamental life energy. That's the most dangerous place. That's where all of it's sitting dormant. So yeah, alt-lit collapses around 2014. It basically morphs that same community built around these figures morphs into weird Facebook, which has pretty much collapsed as well as probably 2016, maybe 2017. It pretty much fell apart. Yeah, that's where it's a weird place. It's the fringe. All of the people that are just totally disenfranchised by the game everyone else is playing. The suicide levels are through the roof. I personally know four people since 2016 that have killed themselves. Wow. Wow. From that scene. Yeah, it's a rough place. So that's where he tried to go in and basically impose some amount of structure. While at the same time playing the same game they were. Because a lot of it was be unacceptable and be honest. That's, I would say, what kind of defines weird Facebook is people willing to be bluntly, if cynically honest with their life. So it creates a really strong contrast with normal Facebook where people are trying to construct an image. Because it's basically just being forward with how absolutely miserable the people are. Yeah. So you have the cynics in ancient Greece who break conventions. Yes. Diogenes, obviously very famous. Yes. Again, I put this in here as well. And then, but then you add a social media aspect where, I mean, the internet is almost alcohol in terms of releasing us from normal inhibitions. People will say things and do things on the internet because it's an external token. Again, it's sort of like Sauron's ring. It's something we invest ourselves into this totem, if you will. And obviously the V of the power of the internet, it's infinitely communicatable, multipliable. And so there's a huge power in that. But also, as you noted, will just be unbelievably unstable. And therefore, if one invests enough of themselves in it, potentially enormously destructive. Absolutely. Absolutely. And that difference you're highlighting, why does it work like alcohol? What I think it is, is actually context confusion. Because we don't know what it means to be the same person in front of your grandma and your parents as with the private conversations you have with friends and the interactions you have with strangers all at once. It's too many different contexts. And so it almost puts us in this place of like, context doesn't exist. And from there, we just kind of spew out whatever. Either that or we get so bound in the contexts that we find our persona becoming ever more limited until it's literally a character. Because we are trying to be the same person to our parents, our grandparents, and our friends, and the streets. And so it becomes the safest option for using social media is to not be a person. It's to be so rigidly defined into a character that basically a robot could do what you're doing. And that's where most, I would say, a lot of people find themselves interacting with the tool. And many, like I know of a number, one of the things that I learned on this Facebook, or not Facebook, but this YouTube journey of mine. How most people in the comment section are not using their real name. Some people have simply adopted pseudonyms. Some people have significant YouTube followings behind pseudonyms. And so, you know, and that on one hand, you know, I didn't choose to go that way for a variety of reasons, but I can understand why others do. Do, yeah. Because these dynamics are... Let's them not have to be the character. Right. There's a layer of safety separating their online identity from their identity as the IRL. Right. And it's interesting if you take that and you compare it to the superhero genre where, you know, you've got Superman and Clark Kent, Batman and Bruce Wayne, you know. Absolutely. It's all very, very interesting. Yeah. And weird Facebook was largely pseudonymical accounts. Okay. So, and one of the features of the cult was we were some of the only people behaving this way with our real names and real faces. So again, the whole point was absolute authenticity in a sense. Yeah. Be who you are, you know. Yeah. And in that sense, it kind of demands as a sacrifice yourself image. To actually be who you are on a world stage, you know. And it's... World stage is how it feels, if not how it actually is. You might be interacting only with an audience of 500, but the fact that anyone could look makes... Gives it the weight of a world stage. Right. Also, all public posts, you know. Everything you say is available to the public. Rather than friends only, right? It was meant to be robust in who you are as a person, flaws and all. Rather than trying to edit and limit behavior. That they, you know, they and I still do largely believe causes fracturing within the person's persona. Yeah. So where does that put us? We talked about trolling a bit and the playground that they were in. We can try and get into some more of the... So another thing... What was the motivation for those entering the cult? What's their motivation? What do they want to get out of it or achieve? I would say it's probably relatively varied. Again, because it was just such a massive, granted imaginary structure that you could project pretty much anything you wanted onto it. And that was part of its point, was to be a modal lens that could fit onto any other worldview. But in my case, my motivation was I... So with the being of light, I had the get up, get off your knees moment. What I saw was people that had gotten off their knees. Right? They weren't going to bow to the world or the social game. They were going to absolutely be who they were. And in that, by being more fully themselves, they would change the game that was taking place on the social networks. So yeah, a big motivation for me was that I blamed a good amount of my collapse... I'm trying to figure out if that was the right word. I don't think it is. But on my inability to be socially unacceptable. So that was what consistently made me kneel again, was the realm of public opinion. And just the general fear of being judged by that force, if you will. So when I collapsed, I saw a bunch of people that were at the bottom of the status hierarchy, acting as if they were at the top. Right? They, in a sense, had a presence of... I don't know what the word is. It's like they walked around like they were nobility, even though they had none of the external symbols for it. And I liked that. It reminds me of, again, Diogenes, right? Where it's just the king comes up and is like, and he shows no difference between whether he's talking to the king or another peasant or whatever. It just is... So the emperor, Alexander the Great, comes up, you know. Yes, that's right. Could you get out of my son? Yeah, yeah. That's what I... That's exactly it. So what I saw was a type of emotional learning that I was desperately needing to get further ahead. And a place where people were willing to show and teach it and support it is probably the biggest thing. So that was largely what drew me in was, you know, it had all its ideas and everything. A lot of it was extremely ironic. So again, that post irony where you stop being able to tell what's ironic from what's sincere, which is, again, a magnificent manipulation tool, especially if you use it consciously. Do things ironically and one day you'll wake up and they're no longer ironic. And that actually is what did this colt in, you could say. So let me see where I'm at here. Let's see if I'm following the thread somewhat. Oh, I'm following the thread. Let's see if I'm following the thread somewhat. Oh, man, your last couple interviews were freaking amazing. I really enjoyed them. The whole talk on with, I don't know how to pronounce his name, B-Y-R-N-E, Byrne? Byrne, Byrne. I didn't ask him how to say Byrne, I think. Yes, interesting guy, huh? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, we'll talk again. Out of the info I'm looking at, so it would be interesting to hear about making sense of it. And then the one on hierarchies also was- Yeah, yeah, with David from Louisiana. Yeah. Yeah. That actually might lead into a good spot with the colt as well, which is it characterized itself. I'm sure Peugeot would have a mild aneurysm. I don't know if there are mild aneurysms. Not all of them kill people, but they're pretty dangerous. Symbolized itself on a upside down hierarchy, so a reverse pyramid. And a good amount of that was playing on the Illuminati conspiracy theories. At the bottom of the pyramid was a lazy eye, like half-oak. So, and again, a lot of this is infused with all of my own sense-making, so it's hard to pull apart what it intended from how I went about understanding it. But an interesting point on hierarchies for me, I actually brought this up very briefly at the Meetup in San Jose, is the star of David is made out of two hierarchies. It's not one, it's not a pyramid. It's the normal hierarchy and the inverted hierarchy synthesized. It forms a union. Well, the cult viewed a lot of the issues of the current world as being born from removing the upside down hierarchy, or basically using it as a sacrifice for the upright hierarchy to make the upright hierarchy bigger. So the way it defined the upright hierarchy was global capital, which is this, or I mean, you could map it onto so many different things. Abstractism, right, reaching towards abstraction, trying to leave the human to reach to higher states or whatever, which could be symbolized as our technological growth, our ability to manipulate reality at a level ever approaching God, etc. An easy way to describe it is that that hierarchy runs on credibility. And I would actually argue against Peterson's meritocracy, that isn't, a better word is credibility, because there's aspects of meritocracy in credibility, but it also functions with a lot of other things going on. Yes, yes. Yeah, reputation. Yes. And reputation that isn't even earned, you know, familial reputation, class, all of these aspects. No, I think you're right, credibility is a better word. And then that translates into the market forces as literally your ability to receive credit. So that's, where is the upside down, I'm drawing the hierarchies on my desk. That's what I'm doing down here. Well, I'm typing notes, I'm learning to type notes, because I post maybe a week or two after I do a conversation, it's like, how am I going to summarize this in a title slide? So I'm continuing to refine my process. So if I type, that's why I've taken notes. Nice. Whereas the downwards hierarchy, which would be the social as opposed to the financial hierarchy and our social systems as opposed to our financial systems. Again, the word finance is kind of loaded. Yeah. Financial systems is most human action nowadays. Yeah. It's functioning on, can I make this marketable? Is it valuable? Can I make money off that type of thing? The social isn't really operating under the context of can I make money off of this? There's crossover. And again, if you look at the Star of David, they're mostly overlapping. But the peaks of the hierarchies are missing from each other. And then the corners of the bases are missing from each other as well. Yep. Um, and the social hierarchy runs on authenticity as opposed to credibility. So, and there's a problem with authenticity, which is that, well, much like credibility, you can't actually try to be authentic. Or rather, the effort to try and be authentic is one of the surest signs you are not authentic. That's right. Right. That's the new age. This hyper, you know, authentic to the point that it feels totally divorced from anything that might be what we think of as a real person. Right. And that actually a higher ideal to aim for in that hierarchy rather than authenticity, granted that's how it's operating, would be something along the lines of honesty. And that's actually, that's a fun line I like to use when people say, oh, we're living in a post-truth world. It's like, well, no, it's not actually post-truth. It's just pre-honest. And that's, there's a whole bit I could go into there where it's like, you know, if you're asking what can always be done, you can't always be done. You can't always be done. You can't always be done. And that's the whole point of the question there, where it's like, you know, if you're asking what can always colonize truth, the answer I would say is honesty. Honesty is the only thing that has the ability to keep all of the familiar truth value and actually enhance it as opposed to degrade it. Because every true statement you could make, you can also make from the point of view of who's saying it. And so, in the sense of science, what defines 20th century, at least physics, is the integration of the observer. Right? So we had laws, physical laws, that were true. But then when you get to relativity, which is funny, funnily named given our current cultural conversation, the whole change basically, I mean, there's lots of changes, but the one of the major ones is bringing in the frame of reference. So events happen differently based on the frame, how the frame of reference you're looking at it is moving. That to me is a step away from truth towards, as an ideal, a platonic truth of here's the laws, they're 100% true all the time, to well, actually you have to also incorporate how you're observing them. And that's the same with quantum mechanics. It starts with Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, which is basically integrating the fact that when you observe something, you interfere with the system. There's no way to look at what's happening without interfering with what is happening. And then we codify that and it changes our entire conception of how events play out and all that kind of stuff. So my argument here is just like we're moving ever closer towards honesty. I think actually the next, this again is just me forecasting, I'm not smart enough for this to mean anything. I think actually where the next major step, particularly with physics, will be is when that frame of reference is made specific. So yes, right now we still have it in the realm of the platonic ideal of a massless, spaceless point of observation. Well, what happens when we plug into that variable what we know for a fact the universe uses as nodes of observation, which would be what we call consciousness. However, that phenomenon may be happening or where it's localized or is it, you know, it gets messy quick. The source of seeing. Yes. And I do think there's a lot of fun ideas. No, this is all really, you know, this is all really good stuff. And, you know, I in, you know, for a long time now in my videos, I've talked about this monarchical vision. Well, part of the reason it's a monarchical vision is because only the monarch, I mean, the monarch, which is mono, archa, you know, monarch, I mean, it's that's the triangle. It comes from a point. But this is something that we, because we are not the monarchs, we are monarchs over our own realm, as it were, but we are not monarchs over the realm. We cannot pierce this or obtain this vision because obviously the moment we enter, we contaminate to use one frame of reference for it. So now this is I really love how you laid this out. This is really, really good stuff. Cool. And I can't believe how fast these go. We're almost at it already. I feel like I just scratched the surface here, but I think I had that thing. What was that? We've talked about quite a bit, actually. We've done quite a bit. Yeah, we covered some territory. I guess I'm just looking at my notes and I'm like trying to spit it all out. I looked into, I don't know how to pronounce this guy's name. Dewey word? Dewey weird. Dewey weird. Yes. Dutch philosopher. I definitely enjoyed, I mean, I didn't look into it. I read the Wikipedia page, which is not very high resolution. But one thing I picked out was his whole idea about the pre-theoretical attitude of thought. And this is what I was describing when I, or this is what I'm describing when I say everything is fundamentally cultic. And that's just the word I'm using for what this pre-theoretical thing is. But you can see him getting into this, you know, what's underneath the rationality that the person is then operating under. And he actually views this as a good thing. Like Christians should be Christian in their thought. Right. Which I would agree with. And then this gets us back into the gaslighting battle, which is how we decide truth in a pre-theoretical space. Right. One of the things that Dutch, one of the philosophical places, Dutch Calvinism really set down camp hard on is this is the presuppositional nature of any perspective in that you, it isn't the case that, so, you know, this monarchical vision is the stuff I've talked about to the degree that however self-aware I've been of the roots of the stuff I've been doing, well, this stuff has all been built into me, even if it wasn't, you know, via my tradition, via all of this. And so it's a strange thing to find your mouth producing stuff that you didn't really realize you had in your head. But, and maybe it wasn't even placed in your head, but it was, you know, it wasn't even placed in my head in terms of that, you know, Ian McGill Chris left brain consciousness way, or these are the things you're supposed to remember, but stuff gets built into, there's way more stuff packed into everything we do and the words we choose and the traditions that bring us forth than we can ever imagine. And so part of, you know, the Dutch Calvinism was this, you know, presuppositional, you know, came out with Ventil who went, you know, to the kind of the right wing reformed Calvinist perspective, presuppositional apologetics, you know, everything in that philosophy was very, paid a lot of attention to the presuppositions. Calvin College, for example, very much their entire frame of reference is that we do all of this from a Christian perspective and the people are like, well, you're doing math from a Christian perspective and you're doing science. Other people are doing math and science too. So, and that's hard to figure out. Okay. Where are the meeting places? But these presuppositions, you never really lose. And so then once you get to Doivre, you're getting to a lot of the, you know, that reflection, they kept going down further and further and exploring this. So it's all, it's interesting. Could call him a, we could give him the title of an early postmodernist. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Granted, I think what people, I mean, I feel about the postmodernists similarly to how I feel about Marxism, which is that I find the critique extremely valuable and I find the prescription absolutely just garbage. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. And it's, I don't like that they often bundle the critique and the prescription together. I think that's a dumb thing to have stuck around for so long. Solvents. I also don't credit the postmodernists with creating anything. I think they were just looking at something and trying to describe it. So. Solvents and breakfast cereal are good, but you can't eat them together. Yes. So here's some postmodern solvent. And as C.S. Lewis made the point, you keep deconstructing, you seeing through things. The point of seeing through things is to finally see something and to finally see something solid and reliable. But if you keep seeing through it, well, now you're back to the game that we initially began talking about. You just keep piercing everyone's gaslighting. No elevated principle behind the action. Right. Right. Which is, yeah, just straight destruction. It's interesting to look at the rights because they were trolling for years before Donald Trump. But then when Donald Trump comes in as a figurehead, suddenly an aspect of direction or a goal comes in and it orients all this energy towards something. And you see a shift in the character of it. Right. But. Wow. Yep. We're just up there. Well, I definitely threw a handful of ideas out there. Hopefully people will find them interesting. I did not get to the rest of this again. I was hoping this would be the last one for a little while so as not to overstay my welcome. Well, we'll just we'll take it as it will take it as it comes and we'll just make a playlist and people can, you know, people can find the previous talks. And it's, you know, it's it's interesting for me too, because part of part of the challenge of the conversations for me is I want to, at least in the title and the thumbnail, present something so that people can have a look into it. But the nature of a conversation, especially when you're having multiple conversations and developing, you know, a sort of relationship is OK. How how does one then enter in and and find it productive? Previous four hours or whatever. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So. Well, you know, maybe by the next time we talk, I'll have made a more solid attempt at starting a YouTube channel. OK. Concentrate some ideas there. Well, I and I'd really love to see you do it. So there's you know, there's a couple of guys that you met in our meetup who one of the things we talked about last night at our meetup was, you know, only James in our meetup has been on my channel with me. And I keep asking some of these other guys to come on the channel with me. But they're holding back because they they want to set up their channel. And once they've got some things lined up, then they want to talk to me because they know that'll give them a boost. And I see. And so they kind of got their plan how to launch their channel. And I'm happy to be a part of that, because these are these are sharp guys. And I think they're going to be able to make a contribution. But they're they're figuring it out and they want to do the timing right. And so I'll you know, I'll trust them to to launch as they as they see fit. So nice. So yeah, I'd love to I'd love to see you do your own channel. I think you've got tons of really good thoughts. And, you know, it's it's funny to me because I reflect sometimes on on this on this medium of YouTube. And I think I'm doing it right, because you know, what we're doing right now, I think this is really what this medium is for. Even though, you know, neither of us will ever be PewDiePie. But this kind of interaction, this kind of availability, this is what this is for. So yeah, at least in my opinion, wholeheartedly agree. Anyway, it's great talking to you again, Nick. Yes, excellent. As always, thank you again for for all that you do. Any any chance you'll be coming into San Francisco for the we have thinking about it. And it depends on whether I can get my finances together enough in the period in between to make it feasible. Okay, but there is definitely a chance. Okay, but there is definitely a chance. And it's only it's not that much further away than San Jose was. So there's I'll aim for it. Is that that's I'm assuming before another that's before the Peterson event in San Francisco on May 2, the Peterson talk begins at 630. So we're meeting in the hotel between four and six. Got it. Got it. Okay. Cool. All right, Nick. Yeah, I'll get in there on the meetup. But okay, good. All right. Bye bye.