https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=43osqeJpj8U

 Peter, some what egregiously mentioned competent men. Well I'd like to introduce you to a couple more competent men. One of them is another old mate, a mate of Mal and Julian, Ben Plazier, he's not here, but he's done all of our IT work and he's been involved in my projects for the last 20 years and he just does all this stuff for nothing usually and he performs miracles that I can't even comprehend how they work. Another one, David mentioned, David Wright, Phil Munday. Phil Munday is a panel beater and he's the most magnificent man, I should say he's amongst the most magnificent men I've ever met. He's a tall, skinny, larkonic, funny guy and he was a client of mine and so 20 years ago I was a consultant to the automotive industry, I conducted this implementation of a management system in his business which at that stage was in a really tumble down old service station at Killsythe and all of his guys sat on the floor at 7 o'clock in the morning eating egg and bacon sandwiches from McDonald's and Phil and his business partner Andy latched onto what I said and implemented this thing fully and it transformed their business and so that's 20 years ago and I've maintained a relationship with Phil who turned his tumble down service station into maybe six, a chain of crash repair stations that are leading the industry and he turned his crash repair business into a network worth initially 12 million and then 60 million. Anyway, on your list and when I wrote my first book which is still unpublished I had some material left over which was really from my men's group and so I assembled it and I said to Elaine, I'm going to see Phil Munday at 9 o'clock this morning and I'm going to $100,000 and she said, for goodness sake go back to sleep will you, which I did. 9 o'clock here I am in Phil Munday's office and I gave him a review copy of my first book, it's about an American drag racer by the way whose name is Big Daddy Don Garletts, it's a whole other story and I said look I've done this other thing which I think has some life, it's got some use, it's for men's groups but it needs some support. He said oh yeah that's good, yeah he's a real encourager and I said but I need some support. He said oh what do you need? I said $100,000. He said okay. So I rang David Wraith, I said you'll never guess, Phil Munday's just given me $100,000 and now it's yours. Just recently I discovered an affirmation I'd written in the early 80s when I first met David Wraith and it says I'm going to give David Wraith $100,000, I'd forgotten about it and he's an encourager, he's a really strange guy, he's given me the sack on several occasions and then he forgets about that and I ask him for $100,000 and he gives it to me. So I wanted him to be here today and he can't so I sent him this email and he said hi mate, enjoy today mate, we're both in Austin, Texas on holidays for the next two and a half weeks. Hope it all goes well, I'm sure it will. See you when we're back. Cheers Phil. That's his mission. He's an encourager, he's an encourager entrepreneur like none that I've ever met in my hearing and so people have got different roles, haven't they? And they'll never make another one like Phil Munday but one of you might be like him to some degree in that your job is to encourage others. Now having talked about competent men, I'd like to introduce you to a couple of competent women of which there's several amongst us. The discussion groups now are several including how might women respond to the Peterson phenomenon including today's conference and that's to be led by Jenny George. Anyone interested in that subject? Ah good, there's an audience right away. Another one is what challenges does the Peterson phenomenon offer Christian theology and practice? That's to be led by Juliette Legara. Where's Juliette? Anyone interested in that subject? Very good, there's an audience. Here's some others. Sniffing the breeze, comparing Peterson, Ecclesiastes and Paul in Acts 17 for clues on connecting with and correcting culture. Anyone interested in that? Good, that's Gordon Priest. Then David Willis, he's a Pentecostal, you can't trust him really. Is God's grace and the Holy Spirit's presence missing from Jordan Peterson's scientific worldview? Anyone interested in that? Oh yeah. Eugene Neibank, an old mate of mine. Does Juliette's personal faith in Jesus as Lord fit into this discussion? Any takers? Good, a couple there. What challenges, oh no that's Juliette's. How to use media. Now if there's an outcome from this conference I expect it will be along these lines. Paul's already alluded to it. His thinking is way beyond mine as is Julian Clark's. Julian was my best man I mentioned. He spent his life in publishing and media. He was the CEO of News Corp Australia. He's leading a discussion, it's entitled How to Use the Media. What does the Peterson phenomenon suggest for the future use of media by Christians? Any takers? Good. And finally, what are the limits of Jordan Peterson's position? His Darwinianism and his Taoism fatal flaws, which was really part of the subject in the last presentation. And so that's Keith. And so each of those sessions has a number. If you go through the door there, the little door in the corner into the office area you'll find tables with those respective numbers on them. And there's butcher paper on the wall, some pens, there's a discussion leader. What we're hoping is that you'll come back, the discussion leaders or someone that you nominate from your group will come back and give us some insights into what these topics are about. And then we're hoping for those reports to be written up into perhaps a couple of pages, not necessarily that long, and published on our website. And perhaps we'll offer them to Paul as part of the outcomes of the conference. And they'll be on his website too. So I encourage you to go to the group that you find attractive. If there's not enough chairs, there are chairs around or there's some still at the back that you could drag in. Something else I was going to say. Can't remember, too bad. I'll have to come and tell you. That's it. So, oh sorry, lunch is... Yeah, just go straight from your group to lunch. Lunch will be out on the tables. And if your group finishes early, that's fine. You can eat up all the sandwiches before everybody else. And we're going to continue... Oh, Paul's still being mic'd up. I'm sure that'll be rectified soon. We're going to now hear back from each of the discussion groups. So we're hoping that each of you have got a representative or a spokesperson or leader or whatever that can come up here and perhaps have a little bit of a discussion with me and Ben with Paul about that. So who wants to go first? TJ, I'm looking at you. So TJ, I was in the same group with TJ, which is Julian Clark's group, which was exploring what's going to happen in the future with social media? How can the church use that better? And so TJ's actually got some plans, interesting plans himself to do this. And he's also going to summarise our group thoughts. So, off you go. Yeah, so we'll have a discussion with the group. You'll need the mic, sorry. We're having a conversation as a group and the initial thing we needed to discuss is the role that media is going to play and the role that we play in the media. And so we started our conversations with the Peterson phenomenon and we acknowledged that it is just that, it's a phenomenon. Could we replicate it? And the answer is probably not. As a church, it's unique in his notoriety, he's unique in his experience, his legitimacy. But the areas that we felt that we aligned with Peterson's methodology or his approach is he's passionate, he wants to make a difference and he's speaking from something that he's particularly knowledgeable in. And so we started with the initial idea of starting a Christian Facebook. That is a place where intellectual ideas come to be discussed and that kind of thing. We acknowledged that there's a lot of limiting of conversation at the moment, so the world's not as free as it once was to have these conversations and share. That these platforms can be dominated or filtered, that there are algorithms that sit behind them that people don't necessarily understand. And so the one channel or the one way in is too easily limited. And so what we looked at was the notion of institutionally fed but individually led. So that people are equipped intellectually by the church, by their church. Yeah. And so we basically thought, you know, we know that content is king. That's been the big driver for Jordan Peterson, his content, he's made it available. We know that we need to press into the digital revolution. There are 2.8 billion unreached Christians around the world. A lot of them do have internet, some of them don't. And yeah, coming to this point of individually led and institutionally fed. So what are the passions that Christ has given you as an individual? The things that you can speak about? The hobbies that you have that you could commercialise? How to videos, whether you're a hunter or a fisherman, whether you like to go camping, whether you are a sewer, whether you're a painter. What could you do in terms of documenting your experience and connecting it to Christ? Having those activities bear witness to him. We acknowledge that Christ is at the centre of every single story we tell. And so the idea was the analogy that we sort of came up with is the city on a hill. We don't light our candle and set it under a bushel, it's for everyone to see. And so Christ and our passions are actually fuel for the lamp or the candle. The institutional church protects and nourishes the carrier, so equips them with the intellectual capacity to connect their stories to the gospel. And then we take our passions and stories and set them on the side of the hill. And that hill is the digital hill, be it YouTube, social media. They're out there for all to see. And we connect our individual stories and the stories of others to the glory and ultimately tie everything back into Christ and Christ crucified, which we acknowledge was the key thing that Peterson doesn't do. So yeah, that was our summary, the role we play in media, content as king, telling our individual stories, telling the stories of others and demonstrating the power and love and grace of Christ. APPLAUSE A big one I did is have you thought as to how you would facilitate people to do that on YouTube? Yeah, so I mean, there's a ton of free content out there. If you look at Coursera, there's quite a large swathe of massive open online courses. I'm actually looking at doing something like this myself. So I'm an avid hunter, camper and four wheel driver. I'm about to convert my four wheel drive into an overlander and basically start making content on that. So I'm looking to reveal the Lord in nature. So I've done a course, a basic course in photography, a basic course in video editing. One of the things that Peterson says that you might be aware of is if your content is too polished, people can be suspicious. So you actually want it to be quite basic. The reality is that it's genuine. We want it to be genuine in nature. So the greatest expression of genuineness is something that you're passionate about. So start with your passion. Research basic editing skills that doesn't need to be polished. Look at how the various roles of each platform. So Instagram is a visual medium. So take photos, post them to Instagram. All roads need to lead to Rome. So what is the call to action? Well, it's your content. That's where Christ is revealed. So Facebook is the community builder where you have conversations with people. YouTube is where you host the content. Instagram is where images that drive people to your content go. Pinterest can be a range of photos that surround your topics and you can create a much greater critical mass. And so really it sounds like a lot of work, but when you're passionate, these are things that you're coming across anyway. So when I've been researching my four-wheel drive, every idea that I've liked, I've just saved it. And then I'm putting it to the side to talk about later. This is why I didn't choose this. This is why I did. So I'm fostering conversations in the four-wheel drive community, the hunting community, the shooting community, the four-wheel driving community, the Australian people, the people who want to know about Australian tourism. So the tags and everything, you essentially just want to use all the tools at your disposal. And if you look at Coursera, massive open online content, it's free, takes a couple of hours a week, and you can essentially become skilled enough to make sure that all the arrows lead into your content. And then it's about being connected with the body, making sure that you've got accountability in the message that you're sharing, making sure that you're being nourished by good teaching and making sure that you're being deliberate in pointing your purpose as Christ. So don't just make it about the stuff you like to do. Be clever, be genuine about the way in which you're reflecting your hobbies back on him. Yeah. Thanks, TJ. No worries. And yeah, so we were looking at the... Thank you. It's the cut through that Peterson has comes from his particularity. So what we don't want to do is say, let's form a committee, come up with an agreed form of words, and then put it out on YouTube, because that's not going to cut. And so what we're doing is encourage people like TJ to put their particular Christian witness out there. And I'm quite fascinated by what TJ's plans are for the next few years with getting out there, reaching people one-on-one with his mission, but then also showing that on YouTube as a way of sharing a different way of being a missionary. So thanks, TJ. It's been really interesting. Paul, did you have anything you wanted to add to that or respond to that? I think it's important. Content is king. And a lot of people ask me, how did you do this? Why did you do this? And again, the how-to is very simple. And my admonition is just start and see where it goes, because you don't know where it goes unless you start. And a lot of people think and think and think. And I think that's right. You follow your passions in terms of excited about this. We'll keep pursuing that and be a little bit determined. There are many blogs and YouTube channels that have been begun and abandoned. And that's okay, but you're going to have to persevere. And another thing that when I started blogging, this was years ago. When I started blogging, I decided I was going to do this for myself. And if nobody read my blog, that was okay, because the process was worthwhile enough for me to do. And so when I started doing the YouTube, that was exactly the same thing. I thought if nobody watches this, I'm okay with that, because I am learning through the process. And it just was strange that people started watching. So here we are. Thanks, Paul. So if you're an external processor, maybe just bung your external processing on YouTube. Who came from a different group and is talking for that? So can I see hands as who's going to be the spokesperson for groups? So Jenny, Michael, great. So how about Michael? You want to come up next? Which group are you from? Group one. Group one. And so you were talking about sniffing the breeze with Gordon Priest, comparing Ecclesiastes and Paul in Act 17 with Peterson. Great. So we didn't write on the massive paper, so we just got this little thing. Yeah, I'm not going to write it up, but I'll just tell you guys. We had kind of three distinct phases in our discussion. And so the first one was the connection between Jordan Peterson and the wisdom literature, Ecclesiastes as well, in the scriptures. And so we looked at how Jordan Peterson, in the wisdom literature, draws on different kind of wisdom from different traditions. Like he looks at the Greek myths and things like that. But he also draws on wisdom that he empirically encounters through his profession as a psychologist with people. And that's how he makes his observations, largely. We also looked at how this wisdom is a timeless kind of tradition. I mean, not religion, sorry, a timeless kind of tradition. And also how, as Peterson looks at this wisdom that he draws from the world, he can't help but continue to nuance it further and further, because we live in a complex world. And that's also seen in the wisdom literature with the anti-wisdom literature like Ecclesiastes and Job nuancing the Proverbs. But then we also recognize that wisdom has its earthly limits. And Peterson kind of reflects that in his teaching as well. And then we looked at the connection between Paul in Acts 17 and the way he interacts with basically his contemporary world. And essentially, if you are unaware of this passage, when Paul speaks to the philosophers at the time in Mars Hill and draws on basically the understanding of gods in the city, he looks at all the gods and recognizes the statue with the unknown god. And so Paul is kind of depicted as Socrates, a walking around teacher viewing the world. And Peterson, he does this as well. Similarly, he makes empirical observations of the world around and he even points out the idols, maybe of specific idols in people's lives. Paul also moves beyond general relation to special revelation, to the unknown god. Peterson doesn't really do that so much. She mostly focused on the general, looking at the world around and seeing the patterns. Paul reveals that there will be a judgment. And Peterson also emphasizes the consequences of our actions quite heavily and kind of calls people to responsibility. But then we also start to really emphasize the difference between Peterson and Paul, namely that Paul is pointing to the resurrection as the source of all meaning, while Peterson is still unsure about that. But as he says, he likes to live as if there is a god. And then our discussion went on to talking about the resurrection and its relationship with other kind of resurrection myths. So we kind of established that the difference between these other myths is that Christianity is founded in a historical account. It's a historical reality. And also we talked a little bit about how human beings on their own, it's quite difficult to come to huge kind of claims just based on your own observations. So you have to rely on other people's witnesses and other people's accounts and traditions of the past. And kind of Peterson does the same thing. He kind of recognizes the limits of humanity and one's own life and the importance of relying upon traditions and evidence passed on. But then, yeah, so then we recognize the main difference between Paul and this might be quite obvious. And Peterson is essentially, Paul is pointing to the hope of the resurrection for the future, while Peterson is essentially saying this is a good way to live because it just is, you know, it's obviously you can see that in the way that people live their lives and the world kind of points to that. So, yeah, and then we kind of ended on because Jesus, I mean the resurrection of Jesus is true. Love is stronger than death. And that was the hopeful ending of our discussion. Thank you, Michael. Yeah, so that back when I was in college and a theological student, Gordon Priest was my lecturer in ethics. And then you just took me right back to what it was like to just meander through one of his lectures as all the ideas just gradually connect to each other. But it's very rich, so thanks for describing that. Paul, did you have any response to that? Part of the difficulty of knowing Peterson is very soon after I started doing videos, I got a call from one of his foremost students and grad students. And he and I actually conversed quite a bit over email for a number of months. One of the things he said about Peterson is watch how he uses words because he gets very contextual and he will very much contextualize his use of language depending on the audience. So it's, and then the third talk will get a little bit into this relationship between the apostle Paul, let's say, and Peterson. So that's just an admonition when you listen to him and just watch, pay very close attention to what his words mean. He's very intentional about his language, but he also contextualizes a great deal when he uses them. And especially some of his colleagues aren't always comfortable with his practice in that, which is a very interesting thing. Hot tip. Thanks, Paul. David, would you like to go next? So David was leading the discussion on is God's grace and the Holy Spirit's presence missing from Jordan Peterson's scientific worldview. So over to you, David. Thank you. Yes, please do. Hello, everyone. Okay, so we started by just being, spending a bit of time talking about the meaning of grace, the meaning of the Holy Spirit, and what is Jordan Peterson's worldview. And if we take the worldview part of it first, the question that we were addressing was are these things part of his, are they missing from his scientific worldview? So we first asked, is Jordan Peterson's worldview a scientific worldview? And we thought that definitely he approaches what he does as a scientist. He uses the scientific method. He has academic rigor. He refers to models, statistics, and the psychology that he's engaged in is a scientific psychology study. So you can definitely see him as a scientist and that he would have a scientific worldview. However, I don't think that's a sufficient explanation of his worldview because on top of that, there's also all of this talk about archetypes and Jung, and a lot of scientists would probably stand back from that and consider that that wasn't part of science. So his worldview is more complicated. I don't have enough depth to be able to put a label on it or whatever, but it definitely consists of two components. And if we think about whether these aspects of grace and Holy Spirit might be missing from his worldview, if his worldview was purely a scientific worldview, then there'd be no reason why they would be in there anyway. Because I don't think you can fit the Holy Spirit and grace into a scientific worldview. It talks about objects and the world from a materialistic point of view. But when you widen his worldview, then there is room to ask, does grace and the Holy Spirit, are they there or are they missing from what he says? So we talked about grace, first of all, and we split that into two components of grace. It was actually Warren who gave me the word provenient grace, which I think is the grace that we all enjoy. And it's the aggregated benefit that we all have, originally from God and through people down through the ages, and why we can be in a room like this. And I think you can probably hear me starting to go into some Petersonian type talk and say you should be grateful for the air conditioning and the lights and the fact that there's a building here. So Peterson definitely doesn't use the word, but he definitely talks about that idea of being thankful for what we have. However, if you move on to talking about personal grace, then that's where there's something missing. Grace, when we think about the gift of God, the benefit that we get from God, the that God coming into our life to help us when we need it, I don't believe that Peterson talks about that. He talks about personal responsibility. He talks about the fact that we need to take our as heavy a load of responsibility as we can bear and go up the hill towards the city of God carrying our cross. And there's a sense in which we're alone in that endeavor. From a Christian point of view, I'm sure those of us who are Christians would say, well, in Peterson's terms, good luck with that because you'll probably find that you're going to need some help. And that's the point of surrender that happens in a Christian's life when they they know that they need God to be part of their life and to be bringing his grace to bury into our life in order to enable us to do all those things that we need to do. Then as far as the Holy Spirit is concerned, that's a huge one. Even if you just started the New Testament, the Holy Spirit ideas about the Holy Spirit go back to the baptism of Jesus, the day of Pentecost, the day of the Last Supper, the manifestations of the Holy Spirit through the Book of Acts. And then you can move on to 325 AD in the Council of Nicaea where the description of the Holy Spirit is put into a creed. And down through the ages, the whole wrestling with trying to understand where the Holy Spirit fits in to the Trinity. Even down to the present day with the rise of Pentecostalism and the Charismatic Movement and the disagreement between churches about where the Holy Spirit fits in, all of that. So it's a huge, huge idea and it's probably not surprising. Well, should we really expect Jordan Peterson to have a clear position on that? I've searched and a few others that were in the group have tried to find examples. If you look at what Peterson talks about, he talks a lot about the father and he talks a lot about the son and the logos, but I think less so about the Spirit. I'll just leave you with this quote that comes from, I think it was a question and answer after the biblical series lecture. Someone specifically said to him, is the Holy Spirit the same as the logos? And his answer was, I think of these as overlapping metaphorical domains. The Spirit exists as consciousness that we all share. And he then goes on to give a Jungian analysis of it. So I think he's moving towards maybe putting a little bit of the Holy Spirit in there, but it doesn't, I think, fully fit into his worldview. Thank you, David. And sounds like potentially revisiting a few heresies. We've been there before, I think. Paul, have you observed anything about Peterson's engagement with these ideas? Is this tied to the imminent stuff that you were talking about before? Yeah. When I did a, I've been doing my adult Sunday school class in First John, so I have my regular personal YouTube channel where I do most of my things and I have a church YouTube channel where I do Sunday school and those things. It's quite a few fewer viewers. But this question about Spirit is terrifically cross-pressured to use Charles Taylor's word currently. I was, my Sunday school class, we're up to First John IV, we test the Spirits. What does that mean? Now, I was, I've been having conversations with Warren about Pentecostalism. My thesis on Pentecostalism has always been, it's not really a theological tradition, it's a culture shift. When, in a sense, what Pentecostal tradition decided to do was simply deny a lot of the assumptions of modernity and move on from that position. And that's exactly what they've done. And that's part of the reason Pentecostalism has spread so pervasively in many places of the world where modernity hasn't really gripped. So these things are really complicated. But I think they're, I think they're, I think they're essentially correct that because Peterson has issues with, with, with God as agent, as transcendent active agent working in the world, concepts about Holy Spirit and grace, they're not well founded. And he doesn't know, he doesn't know church history well. He doesn't know, he's not a theologian. And so, but, but as, as we mentioned earlier, as people dig into these things, a lot of what's in church history and theology is going to come right up because these are all the same issues. But our contemporary representations, such as what we imagine the word spirit means, it's so completely underdeveloped in the West that we're going to have a lot of work to do in terms of people understanding what on earth we think that word means. Perfect. Thank you. Jenny, would you like to come next? So Jenny's was leading a group to give space to women to talk about their responses to what they've heard, what they've read in Jordan Peterson, what they've heard today. And obviously we're not going to treat women as a generic category as if they're all going to think the same thing. But Jenny, did you notice any themes come up in the responses that you know? I think it'd be fair to say that there were about as many different reactions as you could possibly imagine. So that was good. Not a single category at all. Look, I could put this up, but I have large writing, so I ended up with three pieces, sheets of paper, which is probably not so helpful. So I'll just sort of summarize, but also happy to interact around it as well. So yes, very different reactions had five women in the group, five different reactions I'd have said to, to Peterson. I think I'll try and draw out what was in common and then where we differed a bit. So what was in common, I think, was we were really happy that Jordan Peterson does seem to be speaking to young men in ways that are really helpful. And we noted that that's needed, that there are identity meaning psychological things that are going on for some young men. And this does really speak to that. We also noted that we think that there are many young women who need to hear many of the same things, but that's not always possible, or there are barriers to them potentially being able to hear those messages. And this is where we differed a bit. And so we noted that sometimes it can be language that is a barrier. We kind of all, I think, had read the beginning of the book where in particular order and chaos are categorized as order is masculine and chaos is feminine. And this, of course, is just a quoting, if you like, of Buddhist thinking. And I think what we noted that was pretty unhelpful from our perspective is not so much that it's used, but that it's put out there and then really not commented on. It's just kind of left. And this actually is a bit of a theme, I think, with women and their reactions to Peterson. It's not even so much that it's a problem that Peterson often uses male pronouns or language. It's that he does it often without being reflective on it. And I think for women that can feel like a barrier. We had a long discussion about lobsters, which is a very memorable piece from the beginning of the book, which definitely stayed with all of us. And not all of us agreed on how we'd reacted to it. So some of us, myself included, had been deeply annoyed and others had really loved it. And I think that there was probably a difference of opinion about how we reacted to that. I think it would be fair to say that most of the time we thought Peterson had done a really good job on the diagnosis. So he was observing phenomenon in ways that were pretty close to accurate. And we could go, yep, that's the phenomenon. I think we often felt like there were lots of differences of opinion on where to go with it. And that often Peterson doesn't tell us. He leaves it out there. And some of the time the phenomenon, i.e. his followers, not so much he himself, race off with something. And the phenomenon goes to a place that perhaps we didn't all agree with. And we certainly all didn't agree on the remedy. And so we had pretty strong feelings. Some really strongly felt feelings that there was a relief not to be too PC. Other really strongly felt feelings about being excluded by language or treated as other. And we started a conversation in particular about the observations that he writes into his rule 11, I think it is, about patriarchy, social structures, marriage and so on. Again, we all really kind of agreed on the observations as being true and objectively having quite a lot of helpful things in there. But we really weren't sure about where to land. And so some actually thought his observations meant, I'm perhaps hopefully not putting thoughts into people's heads that aren't fair. But that actually, you know, there's something to be said for patriarchy. That's not a bad thing. It's quite protective of women and has been through the centuries. And again, I think we all agreed on that, but weren't all sure that that was where we should be going back to or whether we should be going forward to somewhere else, particularly as Christians. I think that's some of my observations. But I'm happy to have some interaction. You were just saying about that chapter 11 that you broadly agreed on his observations. Can you be a bit more specific about what were the convergences of agreement around his observations in that chapter? Yeah. So he observes that we spend a bit of time talking about the fact that he talks about the games that men and women play. That's the language that he uses. And he observes that boys give up games if they think that they're girls games. So it's okay for women to play men's games. It's also okay for them to win. But if they win men's games, then men get annoyed at them and feel demeaned. And men can't play women's games because that's no social status for them. And so women can play in both spheres, but men can't play in both spheres, or at least at the moment they can't. And he develops it in some ways, but not perhaps in all the ways he could. But he observes this as a social phenomenon that plays out in workplaces, that plays out in potentially social interactions, that plays out in the kinds of relationships that people have. And he kind of not quite leaves it there, but he doesn't come up with an alternative social structure. He doesn't entirely say, so let's go back to patriarchy, although I think a lot of people do think he's perhaps going in that direction. But he does observe that this is a problem. And it's a problem because the more that women are empowered to actually enter into men's spheres, the more that that's going to create competition, which means that men are going to lose out because they don't have other places to go. And so this is going to be a real problem. And I think that's right. I think there is something in that which is confronting and true. I'm not sure that we knew what to do with it. Thank you. I'd like to open it up to the room a bit for this because there are also, and in particular for women, because there are women who were not in the group, and we just want to make sure that your voices are heard in all the diversity as to what you're hearing. Did you feel like that's represented you as part of what Jenny's described, or have you got a different perspective to add? You're welcome to add that now. You don't look like a woman. We'll give a chance to women to speak first, and then we'll fill the room with male voices, I'm sure. Yes. Dale? That's all right. Can I just give the mic to Dale? You don't want it recorded for posterity? No. Okay. All right. What you said, I haven't actually seen it in these workplaces. I was just remarking to my dear friend here, Stephen, in the break is the thing of God over Jesus over man over woman, and I was just saying to him that I actually sit in that hierarchy with my dear friends and colleagues, and that works extremely well for me, and they protect me, and they support me, and I support them, and sometimes I take charge, and sometimes they take charge, but I live in that hierarchy with the men in my life. I'm not married. I even live in that hierarchy with my son, who's nearly 17, and it creates a divine structure that gives me the total freedom to be everything I want to be, and from what I've observed about them, gives them the freedom to be everything that they are as well. So you have a positive experience of patriarchy, in fact? 100% of patriarchy. 100% of patriarchy. God bless you. Thank you. Thank you for sharing. Anyone else? Okay. Stephen. I was just going to say, perhaps about 30 years ago, I read a book called Sex in History, which I recently gave away to a feminist. The perspective that was, I was putting out some perspectives which were rather interesting. Now, historically, there have been societies where women were the senior rulers, and there have been societies, far back in history, there have been societies where the top person tended to be a woman, and many societies where there was a male hierarchy was very strong. The only thing that's noticed, where the matriarchies have advantages, I'm not sure of, but one thing which has been noticed in history is when it comes to warfare, patriarchies tend to be the winners. But the interesting observation this author made, that he looked at, say, European and English history, and when society became more matriarchal in nature, or more patriarchal, as he noticed in the more matriarchal phases of European history, the fashion, the division of the sexes was greater. The behaviours were diverged a lot more. But in patriarchal phases of culture, where patriarchy became more intense, he tended to notice that the behaviour of the sexes would coincide more. So if the modern feminists are saying women should be like men, obviously they're supporting the patriarchy from the point of view of that author. That's all I've got to say. It's an interesting observation that historically the body increases under a more matriarchal rule. That the sexist behaviour will close under a patriarchal rule. Yeah, so there's a number of ways of framing all this and of observing the history of humankind and our interactions, and whether we should have a system that defines how all men and all women have to relate to the system, or whether in fact we can work with the particularity of each man and each woman and express their gifts. And that's a discussion that's still going on in the church today as well as in society. Jenny, did you want to respond to that? No, I'm all right with it. Look, it's an observation. I'm not sure that it necessarily speaks to the Peterson phenomenon personally, so I'm fine with it as an observation, but I don't know that we talked about anything that was specifically... Yeah, I just wanted to make a comment. I guess something that I've noticed with the Peterson phenomenon and I guess in just witnessing it and seeing people react to it, is that a lot of, especially on YouTube, there's a few female YouTubers who have been influenced by Peterson and they'll talk about their own experience and how they feel like they're being lied to for a good part of their early adulthood about what a woman's role in the world is and what will make them happy and fulfilled and things like that, especially with motherhood and having children who have been severely downplayed and so on now with Peterson being the first thing that's opened their eyes to, oh, this is something that has been completely unspoken about until now and something I've, just as a young guy interacting with young men and young women in my day-to-day life, something I've noticed is that almost all 90% of young women that I meet, when they talk about children, they talk about it if it's going to happen, like around 30, but if it's going to happen at all, a lot, even conservative, not very interested in having children and I do wonder about even the ones that of my generation that are considering children, compared say to my mum and the skills that she had as a mum and bringing me up, there's a lot lacking, like I see, like you can go to uni, get skills, etc., but what those don't translate to being a good mother and I just have this sort of great concern about all these young women that are, like what are they, are they going to find out too late? Yeah, so we actually did talk about that, so that was an observation that we did talk about. I think it's, and hence I think where I tried to say, we actually think that there's stuff in here that would be good for young women to hear too and the issue is whether or not there's actually a barrier. So, and now I'm going to go slightly off-topic from what we talked about and give my own opinion, so just so you know here, and that is, look, I think Peterson is at his best as a psychologist. He's a great psychologist, he knows what goes on in people's heads and when people actually hear that and start applying it, it seems to me he's got incredible wisdom to give and there's some examples and I think women are just as likely to get good benefit from it as young men. So an interesting question is, one of the reasons I guess we're here is because as Christians we see this being appealing to young men and we go, that's fantastic, how can we actually make use of that? Can I suggest as a not very young woman but a relatively young woman, actually the way he talks and language he uses is not attractive to all young women and there's great advice there but it's not attractive. It is incredibly confronting and we had one other person in the group who's not here but I know that she has been and along with other friends is incredibly confronted. Now like it or not, actually young women who need to hear this are being turned off. So we actually do need to deal with that as a phenomenon as part of this, particularly if we think it's good advice and that the reality is that actually even if we think patriarchy is a great thing and it's the answer, it's not actually necessarily going to help women who instinctively don't feel that to be able to hear it and let's take the lesson from the fact this is working with young men to say clearly all the lovely stuff we were saying hasn't worked, this is, let's figure out why. I think by the same token rather than just wishing that young women could hear this and get on board, let's actually ask why they're not hearing it and realise they may actually need to hear something with different languaging and we might need to do it differently because for at least some section of young women it's not going to work to just go but you should be on board with this, it's great advice. Actually they can't hear it in this language in this way, I suspect. Thanks Jenny. I can, so a couple of things we talked about. Firstly I found it personally incredibly confronting at the beginning of the book when the Buddhist picture of order and chaos is put up. Order is masculine, chaos is feminine, chaos is hell, it's mentioned as hell many times, order is heaven. Order is godly, chaos is devilish and at no time that I read in that chapter did he ever say, of course this is just a picture and the fact that order is masculine and chaos is feminine was a particular thing of the Buddhists and it doesn't mean men and women, it goes through every human heart. I can tell myself that but he doesn't say it and that was pretty confronting for me and I'd have to say that when he followed up in that chapter from order and chaos to then say oh and by the way guys you'll relate to this order and chaos you know femininity thing when you've been rejected for a date, I'm kind of like so he really means it, he's doubling down on this order equals masculine, chaos equals feminine picture, it's a picture but by golly it was confronting and a barrier for me. Thank you. And early in the book almost didn't get past it. Yeah thanks Jenny. One of the things that I've learned over my years as a pastor is that any category that you try and just sort of push people into and say you belong to this gender, this race, whatever, therefore you need to be this role is incredibly releasing for some people for whom that category just fits like a glove and then for other people because then they think oh I'm being perfectly exactly what I'm meant to be and it fits me and then for other people it's just incredibly toxic because they're just not wired that way and so we're always trying to kind of make space for everyone to be themselves and to find what that looks like in the way that they construct all their relationships are constructed. Paul. A couple of little comments, this is one of the most interesting and this whole subject could deserve its own conference, it's huge. One thing you might have noted, men watch the videos, women read the book. Not always, almost always and in general and publishers know that most many publishers publish books for women. YouTube is 80% men and so there's an element of medium in this too and Peterson the writer is very different from Peterson the speaker and so that's a reality about Jordan Peterson. Thanks Paul and thanks Jenny, thanks all for opening up your different perspectives on that, it's very helpful. Who do I still have to cover? Hands up for the people who still got to speak, sorry brother, oh Keith, sorry Keith. Keith is doing the last one on what are the limits of Jordan Peterson's position and in particular looking at his Darwinism and Taoism so please share with us what your group came up with. Thanks Peter, thanks Keith. We were in the group seven, we were answering the question what are the limits of Jordan Peterson's position so are his Darwinism and Taoism fatal flaws? So we spent a bit of time talking about well what is Taoism and what is Darwinism so I'll just give you a little bit of an overview of what we came to. We talked about yin and yang from Buddhism or the Chinese tradition and we sort figured that order and chaos isn't exactly the same as yin and yang in that religion and so order and chaos is as the lady before me was talking is often you know described as masculine and feminine but we really didn't focus on that, we talked a little bit about that so neither is good nor bad or too much order can be bad like he talks about with the collectivism on the right, too much chaos could be bad so either in excess could be bad so he often talks about walking the line between order and chaos keeping them in balance and we talked a bit about how from a self a development point of view in your life you he Peterson seems to want you to have both order and chaos so order is what you know and chaos is the unknown and so you need to walk out into the unknown and bring it back in and integrate it but also in the terms of meaning so Peterson's really big thing is about how to get meaning in life so we sort of had this concept of and I've heard Peterson say it in a recent video that we need suffering in our life to have meaning so overcoming that suffering or bringing all order to that suffering order to that chaos is what gives us meaning in our life so and so sort of trying to understand this one of the questions we asked ourselves is well is this compatible with Christianity or and we sort of thought well we think it is we think there's there's no real problem with this concept of having the unknown world and the known world and bringing order to it and in fact Peterson sort of brings Christianity into this in terms of the logos which is the the truth spoken into the world is a way to bring order into the chaos and we thought it was very interesting that he brings truth as a critical element in order to move from or from arrows going the wrong way to bring order to chaos truth is a critical element to achieve that so and that's that's the logos of spoken truth and also in an archetype of Jesus Christ he calls it so it's like the creation of the world is truth as well as truth in our own life so we think we don't have a problem with this concept of order and chaos in terms of Christianity although he sort of cherry picked perhaps some of the the the religious mythologies of of of Taoism so that so that seemed to be all good and then we moved on to Darwinism and so Darwinism is a little bit more than just the scientific theory of evolution Darwinism is talking about the origin of biological life and sometimes that's the classical definition it's also applied to the universe as the origin of the universe sometimes Darwinism and the real the commonality in that is really that there's no the the causes for life and the causes for the for the universe are all natural causes so that's scientific materialism now we sort of also observed that we talked about what his beliefs are so he stands on Darwinism as Paul says but he also says things like well there's this other thing out there that's not material this is these transcendent things that are outside the realm of science and it's a bit of a mystery so he puts it out there he believes it's real so it's part of his reality but it's not part of the the the physical world now going back to Taoism a bit I missed a bit we we look at Taoism is is a pantheism where pantheism believes that the material world is equivalent to divinity that's the way it was defined in Wikipedia so they're the same thing but here he's saying well there no there's this other thing besides the material world that's transcendental so that's sort of a conflict so he has this conflict between the pure Taoism which is pantheism so we wouldn't be able to call Peterson a pantheist because he's got this other transcendental belief in his worldview so and it also comes out in in the Darwinism this his belief in something transcendental which he leaves sort of as a bit of a mystery outside the realm of science that's in conflict with Darwinism as well because there's a there's a the theological implication of Darwinism that there's there's no god because if all the processes of the origin of life are naturalistic then that sort of there's a assumes that there's no god so scientific Darwinism there's a presupposition that this doesn't exist and in scientific materialism so he's sort of we sort of figured that he's sort of sitting on the fence he's got a bit of a bit of the both he's standing in the scientific world but he's so he's sort of cherry picked some of these mythologies like Taoism and he's he's stand he agrees with a lot of Darwinism in terms of the material world but then I guess he's rejecting this presupposition of Darwinism that there is no god and then he's adding some transcendential worldview to it so and then we discussed okay so is he a scientist if he's adding this stuff now the definition of science we thought was well we thought that the the Darwinists are less scientific than Peterson because they need an element of faith because they they have they have to have faith that there is no transcendence it's just a presupposition now that's not scientific when you're doing science you have to have your mind open to all possibilities and go wherever the evidence leads okay so we thought that Darwinists are really have a lot of faith to say no I'm not even going to consider that there might be something beyond the material world that's it but Peterson at least is open to that he's saying well yes I'm convinced of Darwinism and evolution over long periods of time but there's more okay so because he's got some evidence of that now he may have some personal stories around that but we see that as more scientifically based so then we started talking about the limits okay well how does this limit him okay so what's he trying to achieve some of the questions we had to suss this out was does it affect his role as a promoter of the biblical stories and judaic christian values because that's what he's really on about so have order and chaoses we think is fine but with this Darwinism he has he's he's sort of got most of Darwinism he's got this is a mystery and we sort of so the limits are he's sort of straddling the fence he's he's agnostic in some sense so and one of the interesting things we thought about was prayer we watched the video earlier where he gave an example of how you would pray and it struck us that that that little story of prayer that he was giving is really praying to god number one okay so it's like he's saying sit on your bed you know confess to yourself or imagine you've got god number one up there and confess to them and i feel bad about myself what am i going to do and so there's a process of confession and really forgiving yourself so with he's sort of up to here where you can he can pray to god number one you can change yourself and you can forgive yourself and that's sort of where that's the limit that's where he stops now so that's there is value in god number one right there's lots of things you can do psychologically right and i think in that video with um sam harris sam harris's point was right he didn't peterson didn't answer it but he said you don't need a a supernatural god to explain that effect of prayer right and he's right because that's god number one you can do that all psychologically in the material world but there is value so the next question we had is there value in god number two yep so if you pray to god number two what's the advantage what's the benefit what more do you get well god number two can intervene i don't think peterson's ever recognized that he's touched on it once with the resurrection remember a video where he's going like this so he's thinking about it healing redemption and forgiveness and even ultimately salvation all these things are reliant on a god number two a personal god who can intervene in the world and and cares and um getting back to forgiveness in prayer or in your life psychologically you can forgive yourself you can forgive your victims if you've done something to somebody else but there's one forgiveness you can't get which is you know the ultimate universal forgiveness good versus evil cannot be forgiven by by god god number two peterson is avoiding these okay so that's that's his limit and prob mostly due to the darwinism we think thank you thanks keith i appreciate it well done paul i'm interested in some of this discussion about um the about science and so on does peterson ever delimit his own discipline in terms of its scientists would think of it as a social science and therefore sort of quite apart from their territory what how does he position himself with regard to science he very much understands himself as a scientist and his darwinian epistemology basically i don't talk a lot about this in this lecture but there's an iron box of secularism which if you are on a secular age you do you're a buffered self and so in order to find good you have a difficulty within that box to define good and so he uses darwinism as an epistemology to say good is that which promotes survival that begs the question promotes the survival of what yeah and so then you have identity issues within that box so but but yeah there's a lot of good in that this group did here perfect thanks paul okay we've we're getting a bit more press for time now so we've got two more groups so i want to hear from eugene and juliette's group so who's representing those just before juliette goes can i suggest that we run this session out then have a short afternoon tea and then resume the program because it's important that everybody's heard yep we don't want to finish at seven o'clock no uh having said that can i ask paul a question paul can i screw the time up even more yeah uh is uh is and the union game not the way the way this group described it there's a fair amount of dualism here in peterson so you have a darwinian materialism and then you have a transcendental layer i recently heard daniel dennett talk about he was on unbelievable had a big debate with uh i forget who he was with but it was very interesting daniel dennett set up the world he talked about material and then he said information and i thought yeah your house is cracking is cracking is there they are the the the materialists are increasingly losing the game and they feel it but just like christianity was terrified in terms of they had so many sunk costs materialism has a ton of sunk costs and they're going to keep fudging to try and maintain it but that was defeated in the trenches of world war one thank you right juliette i'm looking forward to hearing this it's about what challenges does the peterson phenomena offer christian theology and practice so she's going to tell me what to do i think you're going to tell me what to do so quick um i don't know where i'll put this put it here do you want me to hold it up sure yeah so what challenges does the peterson phenomena offer christian theology and practice so as soon as we got into our discussion we were talking about the symbolic um jesus resurrection or the historical jesus resurrection because we naturally go into the parts where does theology and practice diverge from peterson um and where does it converge with peterson's ideas in christianity and that was the first one that really popped up um then we start again to theology church um because those end up manifesting theology and practice we found in that that there was going to be a material and a metaphysical and a material contradiction um and we start asking the question what is it to be a christian is it through rationalism is it progression like in orthodoxy there's the concept of theosis in which you're earning your way towards salvation you're working towards salvation so that's a question i'd like to hear from paul what is it to be a christian because when people come into um peterson and then want to ask him come to churches and ask what how do i become a christian it's a really tough question to answer depending on which denomination you roll into um so yeah we started asking the question how can we communicate and unite these two things and one of the things we found during peterson's discussions with atheists or other christians is that they really get um they start talking in metaphors um like peterson um how do i say it peterson uses a lot of metaphors to describe transcendental things and so do the atheist they get into these metaphors so maybe for christians we have to get away from religious language too much like we understand we know what it means but they don't so they probably understand peterson's ideas of prayer peterson's ideas of the logos which is more philosophical but it's inherited in christianity that christ is part of the logos it's not all of him it's an element of him so we did um come to that conclusion that metaphor will help explain the transcendental side and unite the material in the metaphysical and regards to church and practice so when a christian when a non-christian comes into a church they might have different ideas about science they might believe in darwinism maybe your church doesn't or maybe it does but being tolerant of those views um when they first come in uh will help um invite them in and be able to get into the faith and get into the practice without closing the door on them straight away yeah so that's how we that's it terrific thank you for those thoughts juliet paul did you have any questions for jerry yet well this this point right here is a terrifically important one in terms of where peterson goes and the metaphorical that's foundational for him he the thing about peterson he doesn't know how far he can get beyond the metaphor and he's still right at that line in wrestling with it thank you so beautifully expressed juliet okay excellent uh and we have last group is uh eugene knee bones is eugene giving yes you're giving the uh talk correct the summary so eugene is speaking about uh where does personal faith in jesus as lord fit into this whole discussion so very much coming from a christian and thanks sorry thank you uh yes there were three of us in the group i'm a mate and craig is a member of one of boran's foursons and uh uh yeah george you when you're a follower of the blog the blog yes that's how he's here today so we came from three different points of view now uh we found the question difficult to answer so i'll just give an aside on the in the australian and leading article that's our newspaper for some of us read and it was interesting to know that peterson's christchurch lecture um this was on the 25th of um of february this was reported his topic was uh toxic masculinity masculinity obviously everyone didn't listen to that topic in christchurch i just thought that was interesting that was the case and i could talk much more about that but that's not our topic today is it's a world that needs messages and it's a world that needs action and this question of uh jesus is lord it's a faith statement really that surpasses time and place culture and creed for the christian and if you're a christian and you don't say that he's lord of your life and act as if that is the case your faith can be questioned because lordship is more than lip service it's faith and action and belief that shows out in this world and in the world to come now human behaviors are challenged we thought energized and positively displayed when individuals embrace embrace jesus christ as the lord and master of their earthbound existence and so this faith system of lord is expressed in the way we live and what we do and what we say with jesus as lord of one's life we begin as a pilgrim and then hopefully become a disciple the same root word as discipline of course we become disciplined in our behavior christians are required by him to follow in his steps it's called his example in peter his steps in piety in good works loving examples kindness now that's a word that we've heard a lot on like our televisions lately and the like so how does this relate jesus as lord to what we're talking about well these are the things in the life of a christian if they say that jesus is my lord we should see in their lives and if we don't see it we might question their statement of faith this discipline is required requires collected action by fellow believers and so whilst we might say jesus lord as an individual we also say it as churches and other groups of believers who come together for what they do they have a skepticism concerning worldly values activities and aspirations breeding a meek servant and so others both on and off the christian path will see this and lead to their ultimate redemption when i was seven years old i used to sing a chorus or a group of choruses called the fruit salad of that has anyone ever heard of that no oh yes i'm right down the back that's why because it is well warren only will remember the fruit salad and the end of that fruit salad which is an amalgamation of various tunes and thoughts there is a three-fold triumphant ending and we as youngsters used to sing and if we do not crown him lord of all and as jesus we do not crown him lord at all in other words christianity demands an acknowledgement of his lordship by our lips and the fulfillment in our lives now question was asked under with pierson sort of inspiration because he's into behavior and to the extent that we find kindness and compassion and decency in our lives can someone who is not a christian display these qualities well of course they can and do but it's an option for someone who's not a christian they can behave or they like in one sense philosophical sense if we call ourselves a member of christ's family and call him lord it's beholden us to display those qualities and that's the challenge thank you thank you