https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Ee8wKcBRyy4

 Here we go. Hi, this is Paul. And since our debut on his channel a couple of weeks ago, I know a bunch of you know who this guy is. And today I want to spend more time getting into his story and then I think he very much helped sort of launched Meta. Chad was on a live stream because my little corner of the corner does a lot with live streams. And so the trying to figure out what we mean by this term, Meta modernity and Meta modern Christianity, I think is getting chewed on, which I think is a good thing. So let's begin with you. You've got three names in your bio here. Do you go by all three or what's your favorite? I go by Brendan is my first name. I only threw the middle name in there because it used to be the case that when you looked up, you found Brendan Dempsey, you found an Irish comedian and I needed to distinguish myself from this fellow. So I'm Brendan Graham Dempsey, but people call me Graham now and I'm very happy with that. Dempsey is also fine. Any configuration, any permutation is fine with me. And in this case, I'll know exactly who you're talking to because I'm the only interlocutor here. All right, all right. So, well, this is the way I usually begin. Why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself and why don't you start sort of with the household you grew up in? Yeah, so my understanding that we're good. This is a randos conversation. This is a randos conversation. You're not that rando because you've already got a YouTube channel and you've already got over a thousand subs. So you're not real rando, but for a lot of people, you're not as well known as John Vervecky or Jonathan Peugeot or Jordan Peterson. But actually this is my preferred way of starting almost any internet conversation is this. Yeah, cool. No, I appreciate the invitation to do this. This is good. This was sort of where our conversation or last conversation ended was sort of like good to maybe have a bit more of a sense of the biography. So yeah, so thank you. And also I guess what these usually last for. We'll go a couple hours. Two hours, okay, great. So I just try to get a sense of, you know, how much detail I can get into. So yeah, so in terms of, you know, in the beginning, like where does it all start? That sort of a thing? Yeah. Okay, so yeah, well, I grew up in a Christian family and my, I guess I could start with my parents on that front. They both left kind of high church contexts that they weren't really fully invested in. My father came from a Lutheran context and no, my mother came from a Lutheran context. My father came from a Episcopal church. And, you know, as sort of just, that was kind of a cultural thing that they were doing. But then the Jesus movement really picked up, you know, in the seventies and they were really swept up by that and kind of converted and became born-again Christians. And they, after that, they met at Montree College in North Carolina. And so they actually kind of both through that had a contact with some of the Presbyterian and the Calvinist tradition and whatnot. But during that time, yeah, kind of shuttled between what in retrospect they've come to see as sort of different cults. They were part of some, yeah, some kind of small Christian communities that were very kind of invasive, overbearing, had some abusive qualities to it and that sort of a thing. But finally they landed in Vermont. My father's a professor at University of Vermont, teaches accounting business. And so we all landed here. This is where I was born in Vermont, 1989. And yeah, the first part of this is like, it's an interesting thing. I had sort of, I had a mixture of like homeschool and sort of like conservative, private Christian school education growing up. So it was a very conservative form of kind of evangelical Christianity that I was raised in, assemblies of God tradition, if people are familiar with that, and kind of a charismatic Pentecostal sort of a thing. But being in Vermont kind of, you know, it felt a little bit like fish out of water, which added this kind of additional element of feeling like you're part of sort of a very insular kind of subculture element. You really got a sense when people talked about, you know, the fallen world. It was like everything outside the bubble was very much that fallen world. And, but so yeah, I mean, I think for a lot of people, they might be familiar with the sort of, kind of like this 90s evangelical subculture, which I was very much a part of, you know, focus on the family and DC talk, newsboys, all that stuff. They read CS Lewis to you. Oh yeah, yeah, we got not just Narnia Tales, but well, when I was homeschooled, I read The Great Divorce that was in like fourth grade or something. Wow, it's early for a book like that. Yeah, yeah, but I actually loved it. I thought it was really cool. You know, and he has a great way of being, of mixing sort of the imaginal and the theological in a way that was great. And then later on, I'd go on to read like near Christianity and whatnot. How many siblings? I have three siblings. I have two older brothers and a younger sister. Okay. Yeah, and so we were all raised in this. I was sort of the one of the four to really get really into it. And there's just something always about my temperament. I've tended to really throw myself into whatever I deem to be like matters of ultimate concern. And so I'll really kind of follow that thread intensely and very passionately to kind of wherever it goes. So I'll get more into that in a minute. But yeah, so I also don't know how pervasive GT and the Halo Express is. I don't know if anyone's ever heard that one, but it's sort of like the salty style, you know, like children sort of like you'd sing the Bible verses and stuff to help you memorize them and everything. So that was very much sort of the milieu. What was GT and the Halo Express? I never heard of it. It was this like audio cassette series and GT was a guardian angel and he would like show up to kids and he'd help them through their troubles. And then he'd like teach them Bible songs and they're very, very catchy. I mean, you know, I could, these things very much have stuck with me. So yeah. I don't know if someone- There will be someone out there who has heard this. I hope so. There won't be many, but there will be someone. Yeah. So anyways, that was kind of, that was the- How did you like your childhood? Were you, you were a happy kid? Did you enjoy all this? I was a very happy kid. I mean, the first 10 years of my life were very happy and I grew up in, you know, this like house on the top of like a little mountain and was very fortunate to have a kind of very, you know, deep connection with nature and all of that. And it wouldn't, it was a bit unusual, my educational upbringing in the sense that I would, you know, go back and forth to these different schools almost, well, actually every year until I got to high school. But on the whole, no, I thought it was a, it was a very loving, definitely family and a very supportive family. And so all of that was very, was very great. And, you know, yeah, for the first 10 years, all of that was sort of, I think, developmentally, a lot of that was very much welcome. But there are also elements that in retrospect, you know, weren't because of just the conceptions that you're presented with as a kid at that age, right? Trying to deal with the idea of the end of the world and the Antichrist appearing and, you know, the whole Left Behind series stuff and the rapture and the belief in demons and all this stuff, it kind of in a young mind can take on a very, you know, vivid intensity. And so- Was that a very real thing for you? Oh yeah, yeah, very much so. Yeah, and, you know, if you have an older scheming brother who wants to kind of get under your skin, you know, he'll pretend like he's possessed by a demon and then, you know, come after you. And so you'll have to scream in Jesus name, you know, I, whatever. And so, you know, it's just the way that that stuff gets refracted through like, you know, seven, eight, nine year old brains is a real thing. So that was, you know, in retrospect, that was the element of, I mean, I had a very supportive family, but the worldview in which I was embedded was one that, yeah, would create a lot of tensions and dissonances that would need to be worked out through time. So most of my life is sort of about that. When did you sort of feel, let's say counter-cultural or non-mainstream, when did you first sort of realize that this world that you were living in was very different from, let's say normies down the road? Yeah, well, let's see. I mean, in a big way that really hit in sixth grade, and I didn't feel any real sense of attachment or friendship with most of my peers at that age. And they seem to be just in my mind, just, you know, obsessed with superficial and, you know, kind of debased sorts of things. I remember when I was like, I was in sixth grade and I just felt profoundly alienated. And my only kind of framing device to make sense of that was that just the world was fallen and that was the trouble with things. And I took a stone, a pebble from the courtyard of the public school that I was during recess, and I wrote on the wall, but in the end, every knee shall bow or something like that. Well, it was exactly that. Just the sense that like- You were a zealot. I mean, I was like, this was, you know, of course, later on, feeling a sense of disconnect from other people kind of then became refracted through different lenses as well. But at that age, it seemed like the thing was just that people didn't have Christ and that things were not good. Was that when you started public school? So public school, I did in my second grade year and in my sixth grade year, and then in my seventh grade year, and then, well, half in my seventh grade year, then all in my eighth grade year. It was a very kind of jumble. Did you move around a lot or just- No, that was why it was so funny because we lived in the same place the whole time. But like, you know, I was homeschooled for first grade, and then there was a woman at our church who taught second grade at the public school, so we could kind of trust her. So then it was, okay, we'll do there. But then for third grade, it's like, well, that's not going to work. So then I got moved over to the small Christian private school, and that wound up being a disaster because my teacher was somewhat not fully there. And so then I got pulled out and I did the homeschool thing, and then I got back in fifth grade to the private school because I had a good teacher. Anyway, it kind of went on this sort of logic for a while. And, you know, I think also contributed to this sort of honing of a sense of contextual sensitivity, right? Shifting between these different contexts and having to be aware of, you know, who's here and what do they think, and in a way that's very different where, say, my youngest sister just did public school the whole way up and had a lot more kind of continuity in her experience. But for me, I think that always put a kind of, you know, angle on things. So what was high school like? Well, there are some important things in here. I've made a few bullet elements so that I don't forget because I figured that, yeah, you know, trying to bring out a lot of the, maybe kind of the spiritual autobiography aspect of this would be sort of the most interesting. So the big kind of initial pivot or, I don't know, this shift that occurred in my life was when I was 10 years old, I got in a car crash. We were coming down this big mountain and hit some black ice and we went off the road into this 10-foot ditch. And I broke my femur. And I guess I'll throw this part of the story in too because I think it's also, especially after our last conversation, it might be important for folks in your audience to know that I do have some experience with what you might say the paranormal or the non-normal, the miraculous, what have you, because just before this car crash occurred, we were sitting in a parking lot waiting for my mom to come out and get back in the car. And I decided to unbuckle. And so I'm jumping around the car playing GI Joe. And my brother, my oldest brother sitting in the back seat, and he obviously, he gets very angry, very disturbed. And he kind of yells at me to sit down and buckle up. And I kind of brush him off like, that's weird. So I keep playing around and then he like reiterates it. He's like, no, you need to do this right now. So, you know, whatever. So grudgingly, I just kind of sit down, strap in. And five minutes later, we hit black ice, car goes into a 10-foot ditch, lands on its side. They all get out. I'm stuck in the car. That brother comes back for me, goes in through the window, kind of frees me, pulls me out, and sets me on the porch of this house that we crashed by. And then the ambulances came. But after that, you know, he reflected on what happened. He just says that he got this really strong, intense sense that like, I don't know, that he needed to communicate this. Right. And so that's kind of the earliest instance of something like that happening in my life. And we'll just kind of leave that there. But this whole car crash was a big turning point because in those days, if you broke your femur, they would put you in traction for five weeks in the hospital. So that's what I had to do as a 10-year-old. And then go on later on, have five weeks in a half body, spike a cast, this whole thing. So it was a real kind of ordeal in fifth grade. But it was also during that stay at the hospital that our youth pastor came. And he kind of, you know, I don't know, not sat vigil, but he kind of, you know, he hung out with me that night. We started to develop a friendship and a relationship that would become very important to me. And the other element to this that's worth mentioning is that not too long after I was out of the cast and on crutches, I got brought to my church on like a weekday night prayer meeting for healing. They were going to pray over me. You know, this was other people were there and worshiping and praying and whatnot too. But so my father brings me up to the pastor and my pastor prays over me and prays for healing and whatnot. And then, you know, he kind of, I don't know if it was his hand or the Bible, puts it on my head. And I started to fall down just like the, I felt like the energy just kind of leave my body. And I kind of caught myself and they kind of looked and kind of chuckled to themselves because this is what was happening to everyone else all over the place. And then kind of did it again. And then I was just, I was down. So, you know, in our tradition, this is called being slain in the spirit. It's like a Pentecostal sort of a thing. You know, you can see very extreme versions of this. And well, I won't, you know, get into all that, but like you can find things online with the videos of this. But in my case, I felt it very directly and immediately. And so when I refer back to sort of moments of, you know, what do you make of that sort of thing, right? Very interesting aspect. So those were two elements related to my, this disruption that caused, you know, yeah, this big kind of turning point in my life related to my injury. And so from there, I guess I would just say, so now I'm around like 11 years old. And the next big transition that happens is that youth pastor that I've kind of gotten close with and gotten close with too, because he was a really weird guy. He was like a, he, you know, I mean, all youth pastors are supposed to be kind of quirky and weird and that's sort of their, you know, they're the fun and all this stuff. But he also like, he just had a very bizarre sense of humor and he seemed like a real intelligent guy that I really connected with in a way that I didn't connect with any other people. I didn't really have very many friends at this time. I was kind of just, you know, it was sort of an oddball, but I really had this like feeling about this guy in a very kind of meaningful way. But so anyway, after youth group one night, I think he'd gotten a sense that I was a bit precocious and for whatever reason, he decides to share this with me that he'd been reading some Nietzsche. And he'd been reading some Friedrich Nietzsche. What's a youth pastor doing reading Nietzsche? Right, let alone telling a 12 year old about this. So yeah, after youth group in the foyer of our church, he's telling me about Nietzsche. And so that's when I learned about that for the first time. And I don't remember exactly what he got into, but just some of the outlining of ideas. And so this just like hit me with like a ton of bricks, like, holy moly. So then I go home and I'm like grappling with this. I'm like, wow, what do I make of this? You know, and it had all to do with, you know, stuff around will to power and death of God. And if there is no God, then is everything, you know, what does that mean and all this stuff. So I wound up immediately kind of drafting this long letter in reply to him, trying to work through this stuff. And that was sort of, I would say the opening or the awakening to what would become a series of sort of existential crises throughout my life. That was sort of the first one to get that going. And ultimately was able to kind of seal that one up. I kind of kind of worked through some thoughts and ended basically with like, well, you know, but there is God and he loves us. He's going to take care of us. So like, no need to worry about that stuff, that sort of a thing. It was very kind of like, you know, kind of talking more to myself to kind of get some closure on that. But it did kind of get me aware of this whole existentialist thing. And so I was like a 13 year old, you know, bought this book on existentialism, was trying to make heads or tails of that, you know, reading that over the summer and stuff. So, yeah, that was my first brush with like a whole different way of seeing things. So anyway, I mean, I can just kind of go on linearly, but I also keep going. You're doing great. So then I think, you know, the next thing that happened around this time, I guess I would have been, yeah, about 12, was someone in my family discovered the Bible code book, which is this book by this guy named like Michael Drozdman. You're laughing. Do you know what I'm talking about? I think I know what you're talking about. So the premise of this book is that if you put, if you scan kind of the Hebrew text of the Bible and you put it into a computer and you lay it out in a matrix, you can find these like these messages, these codes, numerology, essentially. But like this was presented as, you know, like this is, this is, yeah. And so this guy writes this very compelling book, compelling book that he's found all these codes. And he's like going around to different like Israeli politicians because some of these codes say things like nuclear Holocaust 2006, or, you know, and then that was the other thing too, that there were all these like codes that seemed like they were predictions about things that had happened, you know, like it's not being assassinated or something, right? Whatever, right? So it's like, oh my gosh, so if you find that, and this was written in the Bible or encoded in the Bible, you know, thousands of years ago, now you find nuclear Holocaust 2006. Well, this made my family member very concerned and actually kind of, I don't know if it sent them into a depression, but it contributed to a depression that they were experiencing. And so I find this and, you know, I'm told about this and I was like, oh my God, now keep in mind again, there's a lot of stuff here about like, you know, a 12-year-old being told things that probably they're not mentally, developmentally equipped to deal with. So, you know, it's like, hey, why are you feeling bad? Well, and you had in some ways been, I don't want to use the word groomed, but you've been formed to a certain degree to be very attuned to something like this. I mean, the Bible code fits into an overall pattern that is behind a lot of what had happened in sort of 1990s Pentecostalism, which is not an area of Christianity I'm unfamiliar with. Sure. Yeah. And I mean, and I would extend it even to, you know, other forms of evangelicalism of just the concern for end times and being on the lookout for these sorts of signs. I mean, it wasn't an accident that the, you know, Jerry B. Jenkins, Tim LaHaye books on the, you know, the Left Behind series were national bestsellers, global bestsellers. So this was very much in the air at the time. And so anyway, so this happens and then, you know, then this gets laid on me and I'm like, oh man, what am I going to do about the end of the world, you know, in what, three or four years or whatever it was? Because Vermont's a real place that the Soviets are targeting. Well, you know, you're talking about nuclear holocaust. It's like, I'll take that one seriously. So then I started having all these concerns that the world was going to come to an end, like soon, you know, not just like a, because you are primed, maybe. That's a better word, probably, than groomed given all those other connotations of that word. But you're primed to think in these sort of apocalyptic, eschatological ways. And so then when something like this lands, it's like becomes very real with like a date attached to it, so to speak. So this was very disturbing to me. And I was grappling a lot with this sense of, yeah, kind of imminent death. And I was like, I was a kid, you know, 12 years old and thinking about all the things I wouldn't be able to then experience. I wouldn't grow up and get married and have kids and all this stuff. Right. And so in a fairly direct way, this actually led me to make certain decisions at this time in my life that I wouldn't have made outside the context of thinking that the world was about to end. So specifically, it got me involved with a person, my first relationship in middle school. I got, I started dating this girl. And this wound up being this very disastrous relationship. They weren't mentally well. And so they sucked me into this, you know, I don't know if anyone has had the unfortunate of navigating a kind like someone else working through a lot of like mental illness and depression and cutting and self-harm and that sort of a thing in a way that like is also used kind of it kind of becomes weaponized because it's sort of like it's sort of used to get you to do things. Like if you don't do this, I'll do this sort of a thing. And so grappling with all that, you know, again, like now I'm like 13. It was like, holy moly. Yeah. And then where this all kind of pans out, which is getting back to the, I mean, all this is really about religion, but where this really shifts for me, my spiritual journey is, you know, I got out of that relationship and all of that, but in reflecting on it, I felt this profound sense of guilt about it all that I'd sort of done this thing of, you know, that was a bad thing. And, you know, it was the first foray into sort of a romantic and sexual relationship and all that. And so in the context, again, of an evangelical world, it's like, oh, this is sin and this is awful. And so there was this profound sense of guilt and that I'd sinned and I'd gone the wrong way and that I'd experienced this punishment as a result of that. And so then all this led me to kind of a conversion experience that's like, well, I need Jesus and the forgiveness of this and so I found a lot of solace then in turning to my family religion at this time as that kind of washing away the slate. And so this, you know, begins this new kind of era in my life, which is this kind of, you know, convert zeal, you know. And you weren't zealous enough as a sixth grader writing on the wall. You had to take it up a notch. Yeah. So, I mean, you know, when I was younger, actually, there was, it was just kind of the air that I breathed. It was the world I swam in. It wasn't so much a kind of intellectual or personal, you know, relationship to these ideas and any kind of, like, well, do you know what I mean? Like, there's a certain kind of just, this is your lens for making sense of reality, but it's not something that you've sort of committed to intentionally yet. And so I think a lot of people- I grew up pretty fervent too. So I think I have a sense of little different milieu, but a sense of what you're talking about. Yeah. And I think this also happens for people around 13, 14, 15. If they stay in that tradition, then they kind of make it their own. And then they choose to get baptized, which I did. I went to the church and was sort of like- and so at this point, this begins that part of my life in a big way. And so this is when I start reading my Bible very intensely. And, you know, just wanted to understand, you know, my faith more, I was going to the youth conventions and that sort of stuff with all the altar calls and the music and all that stuff. But yeah, at this time, you know, I'm reading like an NIV study Bible. And so I'm picking it up and I'm reading Genesis and they'll have like a little like, you know, who wrote this and when is it from? And it would say, well, it was written by Moses, you know, it's like, oh, okay, well, let's take that one to the bank then, you know, Exodus written by Moses. Oh, okay, cool. You know, Isaiah by Isaiah, et cetera. But we can have a long conversation about that NIV study Bible because I don't know if you know that the NIV comes out of the Christian Reformed Church. I- I know- well, no, I guess I wouldn't know all the like the doctrinal, sectarian, I should say denominational aspects of it. I know that it's like Zondervan, you know- Which comes out of Grand Rapids, Michigan. Grand Rapids, Michigan. Before it was bought. And John Stack, you'll find his name. He was my Old Testament professor. Oh, interesting. Yeah. And so, but yeah, but they, the NIV study Bible tried to sort of walk a line. They didn't want to alienate more conservative Christians or evangelical Christians, but there were also some. Anyway, so anyway, so it's super interesting. It's the NIV study Bible. Well, it's important context because I mean, the NIV, that's, that was sort of the Bible of note for the evangelical circles that I've always been a part of. And I think that you're right about the NIV study Bible. I don't know all the, you know, doctrinal and kind of political aspects behind it, but other than I think you're exactly right that there's it. I'll put it this way. It's, it's historical framing is informed very much by a kind of theological angle that I would associate more with the evangelical more literalist and people who, what do you say, are people who tend more in the kind of fundamentalist direction and the kind of biblical literalist direction. I know I use the word fundamentalist in our last conversation. And maybe that one isn't it. Maybe that's too much of a, no, it's just, it's just, if you look at, let's say compare the NIV to, let's say the ESV, the English standard Bible, because the NIV comes out of the seventies. So for example, Bas van Elderen, another guy that was on the NIV translation committee, also professor at Calvin seminary, he would, you know, and these things are products of committees. And so I'm told by other CRC ministers that were in seminary at that point with Bas that he would sort of bring, he would sort of bring some of the work to his seminary students and kind of throw it out there to see, because they were playing in the seventies with what they called dynamic equivalence. Because already you could see the, and for this reason, the NIV always got some hate in the evangelical world. But if you read, say, Molly Worthen's Apostles of Reason, there's all this tension in the evangelical world about trying to be evolved fundamentalists, but yet not alienate people to the right. So in other words, that's, yeah, that's interesting. When you say fundamentalist, I don't know who would be on the, who's on the right side of fundamentalists. Well, I would say that the ESV is to the right of the NIV. Oh, really? That's interesting. Oh yeah. Because if you look at, so you can see in the Christian Reformed Church, if you go to a Christian Reformed Church, if the church has an NIV, they're probably middle of the road CRC. If they have an NS and a new revised standard version, they're probably more to the left. And if they have an ESV, they're probably more to the right. But of course, that spectrum has its own boundary markers. Sure. And the NIV was an attempt in the seventies to, of course, the RSV, which had sort of been held sway. There was a feeling that the RSV was still in some ways not readable enough, partly because of its, a style of translation was still maintained, which was sort of word for word, which was, of course, was really sort of epitomized in the American standard, the new American standard version. And so in many ways, if you want to understand the NIV, you sort of compare it to, let's say, the new King James version, which tried to keep the old sort of word for word translation scheme. But because people were feeling that by the 1970s, the King James was too archaic for people to understand. So the NIV introduced what they call dynamic equivalence, which was in some people's mind, a step too far over into paraphrasing. But what that also meant, because also in the 1970s, you had a translations like The Way, which was more in the paraphrase mode, which sort of comes in like today's living translation. So there's, so actually, your parents being okay with CS Lewis, sort of puts them in an IV land rather than let's say, hardcore King James only land. Yes, right. That's true. Yeah. And that's also sort of some of the DNA that happens with the Jesus movement. Because the Jesus movement, while they still have some biblicism, still is a little bit more open to modernization. And we have to make this relevant, because of course, they sort of blow up on the door in terms of that in terms of music and instrument. And of course, Pentecostalism kind of opens that up. So, you know, again, there's these little tells in a story that sort of helped me locate, okay, you're an NIV people. And then to give you, because the thing is to give you an NIV study Bible. I remember my parents gave me that for Christmas one year. And I still have it, the binding's broken. I would think it's somewhere back in that bookcase. It's right over there. It's over on my Bible shelf. But it's so what they would try to do with an NIV study Bible is at least hold some of the tension with a little bit of, let's say, so English scholars always look over their left shoulder for where the smack is going to come from. American scholars always look over their right shoulder. Because you're going to get hit. Because there's a bigger community of people on the right in America than the left. So the NIV is always sort of looking over its right shoulder. It wants to introduce some thematic things into the conversation without really alienating conservative evangelicals. Sure. And I mean, I'll add too, though, that my family was fairly comfortable with sort of non-denominational Christianity. I mean, and so there was never a sense because, yeah, they were involved with various non-denominational churches. And it was on these sorts of issues, there wasn't a lot of ardent parsing of which translation per se. So I mean, for example, I was also when I was starting to move into studying the Bible, or I should say just reading, like familiarizing myself in an intense way with the Bible, also reading things like, you know, was it Patterson's The Message, right? That's just like a straight up kind of paraphrase. Eugene Peterson's The Message. Peterson's, yeah, thanks. Things like that. And also making use of other translations. So there wasn't a kind of dogmatic, if you will, view on this translation only, so to speak. But that was just the one that, yeah, tended to be used in, you know, Assemblies of God churches and in the evangelical context. But that shows some of the pragmatism of those downstream from the Jesus People movement. There's a degree of pragmatism that gets in there that more of the wooden fundamentalism would complain about. And also, Pentecostals tend to be a little bit more pragmatic, a little bit looser in some areas, even though there's an ardent Biblism in a way that something like the Bible Code would really capture their interest. Because in Pentecostalism, there's also a little bit, I know this is going to get some comments, there's a little bit of a Gnostic strain, Gnostic in the sense that there's hidden knowledge. And that Pentecostalism is big on revelation. And so it's, and so yeah, there's a lot of interesting. Well, that's true. I mean, and growing up, yeah, to give people a sense of, you know, the church I went to, you know, there was praying in tongues, and then there were interpreters of that, you know, and kind of very, you know, people carrying prayer flags and lying in the aisle. And this was also, there's a whole thing I grew up hearing about called the Toronto. The Toronto blessing, yeah. Yeah, and all that. And so this attracted some of that. And so some kind of interesting stuff was going on there. And that was sort of, you know, there's a lot of that in the 90s going on. It's a very interesting decade with respect to that. And I now to kind of switch this up in a kind of strange way, despite all of that stuff coming in, or I should say, at the same time, all that stuff is coming in, I'm also getting a lot of just sort of postmodern culture that's that's filtering through the cracks, despite my parents best efforts to kind of keep me, you know, so you know, at the same time, I'm growing up with all this, we're also occasionally, you know, secretively watching The Simpsons and South Park and whatnot, and then more of that stuff starts to filter in. By the time I'm like 1314, I'm reading, you know, Jack Kerouac and, and, you know, watching like Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas and stuff. And a lot of the movies of postmodern films like Fight Club and American Beauty falling down. They're also saturating my kind of sensibility at the same time and leading to an interesting sort of tension. How are you watching movies? I mean, at that time, it was like VHS, you know, we had like a, we didn't get like cable until pretty late. I was probably 12. Yeah. When we like got got access to Grim Grizz will be calling you with respect to your relationship to set. I just want to let you know that I know if you know who Grim Grizz is yet, relationship to what exactly? Set set the God set the God set the God set. And he has a lovely story about how set came into the home and, and lured people and has so he Grizz sort of plays on obviously the Egyptian God set with a television set. Yeah. So, yeah. Yeah. So there was some dual influences going on there in a big way. But so but I mean, for that sort of stuff, it was incredibly enriching and exciting to like I was profoundly influenced by Jack Kerouac in my early teens and just found this image of like, you know, this this love for life and this in the sense of adventure and you know, travel and all this stuff that was very attractive. Vermont, Vermont for people who don't know Vermont is a gorgeous state. Oh, it's, it's beautiful. Absolutely lovely. But just this the sense of just the eccentric too, because like, I was odd as we all might have been in my kind of little bubble, I felt like everyone else was a normie, you know, there wasn't, you know, now to be fair, there's good eccentric and bad eccentric, but like, I longed for meeting kind of strange people, artists, you know, like creative people. And, and so that was part of what attracted me to the personality of my youth pastor, because he was very artistic and kind of creative like that. But it just started to open me to this other world of Did he have a seminary education that youth pastor? Yeah, I believe he Well, I think he's from Missouri. And so you know, that whole like, yeah, I don't know, there's like a whole thing down there. Oh, I think there's like an assemblies of God seminary, he came out of. But anyway, so yeah, just continuing then on with this with this story. One of the things that happens at this time, so I'm getting into all this stuff and, and starting to kind of make it my own. And this is now at the start of high school, and I get into a new relationship with someone. And she one day shows me this flip book that she found on the ground, or someone was handing out at her school or something. And this is one of these evangelical, you know, flip books that people would hand around. I'm sure there's a better term for this. But you know, I mean, these sort of like materials that would be basically like flip book and that it was animated or was it No, it was like a it was like a little booklet that just told you about that you were going to hell unless you, you know, converted basically. It wasn't a chick track, was it? Oh, yeah, yeah, exactly. Yeah. Oh, the chick tracks. Wait, put that up to the camera. Let me like, yeah, I mean, it was definitely of that size, shape. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's it. I think something very much in that in that vein. Yeah, there you go. Yeah. Oh, this is a fun one. Oh, I can only wonder what's in that one. Trust the science. So yeah, so I mean, my understanding of these is as a evangelizing tool to basically have a quick way of, you know, sharing, quote, unquote, the good news with people, which in this case is, hey, buddy, you're a sinner, and you're going to burn an eternal torment unless you convert, you know, because of what Adam and Eve did in the garden. This is basically the one that she showed me. And she looked at this and she starts making fun of it. And I got really uncomfortable because I went through it all. And I'm like, wait, I believe all of this. Like, I don't understand what the issue here is. And so this was another one of these things that kind of got me thinking a little bit like, hmm. And so, yeah, then kind of got me further down the path of like trying to articulate what I do believe and how, you know, seeing how this lands for people, how it doesn't land for people, right. And so, and trying to find ways of languaging the faith that both made sense to other people, but also I was also in the process still of learning about these sorts of things. So this kind of gets me on this apologetics train for a while. So, you know, reading folks like Josh McDowell and Lee Strobel and those sorts of books, you know, the new evidence that demands a verdict and all that. And this was like a really crucial thing for having me feel like I had an answer to all the questions and that I had all these little tropes I could kind of throw into a conversation or a presentation of something that would just be like, well, that settles it, right. You know, there are things like, well, Jesus fulfilled 111 prophecies about him in the Bible and the chances of that happening are like one in times 10 to the 37. And it's like, well, there it is, you know, we're done with that. There's no other answer here besides that one. But without being flipping about it, no, it was a very kind of important way for me at that time to kind of explore this further and felt like, you know, that I had some answers to these to these issues. So I was very into that for a while. And as I'm digging into that more and more and familiarizing myself with some of that, then I start kind of getting online and seeing these different forums, you know, and of course, this is now I don't know, 2000, gosh, I wouldn't even be able to say what year 2003, but whatever I was, I was 15 or so. And it's after 9 11, you know, 2006 is just around the corner. Yeah, right. So I'm at this point, I'd worked through some of that anxiety, I just determined that's not that's not I don't worry about that, or we're all in God's hands or something. I don't know what my thinking was on that. But I'd sort of let that go. But I'm online and I'm engaging with these forums. And in some senses, trying to, if not like convert people, then at least at least just like be learning things or whatever, you know, Christian forums and stuff, but also atheist forums. And at the end, here's where I stumble upon this person talking about things like, you know, like responding to the ideas that like, oh, there was this prophecy in the book of Isaiah, and Jesus fulfilled it, right. And then his response to this is, well, actually, that's deuterot Isaiah, and it's not the original Isaiah. And this was written in the, you know, in the Babylonian captivity. And the Isaiah you're referring to was writing in the period of King Hezekiah, and blah, blah, blah. And he starts getting into all this detail, and I have like, I have, I've never heard of any of this, I have no idea what any of this is. But clearly, this guy is a lot more informed about the Bible than I am. And I'm the one trying to be in a position to like, understand this stuff. And so that's that kind of opened my eyes to all this stuff I'd been unaware of up until then. And which is interesting, too, to be so fervent a believer, and to be 15 years old and being raised in the church, but just having been given, you know, pretty much no historical information, certainly about the Old Testament, and very little about the new beyond just, you know, the gospel message, as it were. So this then got me aware of biblical studies as a field and history and archaeology and all this stuff of just like, I need to become aware of this stuff. And at the time, a lot of that, I mean, the entirety of it was I need to become aware of this stuff. Because if this is the ultimate concern, and this is what I need to know about, and this is what I need to preach about and tell people about, then I gotta do my homework. So that kind of set me on this new path of studying the Bible. Which, you know, I think it was being different than like reading the Bible or even like Bible study was sort of like, what is this Bible? What am I reading? You're reading books besides just the books in the Bible. Exactly, right. Without ignoring the books in the Bible. You're reading books about the Bible. Right, yes, exactly. But in a different way than you had before. And this is when, you know, so I get into all this stuff, and that was, I toyed with the idea of becoming a pastor, but then I realized, no, this is what I want to do. I want to teach the Bible or biblical history or biblical studies at like a Christian seminary. That was what I, that became my career game plan from that point on. That's top of the status hierarchy in some ways. Yeah, I totally get that. Well, I don't, I didn't. That's what you aspire. You aspire to the top. You're a young man. That's what you're supposed to do. I suppose so. I wouldn't, I mean, I've, I mean, I'm also reading a lot of carowick at this time, right? So in some ways, other aspirations, I'm not, I'm not purely just thinking, I mean, I've never really been someone to just think like, I want to be at the top. It's more like, as I said earlier, like, I feel like they're, I'm driven to engage what's ultimately important. And if this was what I deemed as being ultimately important, then I should be, I should get, you know, I should throw myself into this. Cause like what it would almost be nonsensical or irrational not to, right? If this is the way it all is. And if you know this stuff and this is what really matters, cause this life is just sort of a, you know, a preamble to what, to what it's really about. Then, you know, so, so, but yeah, I don't know you're welcome to, you know, get me to think differently about that. So, all right. So, and then at this point, you know, well, but first we gotta, I mean, cause you don't want to lose, lose track of the, we have to follow the romantic thread. What happened with the girlfriend who laughed at the chick track? So wait, the which girl, the one that laughed at the chick track and said, Oh, right. So then our relationship starts becoming more and more about religion, about me basically trying to convert her. I gave her a Bible. She started reading it, but she's like, ah, I don't know about this stuff. So then I'd write her these long letters, explaining the different books in the Bible and what they're about and where the, you know, all this stuff and, you know, stuff I'm getting from my NIV study Bible, and, you know, Matthew wrote this book and, you know, he was a disciple of Jesus and so blah, blah, blah. And with a few kind of, you know, commentary notes, like, Oh, gospel of John. That's, that's one of my faiths, that sort of a thing. But yeah, it not only became a lot more of that coming from me, it also became a lot more like emphasis on this sort of purity code. Cause like I'd, you know, this was always kind of big in the evangelical world. I was part of everything from I'd kiss dating, goodbye, all this other stuff. But also in light of this new sense that I had that, you know, yeah, I was, I was sinful and of the flesh and this sort of sense of the total depravity of humanity. Poor girl. Oh, I know, right? It's awful. It's awful. So, you know, yeah, I mean, I can only imagine how she would tell this story. So I started dating this guy. What a bad boyfriend. He was really cool. I met him. He was playing banjo and he's into carowack. And then, you know, year later he's trying to get me to read the Bible and convert. And yeah, so, so eventually I actually kind of broke it off because I felt like, you know, you do not be yoked with unbelievers, essentially. Right. And so we kind of, you know, oh, well, yeah. And, and as you can imagine, you know, these are the sorts of things that in retrospect, when you're, when you're years later, you're thinking back and you're like, oh my God, I would, it was, it was a profound foolishness. And you were a kid. But so anyway, yeah, around age 16, I would say was sort of like Max evangelical fervent, you know, yeah. And with all those things. And but, but this all then starts to shift in an interesting way too, because I think part of growing up in Vermont affected this because there's always the sense of like, you know, if any of this had played out somewhere else, or maybe where Christianity was more of a given, I think I could have flowed a little bit easier with things, but there was always a sense of like, you know, having to navigate this, this so-called fallen world in a way. And I would go down to church street in Burlington and I wouldn't like evangelize, but I would just start, I would just go up to random people on the street and I would ask them, what's the meaning of life? You know, the sort of like Socratic thing and just like find randos and be like, Hey, what do you think it's all about, man? Why are we here? And I would, I would start hearing people's answers like, like one, most people just haven't even thought about it. They were just like, Oh, I don't know, to be happy or, you know, or to love or, you know, whatever it was, but there's always a very kind of like half-baked superficial answer. And I wasn't using that as an opportunity yet, even to try to, you know, tell the news or anything like that. It was just like, I wanted people to think about life and like, it's importance, it's meaning what's going on with all that. And so that was, that was the sort of the way that, that I started, I don't know, the way I was engaging with people started to shift in an interesting way around this time. And I would say that as I, as I entered like 17 and 18, my faith definitely made some profound shifts in the sense of, you know, I read Donald Miller's book, you know, Blue Like Jazz. Yeah. Yeah. You're going, you're going, you're going into the emergent movement. Yes. Yeah. So I started shifting out of that older mode and really just getting, you know, grappling with a number of things, doubt, not only because I was also starting to read now some real like biblical studies stuff. Like I was reading Richard Elliott Friedman's, who wrote the Bible and get starting to understand, you know, Oh, documentary, how this is interesting. Okay. All right. But, but also issues around theodicy and human suffering, you know, and like I read the Brothers Karamazov around this time and that whole scene with Ivan and saying, you know, if there is this God and he allows us all to happen and count me out, all this stuff and just trying to like integrate that into a Christianity that felt like it was robust enough to not have to have all the answers and to not browbeat over people over the head with things. And so I kind of fell into this God is love kind of theology. And that was sort of what seemed to sum it all up for me, you know? And so the idea that God was love meant that, I don't know, God was kind of becoming more abstract in that sense. And that not that God was love, but also that love was God in the sense that, you know, if anywhere there is love, then there is God. And, and so that my Christianity shifted into that more almost kind of mystical vein for, for my latter years of high school. And, and yeah, and so I think by the time I was ready to start college, I was in this, in this a bit more, I was in a Christianity that was more humanistic, a little bit more open to doubt and questioning, even inviting it, but certainly more open to like the social gospel, so to speak, and trying to help people. I was doing mission, like I went down to Katrina after the hurricane and, you know, that was, that kind of stuff was very important to me of like raising money on my birthday to like give to charities and stuff. That was sort of like where I thought the gospel ultimately led. And so anyway, so then we're moving towards the end of act one here, which is I go off to, to, to college, get start, you know, I do a double major in, in classical, classical civilizations and religion, you know, classics. I'm doing- Where'd you go to college? University of Vermont. Okay. Yeah. And, and so classics to do the Greek and the Latin, my first class, you know, I got, I took when I show up to college was, was Greek, you know, Greek one to, to read the New Testament and all that stuff. So, and I start, yeah, just taking the classes and doing that whole sort of a thing. And this is also though, when I start exploring the topic now of the historical Jesus stuff, some of which I think we might've talked about briefly in our, in our first conversation. So this starts springing in, you know, it's kind of going for the jugular, I think, because, you know, if you do Old Testament biblical studies, you can kind of be like, ah, but you know, that's the Old Testament, right? Once you start focusing in on the New Testament and applying those sorts of methods to that stuff, and you start reading the kind of consensus scholarship, you know, around this idea of an apocalyptic prophet and you read Mark 13 and Jesus says, you know, surely none of you here present today will pass away before all these things occur, meaning, you know, basically the end of the world. And you're like, well, that didn't happen. And trying to grapple with like, well, wait, was Jesus wrong about the end of the world? What else is he wrong about? Yeah. So all these cracks started showing up and that started kind of fueling this doubt cycle. I also met a woman at this time through a Christian Facebook group. I have to say that as a young man, you were much more successful with women than I was, but go on. That's just not to make that comment. I don't know why. Just a little bit of envy, perhaps, but the romantic subplots of this conversation are quite interesting. So keep going. Well, I am, I guess, a romantic kind of person in that sense, with the capital R, right? I mean, Enneagram four, and that is very much, you know, the poetry of things in the romance of life. I really got to learn what those Enneagrams mean. I'm such a bad evangelical pastor. Don't know what my Enneagrams are. But some people out there will know what you're talking about. Anyway, so yeah, I met this new woman online, and we both came from very similar Christian background and had very similar Christian upbringings on this sort of a thing. And so kind of like good evangelicals of, at least as I assumed, you got to get married quickly. You meet someone and especially, that's just kind of how that plays out. Well, I mean, gosh, you've been waiting and yeah, I understand. You want to get married. Absolutely. And that's the expectation. So we actually fell in love. We got engaged at 19 years old. This is a long distance relationship, but we'd go out and see each other. She was from Chicago and I was in Vermont, so we would visit each other and whatnot. But at the same time, so all of these things were starting now to kind of unravel because both of our Christian faith, that kind of was the context for us originally meeting, we were both grappling with, which had downstream consequences for our relationship. And then at the same time, my whole career path was predicated on this notion that I would become a seminarian Bible scholar. And here I am grappling with, do I believe this? Can I believe this? How do I believe this? What is it? What are you? And so I'm going home and I'm going home to my family. I'm like, well, you know, yeah, I'm reading about this stuff and like, actually, maybe Peter didn't write first Peter and getting all this flack. Like, what are you talking about? Your atheist professors are leading you down the road to perdition and just not, people don't want to hear it. I meet with my pastor like, hey, what about this whole apocalyptic Jesus stuff? And he was a very wise and knowledgeable man, but didn't really quite give me the sort of, didn't quite calm my nerves about this sort of a thing. And so wherever I met with people on these issues, they either really didn't want to hear it or they didn't really have any answers or they would just say, well, you just got to have faith, you know, all these book smarts, this is not what faith is about. And so, you just have to believe. And I just felt like, well, this, you know, so this is where things really all kind of come to a head because my whole life, I've kind of followed this, this trajectory and I've tried to deepen into this trajectory. I've tried to deepen my faith, you're learning more about the Bible, try to learn, you know, more about God and to connect more with God. And, and, and, and that was just, that made sense. And when you're in a very Bible heavy context, then, you know, that's, that's what you've got, you know, especially when all the other traditions and the rituals have been sort of stripped away and it's like Sola Scriptura and you've like, it's, it's, it's the Scriptura part that really matters. So when you focus all of your attention and energy on that, and then you feel like that starts to slip away, everything else kind of starts to come tumbling down. So it was a very, it's a very chaotic and, and sort of just a time of things falling apart. And so to close this act, yes, eventually I just, I couldn't, I couldn't make it work. And I just felt like I can't, I mean, I made some desperate kind of heroic leaps of faith here and there. I'm like, well, darn it, it's absurd, but I'm just going to believe it because it's absurd, but couldn't really do that. And so finally I, I was just like, I can't do this. So wound up breaking off the engagement, wound up kind of giving up on my faith. And that all meant giving up on my, my career too. In my junior year of college. Well, at least you weren't three years into ministry with a church. I mean, indeed. That's even worse. So, yeah, I already feel like I, I mean, I guess I have basically been talking for an hour, so I don't want to bore people. No, no, no, I love it. Keep going. Okay. Okay. So, so this then would begin sort of the act two, which is, and for, you know, anxious listeners, I think there's only three acts, so don't, don't worry. But act two is sort of the catabasis, you know, it's the going into the underworld. And this kind of begins this whole period of my life where I kind of just threw myself into hedonism to aesthetics, you know, the kind of Karawackian poet side of me kind of, you know, came out because why not? And there was a sense, you know, what Dostoevsky, there's, there's no more, you're not, you're not worried about this stuff anymore. Not worried about that stuff anymore. And now, and now I can laugh at it. Like, like my, my, I think now smarter girlfriend from high school got it before I did. And so, but there is like a, there's, there's a, there's kind of like that, if anyone's seen that movie, Joker, right? That like that laugh, that's a cry. You know, it was sort of that, that kind of characterized my whole relationship now to this faith journey that I'd been on of sort of like, you know, on the one hand, profound relief because yeah, okay, no more God, no more hell, no more, no more this or that, but also just a profound sadness, loneliness, you know, no one was watching anymore. There was no, what was it all about? Everything, you know, was just particles moving through space. You know, this was my conception of the times. Like, okay, well, I guess we all just sort of evolved this way and, and there's not really any meaning to any of this. And so the only thing I could really ground anything on was the sense that was sense was that the sensation, which is like, what, what can feel good? You know, you can't lie to me about what feels good. And so the only thing I've got to go on is, is sensation and aesthetics and, and beauty in a way. Right. And so all the kind of, yeah, well, yeah, the romantic side of my personality then kind of comes to the fore here. And yeah, did a lot of travel, actually, that was, that was very important. Went to San Francisco, like with just a typewriter and, you know, did a big lap around Rome and Florence and Athens and Paris and, you know, some, some interesting people met and some interesting experiences had and just sort of like, I don't know, trying to process all this. And I'm going, this is the summer leading to my final year of college. I was on a, I was on a train headed to Turin, Italy. And I was reading Keats's poem Hyperion, which is about the fall of Hyperion and the old gods and this sort of thing. And, and I was reading it and it struck me so palpably that it seemed like this was actually, it landed for me, like he was writing about God. It felt like he was talking about the fall of God, because, you know, it opens and there's this fallen God in the, in the, in the forest. And he's sort of like lamenting his ouster and all this stuff. But for me, it resonated very much as like this God has been overthrown and he's like, you know, lamenting that he's, he's now just kind of in the underworld. And, and so this gave me this idea to, to write an epic on that theme of like writing a poem about the death of God. And, and so I had that, that notion. I came back from my travels that summer and I, I'd, you know, been to Rome and to the, the Sistine Chapel and all this stuff. I decided to secretly paint a gigantic mural on my dorm room wall of like the, the, the scene from the book of Revelation, where, where God is coming on the clouds with a sickle in his hand to, to reap the world at the, at the final judgment. Partly because I was now, I don't know, there was a kind of irony, I guess, in all of this. I didn't believe this, but I found the mythological and the symbolic component very powerful. And I was also reading a lot about apocalypticism, which had now moved from sort of a lived experience to studying sort of the roots of apocalyptic thought from like Jewish thinking into early Christian thinking. And so I was just kind of awash in that. But just to kind of give you a sense of the sort of, I don't know, world I'm, I'm living in, you know, is, is, is that sort of a thing. So, and the last thing I guess I'll say about this period is that because I wasn't interested in the religion stuff anymore so much, I got really focused on my classics side of the degree. So I was very interested in, in paganism and in, you know, Greek history and Homer and stuff like that. And so by the time I graduated, I moved into this artist collective in Burlington, Vermont. It was sort of this Bohemian, you know, artist collective called Aesthesia. So it's dedicated to aesthetics and to the arts, into a particular form of like, of decadent art that, you know, that was in the, in vogue in like the 1880s, 1890s. And, and I lived there for four years in this tiny little room. And I basically spent that time just trying to read as much as I could and just read a lot, read as much of the Western canon and Shakespeare and all these epics and, you know, pretty much into, you know, the modern period with reading a lot of Nietzsche too. And, and Nietzsche put kind of a new nail in the coffin, I guess, because there was something about the way he wrote and the ideas he was expressing that wasn't just kind of classic atheism, triumphant, you know, enlightenment thought. There was this sort of like sad tragedy to the death of God in the sense of giving the world historical sense of its importance that we'd kind of all done this and no one really understood what it meant, you know, besides a few people. And this was this thing that we were entering, you know, into a new historical period where, where we would have to kind of grapple with this. And all of that resonated very kind of profoundly. And, and gave me a sense that like this, this experience that I'd had as sort of an individual, this death of God, this crisis of meaning, as I was reading, you know, I'm seeing this play out in historical time. I'm seeing like the move into the enlightenment out of the, out of, out of the high middle ages and the collapse of just this glorious edifice, you know, of Christendom. And, you know, I fell in love with Dante in my, in college, but basically that whole profound cathedral of, of, of thought and, and the whole, the whole cosmos that existed had just been tumbled over, you know? And so this, I kind of put into this poem I was writing, which is like a war in heaven in which that stuff does just like kind of literally fall down and tumble down and break into a thousand pieces. It's not Satan falling at the beginning of Milton. It's, it's the church falling. Yeah, exactly. I mean, and so, you know, part of the epic genre is you have to sort of incorporate all the previous epics that came before. So there's a lot of like very deliberate, you know, drawing on earlier material, but that was very much it. Cause I fell in love with Milton. I mean, once you read Keats and Hyperion, you're like, oh, and then you read, oh, there's a whole thing by Milton. And, you know, so, but that was basically it that there's a war in heaven, but in this case, God loses and actually gets overthrown. And so that was, that was what initiated this project of mine was just trying to tell that story. But in an interesting way, kind of that mapped both to what I knew needed to happen, but also was kind of forced on me by the genre itself is like the poet who, you know, the speaker of the poem is originally this angel in heaven, but he winds up siding with the invaders as the, as the industrial armies of earth rise up and they overthrow heaven. But then in the aftermath, he looks around and he sees the, you know, the really disturbing, terrible brutalized world that they create, you know, and the loss of beauty and the loss of meaning and all this stuff. And he basically concludes, well, that's not going to work. And so you weren't watching Avatar when you were writing this, were you? I don't think so. With the blue people and the unobtainium and the machines and. Oh, well, yeah. I mean, well, so it's interesting because like some people, especially after our conversation, right. We're, we're concerned that I was harping too much on sort of a modernist frame of reality. And I totally get that. But for me, like, I mean, it was precisely out of a critique of our modernist frame that I was, I've come to try to find something beyond where we've been, right? Like in many ways, the move into modernity is the death of God. Yes. Experience, right? And so, and so when I was in this world of obsessed with beauty and aesthetics and everything, I started reading a lot about, well, how did we get here? And so I had to read about modernism and postmodernism and understand these shifts that we'd gone through when I was in Rome. Actually, I went and saw that Michelangelo's David and I was just blown away. But then there was this little side chamber off here of like a little small gallery and mostly it was plaster casts, but there was one piece of postmodern art right in the middle of it, which was this janky wooden leg crudely painted and was like, you know, untitled number seven or something. And the, the contrast, the juxtaposition was just so obscene to me, right? That like over here, you've got this exquisite work of like, you know, like the zenith of human capacity. And then, and then, and then in this other room, you've got this postmodern artwork that looks like a five-year-old made, and these are somehow supposed to be of the same type or something. Yeah. Or the, or the, the postmodern is somehow informed by the modern. And it's like, if that's information, I'll keep ignorance. Thank you. Right. Well, yes, exactly. And so I was going throughout Europe, having these moments, right? Cause you just look up and you'd see all this beautiful stuff. And then you'd look over here, then you'd see a modern bridge and you'd be like, what happened or a postmodern bridge that doesn't, you know, whatever. And it was just like, what a falling off was there? Like what went terribly wrong? So that was what originally was the impulse to look into modernism, postmodernism, et cetera. And that was actually when I discovered metamodernism, because I thought, well, there's gotta be something after postmodernism, I sure hope. And when I got to look better than that painting two by four, and I was very glad to find that indeed it was a lot of it. This early theory stuff was about the return of myth and this sort of both and thinking and this shuffling between modern and postmodern ideas in a way that reclaimed senses of meaning and all this stuff. And it resonated very much with the work that I was doing at that time. And so I kind of latched onto that. I was like, okay, this poem I'm writing, I guess is a metamodern, you know, poem. And, you know, yeah. And that was still early days for that whole paradigm really. But so that was really the struggle I was trying to work through, granted in a very reactionary way. I mean, I was now wearing frock coats and, you know, and walking around the cane and the top hat, because I was trying the best way that I could to somehow stave off the, you know, the collapse of society. But that forced me then to have to like remove myself from the world as it really was, and to have to like pretend that pretend some other world. And it also left me just glaringly frustrated and mad at the world and mad at the trajectory of things. And so I realized it was how important it was, eventually, that we can't do that. We can't just try to go back, quote unquote. I remember sharing early drafts of my poem with a poet friend of mine. He's like, yeah, it's cool, but like, you know, it sounds like it was written 400 years ago. And I couldn't really argue with that. There was something about compliment. Well, yeah. And, you know, believe me, I spent a long time kicking my heels at this sort of a thing. And I get that. But a lot of things just kind of hit home eventually. And I was, I really, it really resonated that there was no going back and that going back wasn't the answer. And so part of what was really compelling to me was that there's something after where we've been, there's something after the postmodern, and that this does include returns of various sorts, right? Like, like meaning does return and the spiritual does return, but it returns in a new mode, in a new register. And that just totally flipped my orientation to reality. Instead of like looking to the glory days of past, I could now look towards the future and actually put myself in the story, in history again. I wasn't just, you know, fighting against it. I was like, oh, this can actually be something that is ongoing, that develops and does change things for the better. And I don't know, for me, that just became a big message through this whole period was the importance of allowing there to be dynamic change in a new direction without having to, you know, let's say, just try to recreate something that had already been. That there can be novel forms of a lot of the goods that we seek and maybe even better forms of them in the future instead of just in the past. So that was a big insight. And yeah, to round up, round out just this final or this second act. Yeah, I write this story and the poet, you know, he sees this world and how kind of messed up it is. And he's like, I got to go down into the underworld. I got to find God. I got to bring him back. I got to rescue him. So he does. He goes into the underworld and he finds God, except God is mad and he's blind. And he's Peter Sonian. I mean, only after I wrote this poem did I go back and actually look at all these archetypes that are playing out in all this stuff, because he's essentially the he becomes the tyrannical father, right? Of like the figure that can't that's holding back the renewal of the world and is sort of blinded by, you know, what his proper role is in all this stuff. And so there's this climactic scene when they're in the underworld. It's very much based on sort of the scene in King Lear between the fool and the king where they kind of hash all this out. And all this was profoundly cathartic for me, because, you know, I'm the speaker and I'm basically able to relate to God in the underworld and be like, hey, man, what's all this about? And kind of go through things. And so just kind of a personal therapeutic level, this work of art was very helpful. But it also felt like the crux of something world historical as well. And so basically, what happens is, is he tries to bring back this old version of God, but that version can't exist anymore, can't can't survive in the world above. And so if people have seen the videos I just posted for Easter and for Good Friday, those are selections from that part of the poem where basically God dies again. And, and so then, but the poet encounters as he comes back into the main world, this group of artists in this group of, you know, I don't know, visionaries, cultural avant-garde kind of people who are kind of pushing now this was I didn't even, I don't even know if when I wrote this, I had the terminology of metamonternism yet. I'm not sure when I wrote that particular canto, but like, a lot of the stuff that's been fascinating to play out is watching how things I'd only dreamed for or hoped might happen have kind of come to pass of like, I never thought I'd meet my other community and my kin, my tribe that we would like have a shared project, but I'm kind of writing about them a few years before I meet them. And so anyway, he comes out and he basically then meets all these artists, but the God dies. And these artists have been working on this sort of earthen sculpture. And so he buries God in this, you know, kind of goddess statue. And then they go into the city to kind of reclaim it from, you know, the beast and the salesman that have taken over in the absence of God and turned it into a consumerist, you know, hellhole, you know, with its endless Netflix and big gulps and everything. And in this confrontation, they wind up exploding that sculpture and out comes this new image form symbol representation, manifestation of the divine. That's this vast kaleidoscopic swirling eye. And it's the sort of transcendental mandala that, you know, is drawing on all these images. Again, most of them archetypal, but like I would later find these reflected in, you know, Neoplatonic and Christian mysticism and things like that. And so the kind of big conclusion for all this is the sense of by the time I finish this poem, it ends with this idea of, yeah, transforming the God image that we're working with, transforming the religious vocabulary and the infrastructure and the kind of mindset that we're using to talk about the sacred and meaning and the divine. And so for me, it was a way of working through this idea that, yes, there is this death of God, there is this meaning crisis, but on the other end of working through that is the opportunity to participate in the recrafting and the sort of shaping of what comes as the next form, the next iteration of God, as God reveals God's self to humanity in a sense, which is all of a sudden, a profoundly meaningful consideration, right? To go from thinking that life is meaningless and so you write a poem about the death of God, and on the other end of that, you're like, oh, wow, like, my relationship to God exists via the way I can participate in God's self-expression into the world, into a new epic, a new, I don't know, a new moment in the kind of, yeah, unfolding revelation. So that was big. And then I realized I can do this. I can, one, have a spiritual life. I can be devoted to this meaningful enterprise and I can actually go to divinity school, which is what I then decided to finally do, because I found a program called Religion and the Arts at Yale Divinity School, and that seemed to be a way, a context in which I could explore these ideas further. And so I moved out of the bohemian artist enclave and went off to New Haven. So that's the end of Act Two. Did you ever publish this thing or you have it online? Yeah, it's published. I actually published an abridged version of it called The God Emerging, which by the time, as this last act of my story, I'll explain, of meeting these meta-modernists and all this community shows up, which you're a part of, and this little corner is a part of, and this kind of growing cultural shift. By that point, I could start to actually draw historical connections to the stuff that I'd written about and actually be like, oh, okay, yep, no, when I talk about the artist, so I was able to kind of give new headers to things. And also, certainly when I wrote the poem, it's a 500 page blank verse epic poem, and so there's a lot of text in there that some people might find a bit too, I don't know, it might just not resonate as much. So I tried to make it a bit more accessible and just made it like a 250 page thing that people can read and appreciate the resonances with the moment that we're living in. So yeah, so that did eventually come to pass. And I also, I mean, I finished it and I had some copies printed up. I went and gave a talk at the first Meta Modern Conference in Scotland, and I was trying to give people copies and trying to talk people about this. I mean, my presentation was on Meta Modernism and the Return of Myth and the Return of Transcendence, which is actually very important and maybe gets to some of the crux of why some of the conversation I think is so important that we need to have and expand and deepen. Because for me, what's so important is this appreciation that it's a move into the imminent, right? I mean, I think a word like transcendence is really important, and I'll just say this briefly, but there's a crucial role that I think is playing out right now in which people are seeing the transcendent in the imminent world. They're seeing, you know, there's this quote, I forget, it's attributed to various people, but there is another world, but it's in this one. There's something like that, right? People talk about, I think Thomas Berry talked about, incendence. There's, and I wrote a book about this called Meta Modernism and the Return of Transcendence, that there's this new qualified form of transcendence and myth that's returned to the conversation, but it's not so much related to a world out there as in here, you know? And so that's kind of a big factor in all this. So yeah, I was trying to share some of these things with people, and I can get to that a little bit later towards the close of the story. So yeah, I could tie this up now with the last bit about going to the, or if you wanted to dive into any of the stuff. So Yale Divinity School worked out well for you? Yeah, it was excellent. For those who don't know, you know, well, speaking of, you know, Bibles and things like that, there's all these theological and political aspects to the different institutions and communities and whatnot. And, you know, I applied to Harvard, Yale, Chicago, and got in to all those places, but I went and visited them and I didn't, there is just a sense that, like at Chicago, it's all just academics, right? There's no, it's just, it's like, and that's great. That's really valuable. At Harvard, it's academics plus a lot of social justice woke stuff. Like it's a very kind of like very progressive ideology, and increasingly academics is less important. At Yale, there's a thriving spiritual community there. Like it's a rich, um, episcopal tradition, and there's chapel every week. And when I showed up there, I was just really emotionally affected by how, by seeing healthy, flourishing spiritual community in a way that also in the background of all of it had all this modern historical critical stuff that was like a given, right? There wasn't a sense that like, that you had to like put that on the shelf or whatever. There was just the presumption, yeah, that's all there, but there was like being in chapel and, you know, Christian Wyman gets up to give the homily and the incredible choir and whatever. It was just very moving and very powerful, and it really rekindled a sense for me that like this can work, this can really, we can do this, right? I mean, I've witnessed, I guess I would just say so much pathological forms of spirituality and religion that, yeah, to see that operate healthfully was incredibly encouraging. And, you know, beyond that, just the education I got there was really life-altering as well. I mean, so I took a class on Kierkegaard, which was huge for me, and I also took a class on medieval theology, which covered mostly mystics with Dennis Turner. And so, you know, reading Dynasius and Bonaventure and, you know, encountering the stuff was like just the Christian mystical tradition is so rich. And then being able to tie that back to the Dante that I'd fallen in love with and all this stuff was just incredible. And the Kierkegaard was also fascinating for so many ways, not just because I had just come out of this esthete life and his whole, you know, his whole stage theory of faith is like from the aesthetic to the ethical to the religious. But there are also just so many parallels between our two biographies of, you know, he deeply enmeshed in this kind of, you know, very, in a kind of Christianity that had a certain kind of oppressive quality to it because of his relationship with his family and all these things going on there. But then the engagement that he had to break off with Regine and that in the way that that didn't then culminate in anything in the sense that he needed to give himself over to a life of almost kind of trying to make sense of his inability to have faith or to make a commitment, which was very powerful and resonating for me because, you know, when I was reading him, you know, I had broken off an engagement and I left the faith and there was this sense of, well, hey, I mean, what about this kind of leap of faith idea? What is there going on there? And so, yeah, I can come back. So you get out of Divinity School and now you're not planning on pastoring a church. You're going to be an academic. You're going to write. Is that then? I thought about going into academia after this. There were a couple of moments that decided against that for me. One was just I went to an event. It's its own little story, but it's not really worth getting into. And I just, I saw the way that people try to cling and climb the ladder and it was really disgusting to me. And after that, I was like, no, I can't do that. And so I didn't know what I was going to do. I was starting to get really into permaculture. And so actually, when I did get out, I, of all things, went and worked at a nursery for plants because I wanted to figure that out a bit. Yeah, but so it was another one of those somewhat aborted, gestures of going to get a higher degree and then not going on to further academia. I mean, ultimately, I'm very glad I didn't because I've been able to do so much more research and I don't know, just everything than I would have if I'd actually done that. But a few things did happen while I was still at Divinity School that finished this turn for me in an important way. And I'll just kind of wrap up with that, which is one thing that was really big was because I was thinking very much in terms of the shift of the relationship, of the spiritual relationship as being about moving the God concept forward, that was able to plug me back into the religious material in a very alive way again, because I felt like instead of reading everything and either having the sense of either take it or leave it, it's either all true or whatever, there is a sense of what can I use here? I'm reading something and I mean use it literally. I'm thinking, all right, we need new scriptural texts, we need new images and symbols. And so I'm just sort of combing through this treasury of religious materials of all sorts, Bhagavad Gita, but also Christian and others, just looking for the kernels of genuine enduring wisdom and insight and truth that could be amassed into some new way of thinking about and talking about the divine. And so I just found that that was a hermeneutic shift that really opened me to the text in a really powerful way, because everything was on the table again. And even just a line here or there in any given text, that could stand on its own and be of use, even though it doesn't have to be associated with this whole, with whatever else it might seem to at least historically have been tied to. So yeah, at the same time, and here's the last kind of major pivot that occurred was, I was feeling kind of, oh, there's a word for this. What's that word where you're like convicted? I was feeling convicted because as I was reading all this Kierkegaard and whatnot and reflecting on my life and the broken engagement and this loss of faith, but also this new sense that I had to my spirituality of making a commitment to that, there was a sense that I needed to make a commitment to a relationship. And so I'd been in this long distance relationship while I was at Yale with this woman. And I was feeling, I just, yeah, there was so much kind of pent up uncertainty and like, what am I doing? What am I doing with my life, especially if I'm not going on to academia and I've written this 500 page epic poem, but what impact is that making in the world? What lightning is that forking? And I'm dating this person, but is this just going to be another person that, right? So all this stuff. So I'm in Copenhagen and my partner comes to meet me. And I feel, yeah, just this profound sense, like I need to make some kind of commitment, this leap. So of all things, we're at the grave of Kierkegaard and I propose to this woman. Yeah. And, and I, you know, Kierkegaard's romantic themes themselves were quite, it's a very interesting place to make a proposal. Yeah. And I think that it probably captured all of the problems that were bound up with that move. I was hoping for some kind of profound release and catharsis and sense that, oh yes, I, you know, and there was also a part of me that was sort of like, because of our shared parallel stories in some ways, it was almost like, I don't know, there was like a completing of a tale maybe that he wasn't even able to complete in his own life or something like that. But in any event, it was, it wound up being, it just made everything worse. And I, cause I didn't have a, I didn't have a ring or anything. So I just like made this little ring out of like a piece of grass and I put it on her finger, but then it fell off and either be, it always works in the movies. But yeah. So, so as I say, it all, it all just kind of exacerbated the situation because it left us in greater confusion about what, you know, did that happen or did not happen? So I, I then kind of have this sort of like, like kind of a nervous breakdown experience where it's like, you know, I don't know what is going on. I, I, I'm trying to figure out my future and what it is I need to do and what do I need to make right about my life and these sorts of things. And when we get home from this trip, this moment occurs, which, which was very impactful and momentous, even though it's meaning, I think has become more ambiguous to me over, over the years. But I was trying to communicate to this person what it was I felt like I was called to do, which is, you know, update, transform the God image, explain all this stuff. Right. And I didn't think that she like got any of that in the past. And so I finally communicate all this to her and she's able to like speak some of this back to me in a way that was like, Oh yes, like, yeah, you get this and you see the importance of it. And like, and, and there was a sense of that was like this moment of release of like, we, we could do this maybe together and this could be, and so we go in for this embrace and everything like the world just kind of falls away. And there was this like blue flame kind of intertwining, like almost like a double helix, just superimposed on just everything else was just black. And we felt like I felt like I was levitating, speaking of people flying. And, and, you know, we're, we're, we kind of hold in that for a second, but then I kind of pull away and that whole thing disappears. And I'm like, Whoa, what, what was that? And she's looking at me like, what just happened? And then I feel like we're able to kind of speak telepathically to each other. And I'm having what increasingly feels like some kind of, you know, profound mystical and or psychotic break. So I'm like, what is happening? In this moment, things finally kind of settle again. And I actually want to reproposing to her and she accepted. And so that was kind of cathartic and I felt like, yeah, that's a better way of doing that. But beyond that, what really shifted after this was the sense of, Oh, wow, like, is all this true? Like, am I actually relating to a God that I'm helping transform the image of? Because before it was sort of like this needs to happen, right? Like, like, we need spirituality, we need the sacred in life. And so artists are going to be a part of that sort of thing. It was a safe project. Exactly. Exactly. And then at this point, it became a like, like, like something broke through and gave the sense of like, yep, there's something going on over here, you know, like, a kind of stamp on the whole thing in a way that was like, Oh, okay. And that, of course, dramatically changed the way that I thought about this whole project. And so now I'm like, this is actually a prophetic call, for lack of a better term. I mean, if there's actually a role to be played by people in this world, that is helping to communicate, you know, the path that God is moving into, if that makes sense, then there is that thing that we're relating to on the other side of this deal. It's not all just, well, artists tell new stories and then change religion. It's like, artists are communing with inspiration in some meaningful way to the spirit on the other side of that. So that was just a radical reimagining and and and reconceptualization of this whole thing that had come to be this new meaning and vocation in my life. And so that was an interesting period where that's an interesting line to walk where you're trying to communicate stuff, but you also feel like you're fulfilling a certain prophetic role. And of course, that can lead to megalomania and you know, all sorts of going off the rails in no good way. And, but that was part of this story. And I thought I'd mention it for not just because it was an important moment in my life, but also again, you know, I don't want people to think that I'm, you know, like, totally averse to or discount, you know, moments of like kind of divine eruption into existence and that, oh, you know, only billiard balls drop and fall and you know, stuff like that. Now, ultimately, all this became very complicated because what I interpreted this as is like, this was my new partner that's going to help me with this divine calling and whatnot. The relationship didn't work out. And so now I'm two ex-fiancs. And not to mention the high school girl with the chick tracks and the junior high one. So maybe you'll rescind your romance. This is what's going to keep the ladies involved because, you know, I watch stuff and it's like, is there a romantic sub theme, at least something for us? Yes, we got it in this one. This one for sure. So I do mention that too, though, because part of what's happened to me repeatedly throughout my life is I'll have these senses of engagement with the divine, some kind of breakthrough happens, some special moment that feels very miraculous. And I didn't even get into a couple others that occurred earlier on. They would take too long to tell. And then in retrospect, or as things unfold, it seems to kind of kick the legs out from that interpretation of whatever happened. And so there's always throughout my life been this repeated need to deconstruct something that I had rested something very, some very important framing of my life story on. And so I've since come to appreciate how important that is in life, I guess in general, but in the spiritual journey specifically, because that is this process by which, like, I feel like if you haven't had a world and it hasn't crumbled, and you haven't built it up again, then you're missing something really important about reality. And if you've had the occasion to do that multiple times, I think you get a sense of how we make meaning and what goes into that project, what's stable, what's not. And there's hopefully something progressive in all of that as well. It's not just, you know, cyclical and not that it doesn't go anywhere. I think it does. But that's why I harped so much on I think the significance of always being open to whatever world you're living in, allowing that to crumble. And so mine did it crumbled again. This woman wound up leaving me right after my 30th birthday. And so then I'm like, cast back on my heels, had to go live with my parents again, because we were living at this retreat center that we were working at. And wound up making a bus. I bought a bus to convert into this mobile monastery. Because at this point, though, and I think this is really important, once your world has been whacked a couple of times, you kind of know how to deal with that after a certain point. It's kind of like a breakup. You know, your first breakup is really hard. But then the second one, you're like, oh, man, this sucks, but I've kind of been here before. And but beyond that, it's sort of like with worldviews, when they fall apart, the first time that happens, you're like, I didn't know that I didn't know that that was a world, but now I do. And then the second time it happens, you're like, oh, yeah, here goes the whole world losing rebuilding thing again. And so anyway, there's ultimately a happy ending to the story to tie all this up and get us to the present moment, which is this was a real low point in my life, probably. Oh, what was it? Five? No, seven. Gosh, whatever it was. Something around five years ago, I guess, just before COVID, actually. So I make this bus and all this stuff that falls apart. Long story. But then I was able to buy a house with with the money that I'd gotten from selling this bus. And, and then of all things, I get reconnected with Aaron, my my fiance from back in college days when the first fiance first fiance, we started talking in. And, and we both had gone through very similar things in our lives. And we were kind of just rekindling a friendship after all this time. COVID hits and everything gets disrupted. Right. She winds up coming out here. And we wind up getting back into a relationship and getting reengaged. And we actually got married in September of this past year. Congratulations. Thank you. And simultaneous to all this, this meta modern community starts taking off at this around this time. And all this stuff is happening online where people are finding each other. And we're all everyone's talking about, you know, the religion that's not a religion and trying to develop our sense of religion, the spiritual into new avenues and, and, and the meaning crisis becomes a term that people are conversant with. And I just feel like, oh, my gosh, there's finally like a moment for all this stuff that I've been exploring over the past, however long to to reach an audience or something, or to find to connect with my people on. And so this is huge. And then I didn't even talk about this. But after I came out of divinity school, I briefly stayed at this place called Sky Meta, which is this retreat center that the owner said he was looking for someone to take over. And unfortunately, it didn't wind up being the case. And so I left. But when I was there, I was thinking, oh, wow, it'd be so incredible to use like a place like this as like a hub for creative spirituality and developing new, you know, images and symbols and conceptions of the sacred, etc. And just also at the same time, and, you know, 2020 or whatever it was, that goes on, that goes up on the market for sale, Sky Meadow. And, and, and with a with my brother, we're able to pull something together where he was able to buy it. And now I, I run Sky Meadow. And I'm doing this creative spirituality, meta modern spirituality stuff here. And so, yeah, the past five years have been this radical sort of transformation of all these pieces, many from my past kind of coming back together in this new configuration that has just unlocked a lot of really beautiful, wonderful things and opportunities. And so yeah, the last thing I guess I'll just say is that I'm very passionate about meta modern spirituality, which as we've talked about, you know, is this is this way of conceiving a sense of meaning and spirituality after the critiques of, yeah, after the collapse, after the onslaughts of modern and postmodern critiques, and all that the world has been through, and trying to find what that looks like. And, and so part of why I find this conversation important in our previous conversation and your whole community so important and as part of this broader community is that we're trying to figure out what that is. And from my experience, having having both experienced a kind of draw to just say we should go back and having learned very passionately that that I don't think is the right course that we need to somehow go forward. And we need to somehow bring forward into our new spirituality, our new Christianity, an appreciation for the insights of modernity and postmodernity, while not just conceding, you know, things that shouldn't be conceded to them, but still carrying some of their genuine insights forward. That's why I feel like this moment is so pregnant with possibility, but also danger, because, yeah, I hope that people can find a way to do that in a way that doesn't make them susceptible to some of the hang ups that can come and the real fraught challenging things that they set themselves up for unwittingly when that deconstruction actually shows up for them and they're not kind of maybe wanting that or ready for that. And so that's just why I felt very, I don't know, kind of, you know, I feel like my whole life has been about this stuff. And so I want to do what I can to just share from my experience with more traditional forms of Christianity and working through the historical critical stuff and having grappled with the postmodern nihilism and, you know, the social constructivism and tying that all together into some way that I genuinely think is possible to reclaim a sense of meaning and purpose and the divine and the sacred in a manner that still does justice to those critiques and can have express a robust spirituality and a robust form of Christianity. I just feel like that's what my story has set me up to speak to in my own small way. And I feel like right now, this moment is where a lot of that is having an opportunity to really be grappled with. So yeah, that's why when I woke up out of my surgery and I'm thinking, I got to talk to Paul VanderKlay, you know, while you are incredibly important, it's not just you, obviously, it's not just me. It's this moment that we're in and with these recent conversions and everything, I worry about where we're going to land with all this if we don't take enough into account. So anyway, that's my rando. That's awesome. That's awesome. Yeah, that that that that Randall's had had everything it had romance and romance, tragedy, ups and downs, redemption, I think a little hope. I hope I loved it. I loved it. That was great. So tell me about this. So you're you're sort of a I imagine you're sort of a stop on the Silk Road. I guess so. Yeah, I mean, I mean, both. I mean. Well, what's that? What's it? You know, because every now and then my wife is like, you know, she what? You know, we live here in the city in this little place. She's like, I wouldn't be great to live out a little bit more in the foothills and hopefully it doesn't all burn down. But, you know, and she's like, you could you could have a retreat center and people get, you know, I'm thinking, do you really want to see all the people that are going to come to visit me? Is that really what you know? Well, I'll tell you what I'll tell you what I mean. 100 percent. If you are looking to do a retreat, please do one at Sky Meadow. I think that would be magical. And we get a website. Yeah, it's a sky meadow retreat dot com. Where did you wait? Yeah. Oh, you're in Sacramento, right? I'm in California. Yeah. Yeah. So it's a little bit of a trek because it's on the other side of the country. But I got a lot of family and I got a lot of family in Massachusetts, Connecticut. So my mother's from New England. So gotcha. And one of my daughters is like, we're always talking about we should we should build the compound. And the compound is like, so my wife and I, we have five kids and they're all young adults now. And so our desire is like, we want to kind of we want to have a house and have a space for my kids. And and so Vermont is actually a place on the list. Oh, that would be so cool. That'd be really cool. I could say my wife doesn't really love the cold. So yeah, that is my grandparents lived in Vermont. That a church in Virgins. Oh, cool. Yeah. So I, I, I visited there. And some of my friends actually, actually, actually made there. So I you're doing the wedding thing, too. Yeah, we haven't had so many weddings, but except for, except for my own, actually. And there was one other small one before we thought we'd do a bit more weddings. But, but it's it's really much more of a retreat center. It's for smaller groups, you know, around like 18 to 25 people, ideally. And, you know, it's great for that certain kind of gathering where, yeah, you can really kind of have an intimate connection with people. It's not like a conference center. It's I mean, it's an incredible piece of land with incredible structures. And we got, you know, chickens and alpacas and sheep and stuff. It's just very pastoral and beautiful and lots of cabins. Wow, you guys are in northern Vermont. Yeah, that's serious. Vermont, I mean, down, down by Brattleboro and, you know, Burlington, that's kind of a Burlington's up a ways to the Champlain Valley. So they don't write, but like, yeah, Brattleboro is, you know, you're practically in New Hampshire at that point. Right. Yeah, we're up in the kingdom, as they call it. But, but yeah, I mean, so but but at the same time, if you were to come in, say, June, July or August, you know, it's the summers up here are lovely. And I that's what the whole place is about, really, for for now. I mean, I've there's a retreat center that's sort of open to whoever wants to rent out the place. But then I started Sky Meadow Institute, which is specifically for bringing events here from, you know, the the liminal web, which I guess is includes overlaps with is adjacent to, you know, yeah, these communities that we're part of. I mean, I want to have John Vervecki out here at some point. There's been some talk about maybe doing something. Maybe I should come out together. That would be really cool. That would be really cool. So, I mean, yeah, at that point, it would be hard to, you know, accommodate all the people who would would want to come to something like that. But well, early on, so my sister owns a former farmhouse that is famous because it was owned by a get this Russian Nazi. Oh, who is rather famous. And, you know, he was he was just is a crazy story. But early on, I did a little retreat with about 12 individuals that all we did for two days was sit in her parlor and just have conversation like nonstop for two days. And now we have the estuary protocol. So we actually have a little bit more structure that we could use. But well, that's I mean, that's the wonderful thing that, yeah, I'm I'm trying to facilitate as best I can here is that we've all found so many people online. We found these we built these rich communities and we're plugged in now to to these people that we really love and care about. But it's all digital. It's all through the screen, you know, and so being able to come together and connect in person is like half of the magic, you know, like in a number of the middle modern spirituality retreats we've done here, like we might have something planned, but then it's just like, no, we just won't do that because the conversation is just going, you know, and it's just being able to connect at that level is. Yeah, that's really special. Yeah, that's that's super cool. That's super cool. I'm really happy for you. That's a great story. You've got a great story. Thanks, man. I appreciate that. I appreciate the opportunity to share it. And I really do mean very seriously. I mean, you know, yeah, if you can ever get up here, whether you want to do event or you're just coming by, I'd love to connect in person. And yeah, I hope both for your audience and for you, too, hopefully having a little bit more of the story filled in from where I'm coming from can, you know, shed some light on our first conversation a little bit and which to be fair, also, I have some regret around the way that I managed or directed because I felt like, you know, it zoomed in on a particular element of this kind of dialectical tension between more traditional forms and more modern forms of Christianity. And that probably wasn't the most, you know, productive way of trying to do that. Yeah, but it led to this one. It did lead to this one. I have no regrets. I have no regrets. Okay, well, good. So talk to me about when we talk about when I talk about the church, because I am a pastor and, you know, I so where are you at with respect to church? Yeah. Well, I mean, if there were an Eastern Orthodox church here, well, actually, I didn't even mention this in my story at all, but I lived for three months in Jerusalem. And, and while I was there, I tried to make the point of one of those days going to the Holy Sepulcher one morning to hear a mass delivered in the original language, which was really cool. I love, I love the, I love the, the ritual and the aesthetics of kind of more organized and I don't know, I mean, high church is the term that comes to mind. You know, I went to a Catholic high school. And so there's part of me that has a longing to be a part of, I mean, a Greek Orthodox church should be really cool. So I say all that from kind of largely, you know, from largely, I guess, an aesthetic component. Obviously, though, then it's always a challenge to kind of get all like to tick all the boxes, right? Maybe you have that component, maybe you connect very much with the liturgy, but you don't feel any sense of community with the people there. And isn't that, you know, a huge part of it? So, you know, in many ways, I feel like the community side of my church is my tribe of folks online right now. And, you know, I'm doing what I can with these retreats and whatnot to try to make that more in real life. But then, you know, I've also really since those days when I got more kind of mystical God is love theology minded, I've just always thought of nature as a kind of sanctuary, you know, and where I relate to the divine and, you know, I have a personal little altar shrine with a little Jesus, a meditating Jesus on it, as my kind of symbol of, yeah, the divine human. So I'm trying to like, do my best with what I've got. And I think that I think it's probably a pretty familiar story where, you know, ideally, all of these things could come together in something that we could call church that we go to and we participate in. But for me, it remains somewhat fragmented in terms of community here, personal, you know, relationship kind of praxis or, yeah, let's just say the kind of participatory aspect, you know, is more alone and then church is more, you know, when I go wandering and look at the sheep and it's sunset or something like that. But so, yeah, I don't know if that's an answer or not. No, it's, you know, we hit a Luke. So again, sort of my little corner of the corner, a lot of live streams, there's a four hour live stream that Luke started on both Grail Country and his channel. And, you know, Chad the alcoholic popped in and, you know, I thought Chad really nailed something in terms of the meta modern. He said, you know, the rest of this history sort of Tom Holland is walking through his take on Luther. And then Chad noted, Chad's really a very intuitive guy. You know, when he was talking to Jordan, all he was saying, I'm more of a slow thinker. And I think that's right. Chad's like the slow cooker of the corner. The stuff goes in there and he sort of simmers and the smells come out on Friday morning nameless. And, you know, and that sort of boiled down. I mean, we have the Protestant Reformation that was sort of around protest. And I think I played with it on Twitter a little bit. And we're sort of in the, we're sort of in the contestant Reformation now, because we're not protesting. We're contesting, we're contesting, but contestants participate, protest, protesters kind of are against something. And of course, in Luther's day, there wasn't the Roman Catholic Church, there was really sort of just the church and there was the East West split. You really don't have, you really lack identity if there isn't some definition or even splitting. So, and so I, you know, when, again, as I hear your story, and when we talked before I ended with a little bit of Job's story where you have a guy who was an atheist and now he's an elder in his Dutch Reformed Church, but he prays with the rosary. And there's much more of a sense of, okay, we have these traditions out there that have all sort of collapsed in one way or another. Of course, the Southern Orthodox churches were ravaged by Islam. The Northern churches were sort of ravaged by communism. The Roman Catholic Church has been through how many massive upheavals and continue to do so. Protestantism, you know, started its life as fragments and it continues to fragment in all of these ways. And sort of the move from the monarchical to the individual, people are sort of going out into them. And now in an internet age, they're not just reading and, you know, maybe publishing because publishing is so limited, but now they're participating and contesting more than protesting, which means sort of a, there's sort of a buffet spirituality dynamic going. But everybody, I think many people understand that if it's going to be compelling and satisfying and become real, it can't just be a God of my own understanding, which of course is the AA formulation. There are going to have to be, I mean, I like that moment that you talked about, that you talked about sort of, whoa, wait a minute. I mean, it reminded me of in miracles, and Lewis actually used a number of his things in many of his books. But when Lewis writes about pantheism and how, in a sense, pantheism is a God of my own understanding that stays on his side of the line. And Lewis says that the terror of course is that the kids who are playing at burglars here footsteps in the halls and realize there's something there or there's something on the other end of the line. And I think part of that, that's exactly what we see happening with, you probably have seen some things from Martin Shaw and Paul Kings North, but also now from Jordan Hall. I mean, it isn't, the Orthodox aren't going to get all of the, the Orthodox aren't going to get to have all of the fun. God is way too, has way too much fun than that. And, you know, back when I saw that the Peterson, the Peterson Sam Harris conversations on stage, you know, my realization at that moment was sort of the return of God number one. I talked about God number one and God number two. And when you talked about sort of this interesting, this imminent and transcendent are supposed to be opposites. They're supposed to do opponent processing. And I think as you talked about the immanentizing of the transcendence, that's really sort of what I was trying to get at with respect to this God number one. It's sort of peak modernity. God became another thing. Bishop Barron talks about that. And of course, in pantheism, God is sort of dissolved into everything in the world. Panentheism tries to arrive at some separation, but that's not a word I'm familiar with. So I don't use it. But you very much have the sense that I liken it mostly in terms of Isaiah six, when Isaiah goes up to the temple and you know, shock of shocks, who should he meet there, but God, which is sort of like, God is, why would God be the last person you'd think to meet at the temple, which is ostensibly his house. And the seraphim, the angels are crying, holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, which is, you know, it's transcendent, holy, holy, holy, it's all the way out there. And then the whole earth is full of his glory. And so right there, you get the tension between them. And so for me, that was sort of God number one and God number two. So holy, holy, holy is transcendent. And also, you know, Jesus in the sense of personal, although all of the members, I have to say this because this has become a, all members of the Trinity are God one and God number two. There's no God number three. Okay. I'll just say that right now that you won't get it, but a lot of other people anyway, but, but very much these, these movements that I, it sounds like you've really encapsulated in this story and Hey, points for you for writing this epic poem and getting it published. Good, good on you. That's, that's astounding. And it sounds really cool. And some nerds out there will, will buy and read the whole thing. I know. I'd love feedback. I mean, it's, it's yeah, it's, it's having written that and then seeing what's going on right now, there's a part of me that's trying really hard to, I don't know, bring this into the conversation, but it's, it can be hard sometimes to make that happen with a work like that. But, but to what you were just saying though, about, about, about God, I mean, one of the ways that I found helpful to look at this is sort of like God in, in the first, second or third person, which I don't want to confuse people too much with, you know, we've got not God one, God two, but, but just if you take of like, you know, where do we tend to, let's say, meet the divine, maybe just more most comfortably or something, right? And there's sort of God is third person as like the it God is right. And a lot of that pantheism has that there's, there's God's first person, which is God as I, which is sort of the mystical union, right? And then there's God as you second person. And, and that would be the relationship between myself and this divine other. Now I personally have found, since, since having these challenges with the traditional upbringing that, that I had, which was very focused on the God as you, the second person, God, all about that personal relationship. That's what's all, that's what's emphasized. Couldn't even touch God as I, that's heresy, right? You know, and God is it is like, well, no, that's, that's too deistic or something. And so I think because of that, I've tend, I've as a, as a response to that these days, I tend to most easily relate to God as first person and third person. And I have the most challenge with God as second person you there's just something about that configuration or conceptualization of it that, that yeah, it has become difficult for me. And so that's, that's both informed by my experience, but, but that's also something that, you know, it's the kind of thing you can work at, I suppose, or try to get better at. But I also, I also want to say though, that, I mean, while that lens can be really crucial, God and third and first person is also very profound, right? To the degree that you're able to access that. I mean, probably for me, God is third person is that is the easiest. I look out and I see the beauty of the world. And for me, I look, you know, back at the whole, you know, however many billions of years of, of cosmic evolution and complexification that's led to everything that I'm looking at, including myself, including my own conscious experience of this moment. And for me, that is a sacred history of profound awe and wonder. And so that resonates very easily. And in moments of meditation and, you know, those rare glimpses you get at sort of ground of being or pure, pure awareness or whatnot, there's this intimation of the, of the God as I, as like the experience of the ground of being. And both of those are incredibly profound and, you know, not something to shake a stick at. So, but trying to, I think, you know, yeah, trying to have a, a very robust integration of all of those modes would, would probably be ideal. And so I think given the wobbles that get introduced into our, our stories, because of our experiences, we might be having to, yeah, iron some of those difficulties out to try to experience the fullness of, of the divine. Yeah. Oh, that's good. That's good. And, or Jordan Hall went there a little bit with for Vicky in terms of the, because I, I think that, I think that really helps sort of set it. And you can, a way to sort of look at it and you can, in fact, find ways of jiggering your, your Christian tradition to sort of fit and understand those dynamics that you put there. No, that's good. I like that. I like that. Well, this is, you know, a little over two hours, but I'm not pressed for time. So I don't know. I've, obviously you've spoken the most, but I wanted this out of you because for me, I want to know who I'm talking to. It just makes a lot easier to talk to them. Sure. So, so, and, and that's why I, that's why I do what I do. But I don't want to leave anything that you might want. I mean, if you have any questions or anything like that before we land the plane. No, I mean, I, yeah, I did kind of monopolize the, the, no, you didn't monopolize. It's exactly what I intended. Okay. But yeah, I mean, if there's anything you want to touch upon over the next like 10 minutes and get, you know, inject any thoughts into either this or our previous conversation that you feel like would be worth, you know, bringing up, I don't have a hard stop or anything. I really, I really, you know, I really enjoyed both conversations. They were both quite different. It's part of the reason I do what I do on my channel and generally start with this kind of conversation is that when we finally get into content, I have a far better way of understanding you. Sure. There's so much more material there now. So your thoughts are now contextualized in your story. And, and now I can, I can, you know, any, any conversation that's let's say in Breveke in terms pursuing DIA logos is about meeting. I think that's, you know, really what John is getting at. It's sort of a, a really attempt to meet each other and to, you know, agreement may or may not happen, but agreement isn't necessarily the thing that we're always after. We have to have degrees of agreement in order to be able to play this game, but it's the differences that actually make the game interesting. Sure. So, um, I do have a question. Yeah. Would be so, you know, a lot of my story is about, you know, what, what, what could be called these deconstructions. And I use that term loosely, but right. These, these moments where that's been the term that's kind of ascended now. Yeah. So, um, yeah, I mean, one of my inclinations is to treat those as an important part of the spiritual journey. Um, and even to, if not welcome them, then at least, um, yeah, find a way in which we understand that, uh, there's a sort of progressive nature to our deepening relationship with ultimate reality and that there may be particular images or concepts, uh, practices, what, what have you that we use that help mediate our relationship with the divine, let's say that as we progress, uh, eventually lose their efficacy or we, we, we kind of outgrow them in some meaningful way or, or, or just circumstances change in such a way that we find ourselves deconstruct, they fall apart, they fall away, and then we're forced to kind of, uh, land on new ground. And in my personal experiences, I hopefully communicated, um, while these experiences have been incredibly difficult and upsetting, uh, to go through, uh, on the whole, when I look back, I feel like my perspective now has been profoundly enriched by all of those disruptions and deconstructions to the point where, from where I sit now, um, things are so much more alive and anti-fragile in a way that I find important. So that's my conception of it, but I'd love to hear you share your thought about the role of deconstruction in a faith life. Is it necessary? Um, yeah, I don't know. I, I think often it is. I know in my own journey, some of the most important, um, some of the most important growth has been because of collapses. Mm. And I think maybe, maybe I'll use that word that comes out of your story, sort of a collapse. I say that, I say that with, I want to say a couple of things too. Number one, as you said very well, collapses are never fun and they are costly. And that sets up the number two, that I don't, when I, when I talk to someone, and again, I often relate both online and in person in a pastoral mode, because I, I don't, I don't, I don't see collapse as necessarily a catastrophe. It might become a eucatastrophe, that might happen, but it doesn't always. And and so part of, part of the sobriety with which I approach collapses in real people's lives is the knowledge that sometimes Humpty Dumpty doesn't get put back together again. And I, I watch those and I also sometimes see one of my most important videos I ever did. And some people claim it's their favorite was the, I don't even remember what I entitled it. It was, it's basically the fact that I have often seen, I have often seen wisdom, beauty and wisdom, beauty and strength in simple Christians, as opposed to the sophisticated, that I can see, let's say someone who perhaps the faith that collapsed for you never collapsed for them. And I often see such Christians outperforming the sophisticated. And and now that these are now I've just set up a value hierarchy there. And, well, okay, what do I mean, what do I mean by performing? And for me, if I'm doing evaluation of, let's say, a narrative or a story, it always sort of pans out in these two elements that Jesus brings forward. They're not unique to Jesus, but when the, you know, you love the Lord with all your heart, soul, mind and strength and you love your neighbor as yourself. Ones and loving God and loving your neighbor are deeply intertwined. And, and so sometimes I see collapses and, and I kind of hold my breath, because while there is breath, there's, there's usually hope and time for putting something back together. So at Ark, there was a, there was an artist who spoke, and I'd never heard of the guy, and I haven't really looked him up since then, but all of his art was about broken things rewoven. And he noted a beauty in that, that, you know, that the the cup, for example, he had a cup. The original cup was a beautiful thing, but there was a, the cup now had a new, enhanced, glorified beauty because it had been broken and now re-put together. And I think that there is something deeply Christian about that and inherent in the Christ story. And it's inherent in the, the promise of resurrection and the promise of new creation. And it's, it's deeply inherent in the Christ song and Philippians two. It's really nice not having to explain these things as a pastor. It's like, I could use a shortcut with you. Those of you who are watching, you're going to have to look it up yourself. Sorry. I'm not going to fill in my shortcuts today. But in the, in this Jesus self-donating and then being risen to the highest place. And so that's why I don't necessarily panic when I see deconstructions, especially in those I love around me. It's, it's scary, but of course any good story has peril in it. If there's no peril, it's not a story. It's not going to be a good one. And so, so with the collapses, there's peril and, and the peril is real because not all collapses have happy endings. Now I can lean into, you know, that, that all of, all of these bad things will become untrue. I can lean into that, but that of course is a, a posture of deep and strenuous faith. So I think you're exactly right that I don't necessarily see collapses as, as tragic, even though sometimes they are, they are, they are often full of peril. I don't know that they're always necessary, but I think it is part of the larger story. And as Chesterton pointed out with the, you know, regular deaths of Christianity and the reconstitutions of them. And I also see this as a, so the video I just released today was about Jordan Peterson's ecclesiology, because I don't think it's, I don't, ecclesiology is the, is the theological locus that tends to get the least, it's, it's beneath almost everything, but it's not terribly sexy like Christology or theology or anthropology or soteriology, but it is in some ways the most applied. And, and obviously the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century was a crisis of ecclesiology. And I think we are again in another crisis of ecclesiology, because the, the church endures and continues, but it, there, there are transformations within it. And in every transformation in the age of decay, there's always loss and sometimes something beautiful regained. And so I think we're very much in a, in a place like that. And so in terms of individual lives, I see collapses and I sort of hold my breath hoping for a you catastrophe. But I, it was beautiful. Just one more, one last thing. It was beautiful in Jordan Peterson's recent opening himself up to a really earnest Catholic who really wants Jordan to cross the line and come to Rome. And, and Jordan's talking about the, his, his wife's journey into the Catholic church. And it's not good. It's great. It's really great. And he notes that all of the stuff that he's known in his wife for, I mean, he's been in love with her since he was a boy, as he says, and it's such a beautiful story. And, and what he's seen is that her now after, in some ways, a death and resurrection, she is becoming more of herself and yet a better self. And so he sees this transformation within her and he can testify to that. Now, now for him, at this point, that doesn't mean joining up with Rome. And I respect him for that decision. I know he gets a lot of flack for it and I can understand the critics and, and probably fair critiques in many ways, but I think his, what we're seeing is his is another instance of this, you know, if metamodern is the right word, maybe we'll know in 200 years because these things do get renamed. But I think that is very much part of what you are seeing and what you have lived. And I think I see it, I see it very deeply in this little corner of the internet in both the sort of Orthodox wing that Peugeot is residing over and the Verbeckian wing that is the silk road wing. And even in my land of misfit toys that is sort of streaming and doing all this crazy things with branding and, and Lucha Libre masks and everything. So I think, yes, I think very much so. And that's why I'm not, I'm not anxious about the collapse that we are seeing in America now. And that has happened in Europe and I'm not anxious because of my faith in a very strong and providential God, but I am not naive enough to believe that at least within the frame of people's lives, all of these collapses will be mended. And then, and then that leads into whole another theological conversations, but that's really where I'm at. Yeah. Well, it's interesting though, because part of that crisis of ecclesiology that you're naming is also the occasion by which a lot of the beautiful things that you're describing are able to happen. Right. The fact that Job is able to be an elder in a church, but he praised the rosary and the fact that all these different denominations and, you know, and forms of Christianity can come together now wouldn't have been possible in a more, working ecclesiological context. Is that the right term? Yeah, that's right. And so, this is something I keep referring to again and again when there's often this sense that we work towards the goal of seeing something come to fulfillment and perfection. And there's a sense that can come from that, that when it, as long as it's not that we're not there yet, or that this isn't it or something like that, there's a dissatisfaction. And yet I've tended to see Christianity itself as sort of always operating in that liminal period, right? It's always like, we're waiting for the kingdom to come. Yes. We're still quite apocalyptic. Yeah. And, and, but that if you think about what that expectation, and I mean that kind of loosely, and however people want to interpret that theologically, but that expectation that there is the kingdom and it's on the way. And because of that, that is the occasion or impetus to gather together and do church and do, you know, spiritual community is a very interesting thing, because it's in that incomplete and quote unquote imperfect reality that the, that the stuff of life comes out of the church and of our entire Christian lives. Right. And so I think that, I think that there's a message there in, in, in taking seriously living in the perpetual expectation as being a mode of its own fulfillment. If that makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so, so there's part of me that wants to say, well, rather than look at this as a crisis, an ecclesiastical or ecclesiological crisis, that this is a, this is a new form of, of church. Right. It's a new form. And maybe, maybe we'll look back, maybe, because these are the sorts of things, right? When people look back in time, they say, oh, there was a moment in time when things were really working together, there was unity in the church and there was a set kind of, you know, liturgy and this and that. And now we have this fragmented this and that. And it's often in comparison to this imagine point in the past when things were better, but maybe people will look back in the future and look at this moment now where it's like, wow, look at all the, you know, Orthodox, you know, befriending Catholics, befriending, you know, reformed Protestants and all this stuff. And that there's a beauty to that in its quote unquote brokenness. I know. No, I think that's true. A number of people have noted in this little corner again, there's a, there's an interesting new ecumenism that's happening. Yeah. Yeah. Where we're not sort of meeting in cloistered halls, debating medieval distinctions with respect to the atonement or Christology. But yet I don't want to, I don't want to completely remove the sense of crisis nor value it because with every, with every one of these transitions, you know, it, you know, the Protestant reformation and the, the iconoclasm. I mean, we today look back at that iconoclasm and say, you know, the, the, the, the Muslims who dynamited the Silk Road, Buddhas. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. We, we get the idolatry point. Yeah. Yeah. We get that, but there are world heritage sites for a reason. And, and, you know, the medieval Christians understood for the most part, they worked through it that, Hey, don't just dynamite the classical period. You might want to colonize it and appropriate some of it, but don't just dynamite it. And so the crisis, there will be, especially where I'm positioned in this, especially in my denomination, that is basically coming apart at the seams right now. And it's going to continue to come apart. I think it honors my, you know, my previous generations to lament and say, yeah, this is a crisis and things will be lost. But, you know, in that sense, you don't want to, you don't want to say to the women gathered at the cross, Oh, don't cry. You'll be back in three days. That moment deserves, yeah, it's lament and, and what that moment is full of, because then that moment then actually gives birth to the surprise and the joy and Mary looking through her tears. And for me also this, the fact Carl Reiner's great quote, you know, in this, in this world, all symphonies remain unfinished. And to me, this for me is sort of my ontological argument for my two worlds, at least mythology that I continue, even though I'm not a universalist, I continue to hold out hope that maybe those who collapsed in this age will find will find a, a reconstitution in the next that will be, because the problem with universalism tends to be injustice, that there has to be an accounting for many of the injustices that have happened in this world. How do you manage that? And I very quickly say, God knows, not me. And I'm fine leaving that in his hands. But I think part of the reason we have, part of the respect that we give to our forefathers is that they understood more than I could appreciate of them when I was a 16 year old and probably still more than I can appreciate today. And so that's, that's sort of the way I piece it together. Yeah. I have another question if you've got a minute. Sure. So let me think about how to ask it. I mean, so like one way that I, I relate to Christianity or to Jesus, right, is, and that I, I feel like is an enriching, but admittedly difficult and kind of even paradoxical move is to have known, for example, like a very direct sense of that personal relationship and that just sort of total faith in Jesus as, as savior, but also Jesus as a brother, just like that kind of direct personal relationship. And then, and then to go on and do this, these studies into the historical critical stuff and get the modern take, which is Jesus as person who lived 2000 years ago, apocalyptic prophet, did some things, and that's basically it. And, and that's that, that we can know about. And these are very different images, different pictures, but not to get hung up on that second picture, but having it in the background is like, okay, that might be a certain Christ or a Jesus of history, but that first Jesus was much more that Christ of faith. And to be able to toggle back and forth between these different modes in a way that is sort of keeping that deconstructive aspect, but then just sort of like, yeah, okay, but we'll set that over here because there is a reality to bring up the whole issue of the real again. There's a reality to, to the, to the, to God and the second person and relating to, to, to the person of Jesus in that way and all of the rich, important theological implications of that kind of a relationship. And I'm just wondering how an idea like that lands for you. Is that, is that something that you feel like would be better not to have to do? Is it something that you feel like some people have to do, but not others? Or what would you make of, of, or maybe have you ever had any kind of experience like that with anything in the theological tradition where you see it this one way, then you get this picture of it and you're like, oh, okay, but they're going to do this X, Y, and Z amount of the time or something like that because yeah, I don't know what you have. What thoughts do you have on that? My story isn't that far from yours in that I also grew up in a, in a very Christian family now that some of the details are different, but and then went off to... No, NIV study Bible, I take it. Oh, the NIV study Bible. And I, in fact, you prompted me after I'm done with this, I'm going to pull mine off the shelf and see, because I dare bet if you read that closely enough, you'll probably see a little bit about Deutero Isaiah in there and they're going to try and integrate that in some way. And that was, I think for me, you know, there was a point when I was reading C.S. Lewis's Miracles Twice a Year because I had a sense of, okay, I'm reading this book and I'm not as smart as Lewis and I'm certainly not as articulate as Lewis and maybe he wasn't, maybe he couldn't in some ways tell me how he squared this. And so the way I square it isn't necessarily going to be the same way that Lewis squared it, but Lewis was deeply metamodern in a lot of ways because, I mean, he and Tolkien both, when I read this one book about Tolkien and Lewis with respect to the First World War, the great and I don't remember what it is, but it's a great book because I could really see in that book how Lewis and Tolkien basically had this crisis because the truth is that elements that would get accentuated as modernity have always been with us and realizations that get accentuated as post-modernity have always been with us. You can find them in the Classical period, you can find them all the way along through. And so, and for me, Lewis was a help in saying, okay, so Jesus ascends up. Now, and Lewis wrote about this more in The Discarded Image. I don't know if you've ever read that of his. That's one I haven't read now. You should definitely read The Discarded. It is super up this alley. It is exactly up this alley. In fact, if you read a lot of Lewis's less popular works, you find him wrestling with very many of these same questions. Now, he's doing them in the 1930s, 40s, and 50s. So there is a difference in context, but he is deeply wrestling with these things. And some of the recent books showing how many of Lewis's work, like The Great Divorce, I mean, The Great Divorce is basically Dante. It's Lewis rendering Dante in some ways for his context. So we have to put these things together. I don't think they're, I think they are in some ways analogous developmentally to getting to the point of realizing your parents had feet of clay. And that's especially difficult if you had very, very good parents. Because if you had really troubled parents, you learn it early. You might even still learn it when you're a kid that, hey, it's up to you to make sure there's milk in the fridge. And that will cause some certain things in your development. But if you had very good parents, there comes a point when you realize, gosh, those gods, they weren't omnipotent or omniscient or they weren't very good or perfectly good at everything that they did and said. And so you have to come to terms with that at some point. And so I think part of what's happening in this metamodern moment is we are trying to digest the modern and the postmodern, realizing that, for example, a video that I didn't make that it might still make, entitled something defective, how much did Jesus weigh? Because the historical Jesus weighed something. We don't know what it was. Well, the historical Jesus weighed how much when before he was crucified, after he was crucified, right after he's at the feast with the Pharisees in Cana. And Lewis wrestles with this stuff all the way through. I mean, his whole life, he wrestles with this stuff and he keeps returning to it. But it doesn't tend to be, I mean, the evangelical sort of had their Lewis hit parade. But if you keep digging into Lewis, you begin to find, oh, you know, there's a lot going on there. And I've, I've dug a fair amount into Lewis, but there's plenty more to do. So these things don't go away. But they, they tend to get integrated into, I'm fortunate as a pastor that my vocation, especially in the places that I've worked in, the places that my father worked, never let me escape having to integrate along a scale. I have to, I have to be able to minister and to relate to people with IQs less than 80. I have to be able to do this with people who are unmedicated schizophrenics. I have to do this with PhDs. I have to do this with people who have net worths over, you know, $5 million. And I have to do this with people who their whole life long have only financially received a disability check. What a fortunate thing I've lived. And I was set up for that by my father living a rather similar thing at a different time. And so I've, and what that has forced upon me is to have to take seriously the modernist moment that certain Protestant, certain part of the Protestant and Catholic world went through with respect to these questions. And yet I never was able to get stuck in them, because the demands of regular people required that I sit in front of them and say, he has risen. And that means that even though you've lived your entire life in group homes and never will probably enjoy the benefits and beauties of raising a family, and even though dreams that the vast majority of the population can attain, you will never attain. And there is still hope that I will announce you will probably die before me because your life on disability afforded a diet and a level of healthcare that will mean you live 20 or 30 years less than I do. I believe that the resurrection of Jesus Christ and Thomas touching him says something to your life that to whatever degree I can give you a vision for, I want you to hold because if you can hold it, you probably won't become a drug addict or an alcoholic or just a nihilist that does something tremendously destructive to you and other people. I need a gospel that can scale like that because that person is right in front of me. And if I can't figure out how to hold what I've learned in theology school and talk to that person in that way, I'm of no earthly use to him. And then I am absolutely of no earthly use to ostensibly what my progressive liberal tradition says is most important, which are the least and the lost in this world and giving them even in this world, a faith that carries them through what in American terms is a really sub optimal. So that's how I do it. I think that that's so important. And I mean, everything that you say on all that, I think is vital and essential and I agree with. And the demographics, I guess, are such an important issue here to explore because there are also folks who are struggling precisely because they are in a different demographic where it is much more about how do I make sense of this? There are other people who have gone through university and these are also the people in positions of power who are directing the future of society and creating technologies, right? And sort of like the opposite end of that socioeconomic spectrum, not the least of these, and yet also wielding an incredible amount of influence over the future. And I think that, as you say, you have to be able to speak to those folks too. And I guess I'm not a pastor in your situation of having to cover that full demographic swath. And now I'm on YouTube. The swath got bigger. Yeah, yeah. Calamity. But so, you know, I see the demographic that to the degree that there is a, I don't know, any kind of ministerial role. And to be honest, I mean, I do tend to think about it as having components of that still when I think back to having considered becoming a pastor. You know, there is a pastoral component to trying to assist people in the midst of a meaning crisis to find, you know, are we just meat suits moving through space? Is everything meaningless, you know, and the kinds of resultant nihilism and, yeah, the way that the nastiness comes out of that in terms of how people then treat other people in relationships and themselves and the world and all that. And so I'll admit to sort of a smaller demographic that I'm speaking to, but then that does make urgent certain kinds of questions that are also still very important, right? And a lot of what you said, I tend to think of very much as a sort of scaling or a kind of developmental, you know, way that ideally I would love to see a way of languaging the Christian story and the whole message that can speak across that entire demographic or those demographics that can be visceral and important and powerful and transformative for the kinds of people you're naming in your congregation, but that are also able to scale up to those folks who are grappling with, oh my gosh, like, you know, those more sophisticated, you know, educated people who are having to grapple with meaning in life, which is, yeah, I mean, you could say first world problems or what have you, but the outsized influence that those folks have means that we have to take that very seriously too as a kind of steering problem. And if people who are kind of helping to direct society in the future aren't right with meaning, you have a lot of problems that stems from that. And so, yeah, I feel like these don't have to be contradictory, right? That you can say he is risen and that that can land in different ways for different people in different meanings. And I guess that's sort of that's a challenge, but it's also an important thing to be able to see then how that scales, how that shifts across those different, you know. And I think that's part of, so Peugeot and Justin Brierley just had a conversation, and we're in a moment now when a lot of the revival, we'll use that word guardedly, but a lot of the sort of Renaissance is happening sort of at the upper IQ ranges right now, which is a really good thing. And actually part of the crisis, I mean, we talked about crisis of collapse, part of the crisis is at the lower end right now, because there's been a, you know, it's, gosh, I gotta be careful with this. If you look at, say, Charles Murray's coming apart, you know, we saw in, you know, the African American community that has been the context of most of my life in ministry, you know, there's been a deep crisis in the African American community with respect to out of wedlock birth, divorce, trauma, substance abuse, and, you know, a lot of that is happening is that those areas are growing. And whereas when the church was broadly deployed, even in sort of a more traditional frame, it afforded many more people the opportunities of realization with respect to this, because it takes a lot to hold a marriage together for a lifetime. And right now we're noticing that people with people at the higher income level are marrying more, are staying together more, their children are doing better. And whereas the church, which had sort of been a lower socioeconomic reality, it's that church that is collapsing. And I think that adds another dimension of challenge to those that are say in the upper echelons of power. Okay, you can be playing with postmodernity and deconstructing and doing all of those things. And I understand that you need to do it for your own reasons, but understand that a theoretical collapse up here might mean a very material, economic, relational collapse down here. And so, yeah. And so be careful about the deconstruction, you're doing with the structures of society because whereas for you up there, that might be a hypothetical thing. And when the bottom falls out of your life, you might have a place to go. These people are living in their car at best. No, I think that that, I mean, it's all one to me in the sense of, and I've made this case where I've tried too many times in different contexts, but like the meaning crisis, I think is this, you know, what, what do they say? The next things from the head or something like it's, if you have, if you have a kind of broken sense making, meaning making, what do you want to say? Guide or direction setting, the oarsman of the, you know, however, whatever metaphor you want to use for this, if those who are kind of quote unquote in control, leading, steering, guiding things, if that is broken, then you have all these downstream consequences. And so I actually think that that really is very much the locus of a lot of the meaning crisis. I mean, there has been the forms of Christianity that have worked for people for centuries that will be, that will continue to work for people. But that isn't necessarily true of those folks who have gone through university system and, you know, studied STEM sciences or what have you, or, you know, are operating at that echelon that those problems of meaning and those kinds of nihilism that set in, in the broken mentality that exists there and the false religions that wind up entering in there, you know, with all the, like this transhumanist stuff that I'm very concerned about. That is what I think demands that we attend to and therefore demands a certain amount of having to grapple with some of that postmodern deconstruction and all of that. Because it isn't disconnected from the bottom, so to speak. It all has a downstream effect. I mean, so, but one of the questions I would have too, though, for you is that while you can say to that congregant, he is risen, and for them it lands, you know, in a kind of more, I don't know what you want to say, historical or physical. Very vivid narrative about it. And that narrative includes most of the elements that are traditional. That's pretty much where Lewis goes with respect to his ascension question in his book, Miracles. But yeah. But now if, if, if for that, let's say you also have in your congregation a Silicon Valley, you know, tycoon who, you know, is wrestling with all this stuff or whatever. If, if you, or if he were to say in his mind, or, you know, when he thinks, when he speaks the word, he says he is risen. And for him, that means something like these profound archetypal patterns of birth and decay that are, that, you know, constitute the nature of reality are at work in, in the, the, the symbol of Jesus in such a way that gives us hope and encouragement, you know, yada, yada, yada, something largely metaphorical, right? Is that to your mind, like, not enough in some kind of way, or is it, is it like a, it, it doesn't, do you know what I mean? Yeah, I know exactly what you mean. Like, is there, is there, for people who do find some value in, in, in relating to the language, the image, the symbols, the whole Christian infrastructure, for lack of a better term, but, but find a particular value in reading that through the lens of metaphor. What do you, I don't know, I guess the question would be something like what is missing there or like what's, what's not enough in that or, or yeah. There's a tax for having a big IQ and a lot of education. Then there it is in some ways. They're going to have to, they're going to have to do a little bit more work in, because I, I think about, so I think about the eschaton. I think about the age to come and I think about issues like purgatory. Purgatory is such an interesting question because it's like, okay, you know, I, I, I, I bury with great praise. I try to bury honestly, but I, I, I, I'm not about to, I'm not about to kneecap the grieving. I, I bury, I bury saints and sinners. And when I think about, so Jordan Peterson, again, in these little videos that he has with this very earnest Roman Catholic trying to do a sales job, it sort of pushes Peterson to sort of bottom line Peterson's idea of his soteriology. And, you know, I, I don't know what the resurrection is going to look like. I really don't. I've thought about this at a variety of angles. In fact, conversation I had with Neil Plantinga, who was, you know, who's, it was a professor of mine at Calvin Seminary and he needed to write. Yeah. He's Alvin's younger brother. He's a theologian. He's got a few books out there, but he really, last time I had any kind of conversation with him, I said, what are you, what are you working on, Neil? He's like, well, I really want to write some books. And this is, these are some of the areas he wants to write about. I think he's probably such a perfectionist that the books don't come out because he is such a crafter of words. Anyway, I really hope he gets something done because, you know, there's a whole range of questions with respect to eschatology, which is the most unfinished, you know, locus of the church. There's a whole range about, okay, what, what, what does that, what is the resurrection going to look like and how, how, how will this work? And what does this mean? And this person that I put in the ground that I was their pastor and I know there, I know their sins. I know their unfinished business. I know all kinds of things about them and how, how, how then are they integrated into and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. My questions, my questions go on forever with respect to this. And the fact that I know that this person has a fairly low resolution picture of a reunion with beloved family and friends and no more crying and no more tears and no more broken deaths. That's the limit of their frame. Happy are they? Sure. Now the people like me that have all of these thoughts and questions and you know, I can, because the, the, the, the, the beyond modernity and post-modernity just, you know, combinatorial explosiveness with respect to issues that arise. Yeah, I get it. I get it. But well, there's the tax on your IQ and your education. Now you've got to carry that stuff around too and still figure it out in a way that I could say with Carl Barth, you know, um, Jesus loves me this, I know for the Bible told tells me so. And so I think the challenge for those with big IQs and big educations and walls full of books is in fact to create a witness and, and to lead institutions that actually scale for people. Yeah. And now in a pluralistic world, don't just scale this way within an evil village, but scale this way into an interconnected cosmopolitan world. Yeah. Because you know, part of the problem that I see is certain answers, which are at hand also fall apart upon further scaling. Sure. And so even, you know, it, it remains a journey for all of us. And, um, and, and I, I believe that, you know, in the final day, when we are called to account for what we've done with what we've been given, um, you know, these, these questions will come, will come to the podium as well. And so, because if, if the answers I give cut the legs out from under the poor and their ability to, in whatever difficult circumstance they have, believe that Jesus has them well in his hand, I will be called to account for that too. And so, no, I, I, I think the, I think the person who's been blessed with all sorts of smarts and education and opportunity, they just like the, just like the person living out on the sidewalk after here out here has to work out their salvation and fear and trembling. And they just got different challenges. Yeah. I think God understands. Sure. Yeah. I mean, I, and I think you're very right about like the additional tax that comes from that, but I also, I don't know, maybe there's something about, uh, I'm not sure exactly why I lean in more to the, the gains that also come from this, I guess, because I've, I've, I've, these are the things I've grappled with. So I do. Any of them in the, in the whole scheme of things as being net gains rather than net losses, which I tend to view through the lens of development or growth or mature maturity, you know, Paul says, right in the, in the way you could probably tell me where he says it, but, uh, you know, that you've been drinking sort of children's food before this, but now I'm, you know, it's time for, and there's, there's an element even in the tradition that there's sort of different grades gradations of, of, of these ways of thinking. And I think of something like puberty, right? Where, man, there was, yeah, it was really lovely to be, you know, carefree and kind of the, the child, the childhood innocence that like, uh, you know, Dylan Thomas talks about in that poem, Fern Hill, just, you know, time held me, you know, green and dying and all that stuff. Like there's a wonderful innocence to all that, but then there's also wonders to gaining maturity and learning about sex and, you know, and, and relationships and all of that, that would be developmentally inappropriate for younger times. But then that time comes and man puberty sucks, but you get on the other end of it. And it's like, there's also a lot of gains there. And I think that there's a way of conceiving of these, whether they're deconstructions or collapses, but they're transformations. And, um, and that, yes, you lose something, but you also gain something. Um, and, and I also think that just as for that kid, like the, the kid isn't ready for and doesn't need to be engaging with the stuff of adults at that time. That's not, that's not appropriate. Uh, we can have different ways of languaging and articulating to different folks in different, uh, modes of life and, and all of that so that we don't have to always be using the same way of understanding these things, uh, to different people in the same, in a, in a way analogous to how people transform across the lifespan. Um, because I just want to, yeah, I, I don't want to give the impression that like there needs to be one message fits all. And, you know, we should, we should be, uh, burdening, you know, a grieving widow with questions of, you know, eschatology or something like that. Like that's, that's not the point. But I do think that, uh, as people are acquiring, I don't know, more context that they have to integrate from their experience with these older ways of making sense of, in this case, the Christian tradition, that whatever church we have that scales needs to be able to fit them in, especially those folks I was talking about earlier, who a lot of which are, are, are, are crippled by the meeting crisis and are, are most in the situation where, uh, there needs to be a language for them too. And that is seemingly going to have to integrate, uh, those modern and postmodern things. And, um, yeah, I think that, uh, it might not be the easiest route. And it's the story I just gave, you know, can attest to. It's, it can be very, very difficult. Um, but, um, yeah, I think that there's also something that I'd like to feel like is, comes from that. It's, it's a turmoil that can ultimately deepen faith, hopefully, right? It doesn't have to. I agree completely. It's, it's just also there with the warning of, you know, it is harder for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven for a camel get to, you know, through the eye of the needle. And it's like, there's rich in various different ways. And in, in Luke's sermon on the plane, you know, you not only have blessed or the poor, but you have woe to the rich. And so even though there's, there's clearly, uh, I, I, I'm by no means telling people they should be stupid. God has given you intelligence and access and possibility, and you are very much supposed to, in fact, Christ demands that you use these things and pursue the kingdom with all of that you have. But understand that there's also, um, there's a challenge there. That, um, and, you know, blessed are you little flock for it's God's good, you know, favor to give you his kingdom. And, and so you find that theme, not only in the gospels, but, you know, obviously in the Psalms and in the prophets that, um, yeah, yeah, to the, you know, it's good to be king, but, uh, Kings, if you're king, you're going to be judged at a higher standard. And so for those of us who are thinky talky and, and good with words and can read books well and have access to YouTube channels and have a degree of visibility, um, I think that, I think the Bible's pretty clear will be, um, you know, you know, aspired it's, you know, aspire to be teachers, but remember teachers are judged more rigorously. And so that's, that's, I think. Well, and yeah, and to throw, to throw Kierkegaard back into the mix, you know, he talks about, uh, a second immediacy, right? That you go from immediacy to reflection, but then the, the, the religiosity through, through Christianity that can be attained as a second immediacy, or of course, Paul Ricoeur, I think famously talked about second naivete, which I do think when I first was discovering metamonternism, uh, that was a big part of that conversation that really stood out to me. Cause I think that that's, that's a big element to it. How do we bring back the simple? How do we bring back, you know, uh, after all this overwrought overthinking meta reflection, how can we land somewhere just pure simple again? And, um, I think that that, that is essential. So yeah, no, I agree. That's probably a good place to end. I agree. This is Joe Rogan today. Thank you so much for the time. I really appreciated it. I thought it was a great discussion. I hope you had a good time too. It's, it's really good, Brendan. It's, it's good. And I hope, I hope we get to talk again and I hope I get to, I, I'd love nothing better than to get way up there in Vermont and see your place. So let's talk about it. Yeah, we can keep that. We can keep that as an open idea. I would really, uh, that'd be delightful. And I'm sure a lot of people would love the opportunity to gather with you in person and, uh, and you know, make the, uh, this little corner, uh, find a, find a little corner for this little corner. I'd love nothing better. Love nothing better. All right. Thank you, Brandon. It's been a pleasure. Likewise. Bye bye. Bye.