https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=VH4q4laqdqg

 Sam's the one that pointed me to this video, so there it is, Sam. What are your thoughts? You're the one that pointed me to this video. That Sam Harris is a Unitarian Universalist who doesn't have an afterlife. And that his ideas on the subject are surprisingly uncreative and also kind of old, right? When Glenn Lowry was like, basically, okay, Sam, you don't like what they say about God. What do you say about God? Could you say anything about God that you wouldn't disagree with? Right? That was basically, which is an excellent question for someone as Sam Harris, you know? You put forward your own positive definition of this God word, please. And I think that, you know, it was basically like what you would say, Paul, it was a God number one without a God number two. Not a big surprise there, right? And that the problem is like all of these exclusivist accretions that have tried to explain this God, but ended up creating exclusivist groups that have a language of authenticity, to use a verveci word, that includes texts and individuals and histories and those sorts of things of which they put divine importance on, right? Because how else can you have a religious tradition without some combination of those sorts of things? And you need to treat your own tradition and some form or another as, you know, divine in the lowercase d sense of the word, right? And so the problem is, is when people try to do that. And so I think that this move has happened a lot of times in history where people are like, look, there's all these religions. They have something in common, but they have all of their differences. They're all feeling the different parts of the elephant, right? And so all we need to get them to do is to realize that they're all touching the same elephant, but they only have a piece of the puzzle and we can come to some sort of thing that will unite the things that are currently distinct from each other, right? But basically, every time that happens, it creates a new thing. It creates a new elephant grasper, right? That has been the same thing with coding languages that try to combine all the other coding languages. Yeah. And then you face the inevitability of particularity. So, right, like Unitarian Universalism was one of the, even before it was Universalist, was one of the first attempts at this, right? These liberal Protestants up in New England were like, hey, we got these Congregationalists, we got these Presbyterians, we got these Anglicans. This is dumb. And some Quakers. And some Quakers. And a lot of people that are kind of like, I don't really want to go to your boring church. Right. And so here's what we'll do. And what I think another big piece of this is like science had some success in this endeavor in the material realm. Right. Like, oh, we have all these different claims about which medicines work. Right. The Chinese use weird things. The Europeans use weird things. The Arabs use weird things. All right. Here's what we'll do. We'll use the scientific method and we'll try the bunch of the things and we'll see what works. And then what works will disseminate and unite these previously disparate fields of Chinese medicine, Arab medicine and European medicine. And we'll just have medicine. Right. Which kind of worked. Which kind of worked. It needs to be respected. So the science in that sense need to be respected because it did develop things that were replicable that prior to their inventions would have been miraculous had we not known that we ourselves figured it out. Right. And it's not even like everything that China did was wrong. Right. Maybe China had some of the things figured out. The Arabs had some of the things figured out and the Europeans had some of the things figured out. Right. And then we invented new things that were even, you know, past that. So it's like, wow, that kind of seemed to have worked. Right. It worked with physics. It worked to some degree with medicine. So like, let's just do that with religion. But how do you have a scientific process on metaphysical questions? Right. And that like theosophony was like, hey, we'll just, you know, use this rational method to explore the esoteric spiritual realm. And and, you know, it'll come up with incontrovertible truths. And these incontrovertible truths will unite the people and it'll get rid of all the sectarian exclusivism exclusivisms. And we'll bring everybody together into the incontrovertible truth that's incontrovertible based off of our method. Right. But we haven't figured out any method that reliably generates incontrovertible metaphysical religious truths like that. And so every time someone tries to do this, they just make a new elephant feeler. There's Unitarian Universalism. There's Bahá'í, which was basically the same sort of thing for Persia. And, you know, like all these different things. And, you know, et cetera. So and and Sam Harris just seemed like he still thinks that that could work somehow. It's just new to it. It's just new. I think he's just giving people what they're asking for of him, too. Again, his his thing was he came onto the scene post 9-11 to talk as kind of a counter to the neoconservative George H.W. Bush. We need to fight the terrorists. But Islam is good and Christianity is good. And like all of these religions are good. And it had nothing. Don't look behind that. It had nothing to do with religion to nothing to do with religion. Guys, the 9-11 and sure you could make that argument, but darn, there's some good arguments that religion did have something to do. And dogma did have something to do with it. And somebody needed to make those arguments. And Sam Harris was one of five people, ten people that made those arguments the best. But that doesn't get you through 30 years of output of content. So now he's doing something else. And he's probably not really qualified to be doing what he's doing, but he's doing it. And, you know, if he's helping people, then to the effect that he's helping people, great. To the effect that he's hurting people, not great. How the heck are you going to measure that? I have no idea.