https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mtHvgoGUmCQ

 Hey, this is Paul and I had a couple minutes this afternoon to do one of these. So I'm doing it and setting up here to see if in fact I am live. Someone's coming in to join me. Yep, yep. I got it up and running. Let's see if I can get it. Get it on my tablet here so I can see it. Videos, content, live. Bunch of guys were talking in the other room about ortho bros and all the drama. Okay, there I'm up. I'm up. There we go. And Al is here. Often people jump in and join and we'll see if they do. Just looking for any feedback. I've put a lot of videos in this week and there's a whole bunch more that are coming. I've teased the conversation I had this morning with BJ Campbell. I had a terrific conversation with faces who are probably new to people out there on the channel but not new to people on the Discord. At least Catherine's on the Discord quite a bit and Eamon is new to the channel but he's not new to me. So four currently watching, three watching. Well, look at that. I knew Mark would come. Mark, you would not disappoint me. How could I leave you here all alone? I was complaining like, he did this earlier. He came in and he left. He didn't say anything. He's forsaken us. Nice and dramatic. How are you doing, Paul? It's good to see you. I'm doing good. How are you doing, Mark? I'm doing all right. I got into a bit of a Twitter thing with John here but that's okay. He deserves it. Which John did you get into a Twitter thing with? Raveke. You're always getting into a thing with Raveke. Well, Karen posted something and John answered about validity and intention and I said, well, how do you do validity and intention? Which was a mistake on my part because I should have asked who's doing the validity and intention and how are they doing it but I only asked the one question. And he responded with tools. And I'm like, so I said, okay, because he said, well, validity is just logic. And I said, okay, but that's like me asking you how to build a bed and you're replying screwdriver. Oh, yeah, I was pissed. I'm like, if you don't have a good answer, that's fine. You don't have to respond. I just asked an open-ended question because two of the four items are different from the other items and they're open-ended, which is fine. No one's mad. It's just how do you do this? Who's doing it? Why are they doing the validation? And the same with intent. It's the why question. And granted, I asked it poorly, but he still answered even worse than I asked. On Twitter though. Yeah, on Twitter. Asking open-ended questions on Twitter. Twitter is not the place for open-ended questions. Twitter, you can't do open-ended questions on Twitter. It just doesn't work. He didn't have to respond that way. He could have not taken, he could have not, I didn't require a response from anybody. I was just going like, well, you can't just say intent and validity. You got to explain something about that. The other two made sense. Well how are you, Ginger Bill? I'm doing well. How about yourself? I'm doing very well. I'm doing well. This is, this room is filling up nicely now. That's good to see. That's good to see. I just want to see what the Hubba Loog was about. And apparently, yeah, I heard all the, I stepped into the other room. I saw cameras were on and you're all in the middle of your conversation about energies and ortho bros. So I didn't want to interrupt that. I haven't done any clips on it yet, but did a good conversation with Chris and Yvonne and Caleb. So we had some ortho bro energy on that conversation. So I'm surprised Chris hasn't posted it yet because he recorded it too. So I've kind of stacked up with conversations now and they're all big conversations like two hours. So I try only put out one a day, but they'll probably come this weekend. So you talk with Chris and Caleb and oh, that's going to be great. Wait, wait, wait, wait. Which Caleb? Caleb Voiles. That kind of part of that little art cluster. So Caleb was on the channel. He does film. So any feedback on anything I've posted this week? Has it been kind of dull or I have these, you know, I know when I do conversations with people, people get impatient to see them out there. So put it putting out some little teasers, hopefully to. Yeah, I like the teasers. I think you should take my suggestion seriously with my little commercial because I think that would be fun. Yeah, say more about that. Well look, I mean, I think there's I think there's some room for you to poke some fun at yourself and like pretend to be like this blockbuster, you know, explosive conversation with with ortho person, you know, and like cut in explosions, but do it poorly because that'll be even funnier. Dude, if I swear, Paul, if you had because I thought there was a chance that you were going to do this while the video was going. I did that in tomorrow's video a little bit. That would be great. I can't wait. I can't wait. I just get out. I just distract myself when I, you know, so you got Joe and you got Jordan. They go back and forth. I was trying to do Jordan's hand motions. I got a little bit of that in the video coming out tomorrow. So I was so excited when you brought the puppets out. I laughed so hard. It was great. Joe and Jordan. And so I had him had him sitting here on the shelf and their buds, you know, Jordan's hand around, you know, Joe's a little short. So, you know, lucky being a little short, I guess that's OK. That's funny. No, I was very excited about that. But I think I think, yeah, you know, it, you know, like like I said, it's PV. It's PVK 3.0. Like this time it gets real, you know, and then explosions and. In a world. Yes, in a world. We'll have to have a ginger PVK. I don't even know I'm just playing the script, but yes, I can do it. In a world. In a world. Yeah, Paul, you could just pretend to be an orthodox priest and see what happens to your subscribers. Well, Jacob brought me the he brought me the clerical collar. I haven't worn it yet. I'm sure he's quite upset about that. But yeah, you got to put that on in one of the videos because that's part of the new 3.0. Look, man, you got to roll. You've already put it out there. Now you have to you have to fill the role of 3.0. You get I'm not even sure what 3.0 is. What happened to the software update? I didn't get it. I made a video last week about because I was putting out some shorts and some little videos and and I started it. I just wanted to get feedback on is this helpful? Is should I put these over on the clips channel? So but I'm using the clips channel for something else. So. Yeah, I'm about two weeks behind, so I apologize. I can't comment on any of this. I also got to get back to the hero's journey. That's I start things that I don't finish and it's a. It's a it's a problem. So that that Dr. Jim thing where he basically pointed at the open ended T-Lost, I was like, oh, that's huge. That's absolutely huge. But that's Nick. Nick B. Right. He used to he did this to me on the verveky server. He's like, no, no, the elephant has to be open ended. So it's an open ended T-Lost elephant. And I would I would swear at him, of course, right, as appropriate. And then and then one of the other guys put his camera on and took an elephant and he put a sticky on it that said open ended T-Lost and marched it across the screen to mock me. It was awesome. We definitely need more. We definitely know our puppets and props. Yes. P.V.K. 3.0 with puppet with. Oh, look at that one. There we go. There we go. That one's cool. Yeah. Yeah. So when when the when the when the thing dropped, I thought, OK, well, let me see if I can take clips. This is not called. Can anyone guess what it is? What is that? Crab? It was a type of crab. Yes. I don't want to. I don't want it in my backyard. And obese lobster. It's a type of crab. What does it say? It's a type of crab. What does it say? When I say crabs. It's an insect. No, as in the VD. Oh, oh, yeah. You have a VD puppet. I have three of them. That's got it. Yes. Yes, I don't. Mates get your Rotterdam presents. So is this part of the 3.0 as well? This is part of the 3.0. Yes. Welcome. No. What kind of fool puts just opens up a Discord server and oh, gosh, and lets whatever go out on his channel, you know, that's you're welcome is the answer to this. I have cool puppets. That's a cool puppet. Yeah, I got my I got my Boston College Eagle. Oh, yeah. You know. Hey, Julian, how's the weather up there? It's awful. There's a big storm around here. Yeah, I'm not much of a Canadian. It's a bit too cold for me. That jacket looks pretty thin. I remember a Californian putting that jacket on in October in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and his roommate from Minnesota said, if you're putting that on now, you better have another one to put over it. So you must be a real Canadian. You're not there like the doughboy. Well, it's got it's got the windbreaker thing going. So at least it I mean, that that gets most of it. But yeah, minus 30 or whatever Celsius. You just stay inside. So so one of the one of the ideas for for Channel 3.0 that came up, let's see, it was Saturday afternoon. I saw Jared in the other room. We didn't follow here as we were we were talking about. We should do a we should do a bachelorette show on the Discord server. We can do the Bachelor have Joey be the Bachelor. But the thing is, we got lots of we got lots of single dudes and like hardly any women. So oh, did you did you hear about the new couple on the Internet? I don't know if you know these people, but Alistair Roberts, I think, is the one that Alistair Roberts and Zazane Black are a couple now. I saw it on Twitter. That was pretty cool. Yeah. Good for him. Good for him. Yeah, I was wondering why he's not taken. But now he has. There's hope for you yet, Julian. There's hope for you yet. No, I thought I thought I thought Bridges of Meaning Discord bachelorette show would be quite quite humorous. That would be funny. Do we have do we have any single females on here? Like maybe two or three. They get they get taken very quickly. We've got a better record than the ABC show. There you go. We do. I mean, I mean, I don't know. I mean, well, we've got Anna Meek yet, but she's pretty young still. I mean, you know, today women are waiting a little bit longer. So yeah, yeah. It's really funny being on this discord. And there's so many young single guys, Christian guys on this discord. And you go anywhere in the church and it's the opposite. Like there's I was in YWAM and there's like two two girls for every guy and they're all complaining about where are all the men? And like I think but can't say, well, they're on this discord server. That's where they all are. But then you have to find your way here. I mean, that sounds like the way to get men back in church is just reveal that back to them. Well, I have to say, at my church is the opposite. We have so many new catechumens coming in in Orthodox Church. It's like we have like 25 people and 20 of them are young single guys under the age of 25. That's actually this is true. I saw a poll the other day that was breaking up churches by the number of males and females and the ratio with the Orthodox Church was, you know, shocking. Like I think they had I wonder what I think it was something like 70 30 and everyone else was like had more. I think it was the only one that had more males than females. I thought that was really interesting. That's very interesting. That goes back to what I'm going to talk to Andrew with the bangs about. Yeah, I'm going to talk to her on Friday, which I think is the intimacy crisis. And she wants to know how that fits in with the meaning crisis. And I'm like, yes, this is going to be awesome. You're going to be on her channel or is she going to be on your channel? No, I'm going to be on her channel. She invited me over to her channel. So it's going to be great. I'm really excited about that talk. Have you been watching the videos of my channel yet, Paul, or what? No. Oh, come on. I intend to. You know how many chance you know, much video content this little corner the Internet is creating. It's insane. That's just my latest one is great. I'm going to do a four piece one next. I'll probably record that tonight. Actually, I got to build slides, but I can do it. I just couldn't couldn't focus yesterday. Well, and then Kurt Jermungle puts out all of this video and it's like, you know, okay I can on that nature all have to be Bohs that guy of the Navy and Bosch, that guy and respect Ian. I mean, I haven't even seen those, so 웃io. God no good. Really? Not worth the time. Well, I mean, we know we're Kur butcher worldly suck, zonesooters cut. It's like what ever. It's more liberty stunts the cares and Josh it is good and points all these things out. Just ignores it all. As used, Josey. It's like Jordan Peterson being stuck on Jung. Like every time he starts talking about a really great thing about the Bible and he goes, and Jung thought that, I was just like, oh. And whole rafts of committed Christians just go, pfff. I don't think I've hit that bit yet though, although maybe if I, I probably should rewatch some of Peterson's videos and then see where he sort of trails off with Jung, because I might have been with him say a year ago, but maybe now I might be sort of, especially having found out some of Jung's more sort of quirky takes, like what was it, Satan being the missing fourth part of the Trinity. Yeah, there's a lot of stuff in Jung that gets pretty weird. Right. Jung in psychological work is just pretty weird in general. Like if you've ever just read anything about that, it's like, if you had to choose between Jung or, what's the other one? Freud. Yeah, I take Jung any time. Freud is actually just, if you think Jung is crazy, Jung is just more mystical. Freud is just, yeah, let's not go there. Nor typically insane. Yeah. Well I think that highlights an important point. Peterson justifies his objective material reality middle out viewpoint by appealing to Jung instead of just submitting. It's a strange person to appeal to for materialism though. You gotta admit. Yeah, he's not materialistic, he's a panpsychist as well. Yeah, they're all, I mean materialism is all done. You can't point to the important things that they know they need to point to. That's why Verbecky does the, is E equals MC squared real? You can't find it. Where is it? Right? So he's extending the definition of materiality in essence and then going, well, all we need to do now is extend rationality and now we don't need to submit to God. We're good. We don't need to deal with creation at all. That's the move. I think it's a dumb move, but that's the move. Oh boy. I'm trying to understand that move. I'm trying to understand that. I'm trying to understand what you're saying with there. I'm trying to think. Speaking ill of Jung around here. I mean there's... I'm like, eh, whatever. I like Jung, but that's the safety valve for Peterson. I think that's a really good observation. Every time Peterson would have to stray towards, no, you have to submit to God, dummy. Instead he says, oh, Carl Jung. He escapes that way. It's the Jung escape hatch. Yes, exactly. I'm getting lots of good titles for this one. We've got the Bridges of Meaning Bachelorette Show and the Jung escape hatch. That's good. Paul, I actually have a request for a PV 3.0 kind of line. I ran into studying the idea of scarlet thread in the Bible today. That has so many connections to so many stories that I thought it might be interesting for you if you took an image and just did the exegesis through the Old Testament and New Testament and showed just all those connections and how they tie together on those kind of themes. There was one I went on a few days ago where Mark mentioned that there was a very large stone covering the tomb. That ties into the story of the Samaritan woman at the well, and it ties back to Jacob's well with Rachel, and it ties back to Psalms. There's all kinds of connections of the fact that he mentioned a very large stone. It's not just some journalist going, oh, I should write this to make my story more interesting. All those interesting connections that really unfold a lot of interesting stories and interesting insights that aren't readily apparent to especially a modern mind. There's a lot of ... Part of deconstructing modernity is trying to figure out how not to do all the things that triggered it. This whole tradition of biblical typology is a huge thing, and every tradition has their own typology systems. What Peugeot is doing is opening that door to a lot of people who were in modernity and had no understanding of this. It's a very rich tradition, but for some people it's like eating a very rich cake. You can only eat so much, and then you stop tasting the distinctiveness. That scarlet thread- We go to another cake. What's that? Yes, we go to another cake. That's true. You go to another cake. That scarlet thread is such an interesting thing because pay attention sometimes how little color there is in the Old Testament, and then there's that thread. It's like a bright neon sign. Pay attention to me. Connect me with all sorts of other things. Some of the comments about some things that I should do on my channel as if I needed more things to do did involve both more application and more specific exegesis of things. I hold off on that for rough draft for Sunday, and then Sunday school is restarting now next week, and so I'll have more Sunday school content on the channel too. These are huge issues. All this stuff is biblical commentary. People don't understand how much content the Bible has generated. That's what Peterson was talking about in the Joe Rogan video. It's a good suggestion to take something and work it through. The challenge is always the limit. When are we just sort of making stuff up? Well Jonathan Peugeot would ... Like I said, he seems to err on the side of going as far as you can. As long as it's fitting a pattern, and there's iterations of the pattern. But I think a lot of people who are coming from modernity into back to the Bible ... I guess I can only speak for myself, but it's a whole new world that's reopening to me as far as those levels of depth of connections that are there for anyone who has either a good memory or a good search, a good way of searching the Bible for words. It's just something ... Like I said, I ran into the Scarlet Thread and I thought, I would love to hear Paul walk us through the Scarlet Thread ties through the Bible. All through the hyperlinks. Yeah, exactly. That would be a fun Wikipedia journey. It's also interesting the way the different traditions do that. For example, this commentary ... Julian once asked me, do I do anything with these books that are behind me? I remembered Julian. This commentary series would be very popular in this little corner of the internet, the ancient Christian commentary on scripture. What it does ... Is that by Bray? Is that by Carol Bray? I think he's a new editor of it. This has been out a number of years now. This is the first book ... doesn't look like the first book. I think I know that. This takes ... You can look up a biblical passage and it will comb Church Fathers on commentary on that passage. If you play with something like this, it's really interesting to note how seeing symbols has a lot to do with the formative ... The video I made about relevance realization from our ancestral code. We are coded by our ancestors and by everything around us to make these relevance realization connections. You find when you look at something like this, but especially if you read sermons from other cultures, sermons from Africa, sermons from Asia, you recognize that different cultures see different connections. I think the reason is because their relevance realization black box is encoded by their culture. Peterson was talking about in terms of what he was saying. It's really nice to have, let's say, a very old tradition. We'll see you, Julian. Like orthodoxy where in a sense, they keep all that code together. That's how they keep a culture together. If you look at even low church Protestant preaching, just go on the internet and find a random sermon by some random Protestant preacher, you will see symbolic thinking and working all over the place. A lot of it bad. Go into any kind of inductive Bible study. This is naturally what people do with the Bible. They'll open it up. They'll read something. They'll have some sort of word association and then they'll draw a lesson from it. This is a tank. I've heard that in the book of Revelation. I was running, this was a number of years ago, I had a men's group at church. We were doing Bible study. We were just going through the Bible together and I had an untreated paranoid schizophrenic in the group, which was fascinating to me because if you're ever around untreated schizophrenics, their associations are not like ours at all. He was talking about Henry Waxman who was a famous congressperson from California and he went to school with his daughter. We were just going through the Bible and a word would hit him and whoosh, off he would go into schizophrenic land. If you go out and listen to sermons, you're going to hear a lot of that. A question I have really for the Catholics and the Orthodox is, boy, Protestantism created this huge amount of content. Catholicism and orthodoxy try to reign it in by keeping it contained in a liturgy. I really wonder how that's going to go in a contemporary context when we're just awash in content outside of the church. I'm really curious about this new orthodox experiment that we've got running. That's Grim Grizz's comment. He thinks that the flood that we're in is information. He explained that to Manuel and I went, oh, that's what you mean by an art. Yes, we are an information art. That's definitely what Manuel and I are doing for sure. That's what the wisdom is in essence. The wisdom is all the information that you'd want in an information art. At the same time, to the earlier point, you see the breakdown of modernity. I didn't know if I should email you, Paul. I've been thinking about do I email Paul this video or not? I'd rather you watch my content. Anyway, I happened across a video of Adam Savage who does a channel called Tested. He's the Myth Buster guy. It's called Adam Savage's Epiphany on the Science of Measurement. And this is another fascinating thing because he's effectively having a religious experience that deconstructs the objective material reality idea of measurement. There's no absolute measurement in the world. He had an epiphany about this and he literally goes down without his normal recording stuff. He has all his stuff, but he doesn't have his team. He's just doing it off the fly and he's explicit. I'm so excited about the realization that I have the epiphany that I want to share it with you. And he shares it in real time. And it's fascinating because at the same time, he's deconstructing the idea that there's an objective material reality. And I was just like, this is awesome because it's the thing you would see in church. It's the thing that used to see on the 700 clobber whatever right back in the day. It's the exact same thing. The context is purely scientific material. That's interesting. That he's doing it is interesting. Right. You see, when I look at the Orthodox Church and you think about what was it like to be in a medieval Catholic town or in an ancient Orthodox community, the church had, it didn't have a monopoly on content, but it sure had a much bigger market slice of attention of its people. Center of every village in Croatia. Every village in Croatia is a church. And again, the fact that the shape of Protestant liturgy happens in the context of the awakening of the printing press and the Colombian explosion and another 20 or 30 or 50 really foundational transitions that happened in the 16th century. Those things are not zero disconnected. What's that? The introduction of zero, the number zero has an identity all of a sudden, which leads to calculus, which leads to calculating the orbits, which leads to Copernicus and to Galileo, right? I'm sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt, but I get excited about that topic. No, no, that's cool. I like being interrupted because it shuts me up. I need to shut up. Yeah, zero came in and that's what led to the Freemason Revolution in my opinion. It's like zero led to the French Revolution. Wow. So because you got the metric system out of zero, right? And the metric system was part of the French Revolution. That's true. It was very tight. If you if you people don't know actually clearly I used to do metrology, which is system of weights and measures, which is what Adam Savage's kind of epiphany was like the science of measurement because everything is relational to another thing. You always make a measurement relational to another measurement. That's all you're doing always. And every measurement you take, there's always an error in your measurement. It's like, oh, there's no perfect measurements. Well, it's kind of insane. It's actually fractal, too, because it's like infinite because no matter how small your ruler is, it's never catching all of the detail. So if you tried to measure the coastline of England and you use like a meter long stick, you're going to get one measurement. If you use a foot long stick, you're going to another measurement. You're going to use one inch. You're going to get another measurement because you're getting exhilarating levels of detail. And that's actually how they found that the coastline of England is fractal. It's not two dimensional. It's not three dimensional. It's two and a half dimensional. Anyway, yeah, there's these fractional dimensional things. Yeah, it's crazy. This is what led me out of fractal fractal fractal fractional. Yes. Yes. The word means. Yeah. So I know you can't be like I want to say zero is because actually thing is about calculus was that Archimedes is good calculus. Back in there. But he did it completely geometric. They found out they found some piece of paper that was been rubbed out and written by some like scribe from the Middle Ages and he just wrote some stuff on it. But then he looked at it and went something on like on this. They actually scanned across and they found out this was from Archimedes and he had discovered calculus 2000 years ago. Wow. But did it. And he was figuring out effectively he did it all through geometry. It is really like really clever what he did. He didn't invent. He didn't have any algebra yet, which is how like Newton and Leibniz did it. He went full on geometric and he was effectively trying to figure out, oh, how heavy does this line have to be and figure out what to pretend if a line had weight to it and going that way. It was kind of like, oh, so there's actually been a lot of things been missed and lost because like history wise. So when something else come together, like we're saying, Isaiah got reintroduced, which is from the Indians, the Indians had comes out zero first. Yeah, the Hindus. The old thing is covering walk back again. Effectively, it was like rediscovery. It's kind of so fascinating. Yeah, someone mentioned that zero was very late to Europe. Like it was in Hinduism for a very long time and then kind of transferred into Islam and through through their mystic tradition and then came into Europe and it's through again, through the through the exoterics. Yeah, exactly. And through through the like the secret societies, they brought it in and the resistance was that the idea because they believed in eminence, the eminence of God. So God's in all things. So there's no way that nothing can have an identity. Like they just refused to accept the idea that nothing would have an identity because to them, nothing was just an absence of God and we don't it doesn't have a real identity. But then the alchemists brought it, it sneaked it in through the back door. And I mean, that's it changed everything. Anyway, I didn't mean to get off. Tell me more about how that got you out of modernity. Well, so I ran into the fractal. I ran into fractals and fractal is something that basically I ran into it through my work. So I work at a custom fabrication shop. Right. And so there's unlimited iterations of what we build, but it's all based around pipe and the fittings that go with pipe. And what I found is that if you look at the output, like the productivity of one person and then you measure the variance of that, and then if you look at the output of one, like say 10 people like that, that would work in a line that would work on a certain range of pipes and the scale of that is the same. And then if you scale it up to, if you look at the output of a shop, the scale of that is the same. And what I found was, oh, that's a fractal. Right. So it doesn't have a scale. No matter what you look at, the variance is the same. It's just that the units change. Right. The magnitude changes, but the scale itself doesn't change. So I was looking at a chaotic system. So I discovered a chaotic system in a job fabrication shop. And then a bunch of like nuclear physicists, PhDs got hired by our company as consultants to come in and try to help us build a system that would help us predict how many we were going to ship in a per week and when this particular one would ship. And I kept telling them that's impossible because it's a chaotic system. I can give you a range, but the probability of that range is going to be very low and it's going to be very broad because of the variance. And they couldn't like, basically I discovered the long fat tail myself, which to leave really rolls out. I discovered that where, you know, it's like instead of a bell curve, which is what most PhDs in nuclear physics are expecting when they look at natural systems, ours went up and down and then it had a very long fat tail and would drop off in the bell curve as far as like how long it would take to build something, right? Like how long it would take to ship. So when you used averages, it was just a disaster because your average was only right like 30% of the time. So what happens, I started studying chaotic systems, which led me into complex systems and unpredictability. And then I got out of a determinism because then I learned about non-deterministic systems and even chaotic systems that are deterministic. Basically, my work with building job shops and trying to predict how long is it going to take to build this one and when is this one going to ship? Studying that, I found out it's indetermined. It's undetermined. You can't determine it. You don't know it's going to ship until it ships. And that undermined determinism, which undermined materialism, which undermined the whole idea that this is a giant machine and that if we knew the speed and the location of all of the particles in the universe, I think it was Liebniz who proposed this, Liebniz Monster. If we knew those things, then we could predict the movements of the universe. And chaos theory proves that not true. You basically lived, you basically converted along the lines of C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles, because what you just described is basically the whole show. And then he basically looks at the whole show and says, this can't work. If this is the truth, then all this other stuff, none of it matters. And basically he was in a mid 20th century meaning crisis or an early 20th century meaning crisis. So that's fascinating. Yeah, that's what opened the door to me too. I just, I got to the bottom of math and went, this isn't deterministic. Math is just an abstraction away from reality. And it's a good enough model in most cases. And it allows us to do really amazing things. But you can't, at the root level, you can't predict things. Everything's a probability map. Everything's a probability function. That's it. That's the best we can do. And that's what the science tells us over and over again. And they just ignore it and like, oh, no, it's fine. And you know, we can build a rocket. It's like, yeah, you can build a rocket. I will say about the physicists, if they think everything is a Gaussian distribution, so no, like, yeah, they don't know much about statistics. Sure. Because the thing is, like, if you're doing like things, it's Gaussians assume that they go from positive, they go to positive infinity and negative infinity. But if you have a distribution that only goes to zero and to put positive infinity, then it will never be Gaussian is your answer of it. Usually it'd be more likely to be a Poisson distribution, which is just fish, fish distribution, fish and French. It's a fish. And what it goes on is like those things like counting. So life and radioactive decay is more like Poisson distribution. But like even then, you're talking about topic, you've probably got even a weird distribution going on and there's probably a lot of statistics already done and saying you've got a very long fat tail. So actually, you're saying that probably the vast majority of that is in that fat tail, even if it's a very long tail. So you're like 40% of our off. Yeah, our 40 are our are like 40% of our output is in the long fat tail. Is outside what a normal Gaussian distribution would be. So we so basically you say, oh, it takes an average of 12 weeks to build something. But our maximum was 400 days. Right. So so so the median Yeah, the median was higher than my average by a lot. And that just blew people's minds. They just they couldn't they didn't know what to do with it. So they tried to build this really junky little thing where they basically made all of them exactly the same and just added a bunch up and added tiny bits of variance. And every time you ran it, it came with a new outcome. So it was non deterministic, which is what I told them. And then they took their millions of dollars and went on their merry way and the company went out of business about two years later. But not just non deterministic. There's also if people know computer science is something called non computable as well. Yes, it is. So for people who don't know this in computer science in general, computer science is not real science. Everyone else in the world calls it informatics for some reason, because it's a better term. But in general, what is like this something was Alan Turing. There's something called the Turing machine, which this is if you can have a Turing machine, you can you can compute anything on it. But there are certain problems you cannot compute. One of them is called the halting problem. Can you give a program any program look at any program and tell me if it could is going to stop at any point in that program for any given input? And the answer is you cannot compute this. This is unknowable. It's a non computable problem. And it's a very simple problem as well. Like, can you give me any arbitrary program and tell me if it's going to halt or not, like stop randomly or go into an infinite loop, one or the other? And the answer is. Nope. So this even that go into the things like even if hypothetically, say the world was complete deterministic, you'd still have to have know things about the universe you could not know. You physically couldn't know. And you can prove you can't know it or no compute it or any of these things. So it gets even weirder and weirder when you get down to it. So this thing is even if you accept the deterministic view, you still get to positions where it's like, great, but you can never be certain about your position ever. Right. And managers hate that. And customers think you're lying. Everyone hates it. Yeah. Yeah. You can just look at nature and do a simple observation, careful observation of nature. And you'll get right out of the determinism because you can't. That's the beauty of it. Right. It doesn't take any careful. We're speaking to a Calvinist here. So be very careful. Well, look, look, yeah, because when you when you look at the beauty, God draws you in. That's Calvinist is going to say. I already know his answer. That's deterministic. The answer is deterministic, but not the universe. So, yeah. So one thing one thing that came to mind was I was agnostic for a long time and I figured like, well, you can't prove God. Right. So why why pay it any attention? And so when you had brought up zero, it's like, oh, now there's a thing to put in that place that I could give attention to, like my highest ideals or or whatever that that would be. And then I could build that. I could use that in my formula to do all sorts of things to live, you know, to well, I mean, I'm just at the beginning of my journey, but I'm like, wow, this is opens up a lot of possibilities. So. Yeah. Funny enough, I'm probably a Christian because I came to the determination that like things aren't actually random and chaotic, that there's a rhyme and reason to things. And so anyway, so. So so we're in the middle ground between randomness and determinism. Well, and I don't say well, yeah, I don't say random. I say there's too many layers of variance. And then when you add up all of those layers of variance, so like this. So if you look at like average average welders, they're most productive on Wednesdays and it trails off pretty steeply from both from in both directions. Right. Like Monday is very not productive and Friday is even less productive. And Wednesday is the most productive day. Right. So if I give it to somebody, if I give this piece to for them to weld on Wednesday, it's going to it's much more likely to get done than if I give it to them on Friday. Right. And if and then you have the Pareto distribution of productivity. Right. So every so I have if I have 10 different welders, my my fastest welder is going to be about five times faster and five times more productive consistently than my slowest welder. And it doesn't matter if I have 10 welders or if I have 100 welders, the Pareto distribution of productivity is there, too. So now how do I account for that? Right. So if I give it to this person, it's going to be done 10 times or five times faster than if I give it to this person. And I have no way of knowing who the supervisor is going to give it to. Right. So you have all these layers and then, oh, let's say, oh, he ran out of welding rods. So now he's going to stop. Now he's got to go. He's got to get more welding rod. Oh, now I've got oh, this was the wrong welding rod. They gave it to him. So now he has to grind that weld out and do it again. Now I have this metal wasn't ready on time. You just have so many layers of a variance that you get when you add it all together. You get a very fat or a very flat distribution of possibilities. So basically, at the beginning, they would say, how long is it going to take to build this? I built a model using 10 years of data of our productivity. And I said it's going to take anywhere from two to 40 weeks. And the estimate of that, the highest, the highest is 16 weeks. And I'm five percent certain of that. They didn't like that answer. No, no, no, they didn't. But that was the mathematics truth because of so many layers of variance in custom fabrication. There's too many things that we can't account for. You know, you can't account for if somebody is going to weld it on a Wednesday or a Friday, and you can't account if it's going to be the fast person who welds it or the slow person. You just and there's infinite layers of that when you try to build. Some is only get these fast welders. That's what you're telling me, right? Well, yeah, but, you know, as soon as you have to, one's faster than the other. Right. Well, you just need to get the chaps. Come on. It's not trainable. We've been spending 100 years trying to do that. You can't train productivity. You can't. You can improve it marginally. But you that Pareto distribution just happens. Yeah, but that I exemplified that in my latest video where I talk about metaphorical truth and I took the other side of Bret Weinstein's argument and said, what's the literal truth of how close you can be to the porcupine? And of course, there's no answer. Like it's incomputable for the same rate, right? Because every time you add a variable to the equation to account for something like, say, motion or time, right, you add variance. And so, yeah, the total variance when you increase the total number of variables exceeds all possible ability to to get it to get it to get a good probability on it. This is what Peterson keeps trying to say about the climate model, but he keeps fumbling through. And so then the scientists go, oh, he doesn't know what he's talking about. He knows exactly what he's talking about. Every time you. What's that? He needs to read to lab. And yes, yes, you have better tools. Yeah, I don't know. I don't know. He's naturally I don't think I think the problem with him is it's two things anyway. I think he technically is technically kind of kind of qualified to talk about that. But many people think he isn't. So that's one problem is that he kind of just needs to say, actually, no, I do kind of know to a certain extent what I'm talking about. But the second problem with Peterson as well, with how he's talking, how he's focusing things on folks and certain things, because to me, I'm like, Peterson still focuses on science a lot and he focuses on the science and talking about all this and he's trying to criticize the science. I'm like, you don't even have to go that route to even criticize the entire thing. The entire thing, like with all the climate change stuff, like my make or dismiss, it's like, OK, this is going to happen. Is that a good thing or a bad thing? No, that's a simple question. Like most cannot answer. Of course, it's going to be a bad thing because it's like why? They didn't even say, oh, he's a bad thing. So, OK, so what we're going to do about it, because I've got calculations papers so what's the goal? What's the goal? What's the actual goal you want to achieve? And most people don't have an answer to this. They really do not have an answer. Like, what do you mean? What do you mean goal? It's obvious we need to do this. Do what? Oh, we need to reduce temperatures. I'm like, why do we want to reduce temperatures? What's the reason for this? Oh, we need to reduce carbon dioxide output. For what end? What are you trying to do? And it's always because, and then they always go on different chains and really, they haven't really thought about this entire line of thinking. So this is kind of the point for me is like, no, just ask the why question. Don't even ask the science questions. Don't because you're already agreeing with their like moral framework if you do, because you just have to ask the why questions. It's like, great. So you want to get zero carbon output. OK, great. We could just kill every person on the paper. And if you do that, temperatures are still going to go up because you've got committed warming, according to your models, at least. And that's still so you can still going to increase between two and three. Was it one to one? Is it one to three Fahrenheit over the next century, even if you killed everyone? So what were you trying to do now again? I mean, this is one of the it's like this is what my point about peace and like, and he's true. He still gets stuck in the same framework. Oh, of course, everyone's still agreeing with me on this side. They're just very good folk on this. Like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, just stop that. You need to go the other side. You need to go to the belly of it all. This is similar to arguing for the truthfulness of the Bible from an archaeological point of view or from like using a materialist argument to validate the Bible somehow. Like somehow that makes it more useful. Right. It's the same. You're right. It's buying into the model. It's like accepting the scientific method as the way of the only way of establishing what's true. I'm not even criticizing the science. Yeah, no, you're not. Yeah, right. It's just, I'm not even going there and I'm like, okay, I can go wholesale here. 100%. I could, I'm not going to, I'm not going to say the white men's do it. And then I still don't get to the same conclusions you're panicking about. You're validating by, by goal, by T-Lost by goals. And that's something they can't, they can't do. And they don't realize they've just got this consequentialist model, which they don't know what the consequences are aiming for. Right. Right. Right. Well, I mean, that was, that was my Twitter battle for Vicky today was, you just gave me a bunch of tools for a how question and tools do not answer a how question, buddy, it's the is walk out every time again, it's the enchanting of the two worlds mythology. Okay. You got heaven and earth. You got is an orgy. You've got a matter and goodness. It's like great. Welcome. We can't live there anymore, Bill, because Vicky said we can't live there. So we can't like, I don't live in the other one either. So. Well, we have, we have drawings and we have raw materials and we bring, we weld them together and we make a new thing that gets a new name and it gets inspected to accept whether it's going to be integrated or whether it's going to be rejected and then it becomes part of a new thing that gets a new name and it's not official until it has paperwork that goes with it, giving it a new name and shipping it to a new location. Yeah. We, we, we live that model in my industry. Like that's what we do for a living. We, we take drawings that have tolerance because we understand that the real world never fits the engineer ideal. Right. There's always little. Like it's a really powerful model for a lot of things. It was one of the things I didn't like about the four horsemen conversation, the four horsemen of meaning is Bishop Barron said, no, I like science, but I hate scientism and it's like, I wish you would say I love science, but it has severe limitations and here's what they are because that's what the message that people need to hear. Right. Because no, it's not that we're not rejecting science, but we're rejecting all the things that we think of as not science, cause then you're going to get back into the battle again of well, where is the line of science and not science? And then, and then that's going to go into, well, there's other methods other than the scientific methods that have the qualities of the scientific method, even though so far no one can, no one's proven that to me. They keep saying that's true. And I'm like, well, where are these other methods? And they don't seem to exist. You're relying on inference and I'm, I'm with Popper inference bad, right? It was bad. Adoption all the time, critical rationalism go. Um, I actually like deconstructing in that model when people present it that way, I kind of like deconstructing science a little bit and saying, so they used science to make the internal combustion engine, they used science to make the refineries that's dumping all this carbon into the air, but we're going to use, we're going to trust the science about fixing it now. Right. So, so which science, which science are you talking about? Right. Like, are you talking about the science of internal combustion engines? It's the same science. As I keep saying, that's not science. None of them saying it's barely, it's get to the belly of this is all morality. They're doing they've got, they're not just morality. It's also rationality. So in my view, rationality is the ends is like purposeful action effect. You have to eat ends means that's what rationality effect of it is. Right. Not, not same reason. Splitting off and making many distinctions here because you need to make distinctions because it's fun. Um, but in this case, like, look, they're looking at ends and goals and it's like, okay, why do you want to achieve that ends? It's like, you could always go, okay, where's the cheat cheese that ends and go, fine, this is what you want to do. And this is what you want to do to achieve that. It's like, they're already assuming that and assuming it's like, of course people want to do X, Y and Z. Everyone wants to do this. It's self-evident. And it's like, oh, well done. You've just smuggled that in. Um, yeah, you can almost call it, um, too much smuggling to borrow. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I use, I use a knife. So if you have three knives, if you have a steak knife, a bread knife and a butcher knife, uh, which one is scientifically the best knife? So you start with the knife. You can't, you can't know scientifically. You don't know which knife is the best knife until you say, I want to cut a piece of meat, then science can tell you, but it's like you have to provide the Y. Right. So when you start with the knife, what are you doing though? You're starting in the middle of the story. You're literally starting in the middle of the story because there's a story about why each knife was developed. There's a story about how they were developed. And then the end of the story is what you're using it for. And that determines which knife. So you can't start at the knife because the knife is literally the exact center of the story. That's the middle out thinking. Okay. That's yeah. Now, the first usage, also purpose function usage for me. Now, Mark, what I need to challenge you with is to apply your middle out thinking to your storytelling on your channel, find ways to begin at the beginning of the story for people. That will, well, I, I listen to you. Plenty. And I think that I have a persona, sir. Oh yeah. Yeah. I got a beef about that. Well, I put it in the comments, but yeah, I, I, I adopt a slightly different, different persona. I talk about, I talk about middle out thinking in my videos, but the, but part of the key to dealing with people is you start, you start with them and then you bring them along in a journey. If you, if you plunk into the middle of the story, then you have some of that dynamic you were just pointing to. No, I, I, I totally agree. I don't think I make that mistake in the same way on my channel, but maybe, but I don't know, I'll try and watch some more of your videos because you got good thumbnails and you got good titles and, and YouTube is serving them up to me. So there's a Mark video. We did a, he did a video on that. And then maybe, I don't know, maybe I just get distracted by other things, but. I would arbitrary. Isn't it arbitrary where we choose to begin the story though? Like we can start the story with the knife and we start the story with it, with the kind of thing that we want to cut with it, but couldn't we start further back with we were hungry because we didn't eat and then we could go further back and there was a cow on the field and depending on the story we're telling. See, I come from the maker point of view as the guy who, who manufactures things. I think of all the different like levels of involvement and levels of artisanship involved in making a knife, right? Like the metallurgy and, and the, how much purity do I have in the steel? And how do I forge the steel and how do I heat treat the steel to get the certain properties that I want? What alloy do I use? What, you know, how do I form the handle? Do I want to handle for a fat hand like mine, or do I want to handle for a small, you know, small person who might be cutting more things than I do? You know, it's like there's, you can get lost in the details really quickly when you're trying to deconstruct someone else's story. The good news is you don't have to, you can, right. And, and, and you can say, well, well, why? Because you can figure out what, what are good stories or better stories and, and worse stories, right? You can figure out better and worse stories. The problem with that is that you have, that's what the realm of ethics is. It's determining better and worse. And so that's the framing. So you can't, you can't jump in and say, Oh, well, all framings are equal because there's a field of objects and we can go at any chain in the object and start, and start the story from there because you can't start the story from there. Are you not telling me I don't want to maximize utils? I mean, you just need to maximize the utils. Come on. So, so I come from a Christian tradition. Sorry. No, I come from a Christian tradition where we tell testimonies to each other. And so like either in church service or website or something like this and testimonies are when we, we take our life experiences and we form it into a very specific kind of store where we have a problem and then God sovereignly acts in some way, and then there's a solution. And so what you do when you bring testimonies is you take your life or like, you know, the things you've experienced and then you tell it within story. I always hated tests and trying to tell testimonies because in my experience with the world, I was never, were very rarely experiencing life in that way. Because to me, if I were to tell a story of, of like, Oh, I got in the car, but then I got a phone call and then that made me a few seconds of a break. And then that made me a few seconds late and a car swerved out in front of me. If that hadn't happened, that would have been hit by a car. For example, yeah. If to tell that kind of story in a testimony would mean I would have to start in a certain place and finish in a certain place. And I was always very uncomfortable doing that because for me, my experience, God, God is up to bigger stories. And if I were to frame that and cut that into that simple kind of story, then that would be eliminating the potentiality of that God is doing something other than what I think he's doing. And so I would either avoid, avoid telling testimonies or I, or if someone, someone asked me to, I would just start telling my experiences in a non story format, because that's not how I experienced the world. I experienced it in different kinds of stories. Causality is really hard to track when you start digging into that's very, that's a similar path for me as like tracking the variance of, of building something like when you start tracking causality, I mean, there's infinite variables, you know, so that's a very interesting point about testimonies and being it's difficult to start to know where to start. Cause it's like, do you start when you were five years old and you noticed, you know, whatever. I mean, it's just, yeah, it's causality. And we have a bunch of these, you could call them genres. One of them is a testimony. And what they do is they present constraints, right? And that constrains what you present. And that can be, especially for someone high in openness, that can be really, um, something that they don't want to do. So that's why you have to shift, right? And see that you can shift or can shift. So I've got, I've got 20 minutes left and I think we should try to figure out how to help Mark make better videos that people want to watch, especially videos that I want to watch because, you know, I always feel bad when I come in here and I know Mark has made videos and Mark's going to ask me, have you watched any of my videos? And I'm going to say, no. And, you know, I'm like the kid who hasn't done his homework. So, um, what can, problem solve. Then you can give me reasonable feedback. See, I should say, I feel guilty because I'm, I'm at the other end of this because you give me lots of good feedback. And, um, you know, I, I do have to say though, that, um, we haven't heard anything from beta rampage nor, nor knee room. So, and, and you two just have really interesting cameras going now. I like the green and the hair and I like the, you know, I like the face down. Oh, there's this guy, my favorite Martian. What's going on with your videos, Mark? Um, I've just talked to you on here a lot. I haven't, I didn't know, even though you had a YouTube channel. Yes, it's called navigating patterns. Check it out. Give me some bad, bad, bad. It's my videos that he won't watch. What, why not? I just, I haven't, I don't know. Mark has, you know, I have the same thing. Like, I like Mark and iron route. They're kind of the same for me when they hit me. It's like a wall of words and it's like, and sometimes I can see through the wall. And, and I think they got really good ideas in there. Oh, Sevilla's here too. Hi there. Welcome. Thank you. I've been hearing so much about this. I want to enjoy. Somebody's got their YouTube connection up loud. You have to turn that down. When they hit me, it's like a wall of words. I think it is. So turn it off, turn down the volume. Okay. No, I just turned it off. Okay. There you go. There you go. Okay. Otherwise. No. So I was, I was just trying to, I was just trying to give Mark some, you know, fi find out why I won't watch Mark's channel. Cause I'm always disappointing Mark. And I feel bad about that. So, but there's a lot of talking about Mark. Maybe you should just have some guests on your, your podcast or your channel. Just talk to people. Have somebody riff off of, I don't know. I've had Manuel. So you and Manuel are like the same. No, not even. Yeah. You're almost the same person. No, we fight so much. We disagree on so many things. You're like an old married couple. I fight with myself a lot. That doesn't disqualify you from being the same person. So, Savella, how are you doing? I'm good. Good to see you. I've been hearing so much about, you know, these, uh, impromptu live streams. I've spent the past 20 minutes trying to get on here to begin with. Oh, figure out find a way onto the discord. Oh, I get it. It's popular. It's a little weird. It's, it's hard. And I have a lot of people that sort of apologize to me the way I apologize to Mark, they say, I went over to the discord, but it's a little much. Yeah, it is a little much. Everybody's got a place to hang out though. It's really cool. Thank you. Yeah, it is. And, and just, you know, just this afternoon, someone mentioned in the comments section, basically Paul has built a machine now he just has to start it. And, you know, we've got, um, zero and how, you know, I just sit here and learn. So I just built a big learning machine for myself and, uh, it's really cool. Well, the reason I wanted to get on is because like 20 minutes ago, you guys were talking about, you know, there's no single women here and, uh, and it's funny because I'm in a world where there's single women who don't know where the men are. And I'm just wondering how we can merge these two worlds. You can be the bridge. I think I could be the bridge. Bridges of marriage, another BOM server. Right. You have to get the single women talking about how zero is. Just start writing that as a conversation. Why don't, why don't you guys do the philosophy meetups? That's where the guys are. That's true. You know, and that in a way, this is kind of related. So that really piqued my interest when I was, you know, I was watching you guys on YouTube and I felt like I had to, you know, pop in and see maybe there's something that can be done about this. Well, like I said, we were, so I was sitting there with, with my wife and my daughter and my son and his girlfriend. And we were saying we should do bridges of meaning bachelor shows at first, Joey, we got to get Joey married off. But, but the problem is we don't have any women. So he said, no, we got to start with the bachelorette. And so we have to, um, but I, I'm, I'm a little concerned though, that there's something about our discord server that I don't know. I I'm, I'm afraid of what I'm about to say. Um, do it, do it, do it. Maybe, maybe we need like, we should have lessons in our bridges of meaning server about how to relate to women. Could it be that? You know, I mean, that's, I don't think that's, you know, I don't think that's unreasonable, you know, but it's not the main thing. I mean, basically you've got a bunch of, you know, a bunch of guys who are so smart, so interesting. And I think that that's 95% of it. A little bit of, you know, a little bit of, let's just say we're fine. We're just a bad thing, but we had a girl on the chat today and it went really well. I mean, we just, she was knitting and we were all talking about James Bond and all kinds of stuff. I think the dudes here are fine. I don't think there's a problem. Everybody was nice and respectful. There are girls around, but they're all married. Yeah. A lot of them are married here. The point I'm making is that I've got, you know, single women that I talk to that, you know, don't know where the men are and don't where the smart men are and don't where the, you know, thoughtful men are. And I'm just thinking, huh? Well, that's, that's another one of my abandoned projects that I should pick up again, because I have the same thing. So my wife, you know, has all these, knows all these women in their early to mid thirties that are like, they really want to find a man, but there are issues there because I once asked my wife, I said, honey, if something were to happen to me, how much money would a man have to make for you to consider dating him? And it was a very small group because it was a very big number. And it just meant it was a good, I think I got in early when neither of us had any money. So, I mean, if she would divorce me because I'm poor, that would kind of be crappy. So, Well, I think there's a lot of value added stuff that women don't look at. Like, can you, you know, do you know how to navigate something like Discord, which is complicated? Do you know how to do this? You know, do you know how to navigate these complex platforms? Do you understand what's going on in this, in this world? You know, do you, I think things like intellectual, you know, the, the kind of intellectual level that everyone's talking about here really, you know, there's a conversation partner, you know, there's a value added thing that I think that the internet dating platforms really discount because, you know, a lot of the discussion I've heard, you know, in the past 20 minutes or so is you got this materialistic way of seeing things. You got this, let's just say subject object way of seeing things. And at the bottom, at the essence of that, the most efficient way to, to qualify that is, is income money. But there's all this other stuff. There's all this other quality that kind of gets discounted in this, in the internet dating world, which is, you know, very reductionist. And that's something that really has to kind of be re-examined. I mean, are you someone who will shovel the walk, you know, when it snows? Are you someone who knows how to, you know, change the oil in the car? These are very valuable things. Yeah. And, and women, I'll tell you, it's so funny. What, I think I made a, I made a video about this and I was watching, I was watching, I got onto a, for two days, like a YouTube, um, what's that game show that used to have, um, you have the top 100 people, um, set survey says, bing. What's, what's that game show? Family family feud. And, and, you know, I had this thing, you know, survey top surveyed, um, 100 married men, what they would do for sex. And so you had men and women trying to answer this question and the men had like beg, kill, um, you know, just all these just over the top things that they would do. But then the women were trying to guess answers and they were like clean cook. No men said any of these things. They'd rather die or kill than cook or clean. But the things that you just talked about are very real. I mean, when I fix a computer for my wife or my daughters, I'm a magic man. Like, like, for example, can you buy a window at home depot and put, and put it in and change up the framing? I mean, I prefer that to a high income to tell you the truth. Yeah. Yeah. And actually on this server, we have this server has a ton of smart guys and actually some guys on the server that makes decent income. Um, we don't talk about money on this server, but I've seen that. Yeah. Well, they're doing, they're doing real work too. Like Chad's, you know, laying tile and yeah, there's, there's people who know how to do things, but I think, yeah, when you squish things down to the material, what you're really doing is you're losing opportunities to connect with people. That's the intimacy crisis, roughly speaking. You have fewer things to connect on. Oh, I can, I can connect on whether or not I like dogs or cats. Right. But, but, and then these dating profiles, you know, to your point, like, yeah, these are terrible. Like a lot of these women will, will literally write a dating profile that goes something like this. I've got my own house. I've got my own job. I've got my own whatever, and I don't need you for anything in some cases. You've kind of narrowed the field down about, are you sure that's the message you want to send? Cause this is not, and then they'll say, and I don't want to be used for sex. And it's like, well, okay. But where do I fit in the picture? If you've got everything, you're independent. What can I provide in that, in, in like, where's the relationship? You've got everything you need. Like, what, what am I doing? Steve Harvey actually made a really good movie about that. I'm trying to think, I'm trying to think of that Steve Harvey movie exactly about that is about this woman that was super independent. She was like a CEO in some company and, uh, she ended up falling in love with a dude that ran a food truck and he was really creative artist. And, uh, those are the types, I guess, that match with that because the other CEO that she loved, he didn't like her because she was too, you know, she didn't need him, you know, there, those women have to kind of lower their expectations or whatever. I don't know if that's the right way because that dude, he worked hard. He was a cool guy. He just, he made like $30,000 and she made $200,000 a year. So, um, no, a lot of times they advertise what they're looking for because they assume men are looking for the same thing that they're looking for and men are completely not like they're to your point, they're not creating the space, right? Like, like Mary and with Jesus at the wedding of Cana, you know, she's like, could you, and he's like, well, she created the space by asking the question, right? And women aren't doing that. Women aren't asking the question anymore. They're just, they're, they don't know. Yeah, exactly. They're asked, they're acting very much and they need a more feminine creative man in order to balance out and they don't want to admit that they act like a guy. They just can't. What's weird is on these like dating apps in general, or to date and profile, you'll see them, the women will tell you exactly what they think. They'll tell you, they don't even hide it. They'll just say, yes, I am a psychotic, crazy woman. Effectively, not even like they'll say those words pretty much. And it's like, wait, what, what's what you're saying this? Although they'll, they'll just, they won't even hide it. Like saying, yeah, I get a little bit neurotic at times and supplies. They'll be honest about it. It's really surprising. They're not trying to use Flutterangs. They'll just say it bluntly. And I'm thinking, oh, but people just tell you what they think pretty much or what they are. It's quite interesting when you just, you think, you think, I don't know. They don't. I'm sorry. I didn't mean to interrupt you, but I went to get my car inspected a few weeks ago and I went into the shop and the guy was like really nervous all the time. And, and, you know, he was saying, oh, this is a really nice car. Yeah. And I was like, oh, you know, whatever. Thanks. And he goes, he goes, I really want a car like this. I'm like, well, you know, keep working hard and we'll get there. He's like, well, this is the only job I can do. And I'm like, oh, really? He goes, yeah, I have anxiety and PTSD and I, so I can't have these regular jobs. I'm like, dude, you just met me. Like, why are you telling me this? I have one of those faces. I might have one of those. Maybe it's a generational thing. Is the guy married? Did she see a wedding ring? No, no, he was, and you know, he was like probably in his late twenties. And I'm just like, like when I grew up, you didn't advertise your weaknesses, especially to strangers, like other men, like, Hey, pick on me. I'm a loser. I have, I'm most scared of everything in the world. Please beat me up. Like, it was just like, okay, dude, good luck. So you're saying somebody should beat him up and then he'll stop. Well, that's what it would have happened to me when I was a kid. I'm just saying that, you know, because kids nowadays do not have any fights in school whatsoever. I think that's kind of weird. Um, when I was in school, I got into all kinds of fights and, uh, I knew what to do out in the world, um, and I, I didn't have any anxiety, but I noticed these younger kids, they've never had a challenge to overcome. They, they, they don't know, they don't know who they are, you know, and the schools, I think insulate them so much. Um, they, they, uh, like I said, I'm shocked. None of them fight any. It's like unheard of. Go to a very rough school, like I did. And then just some kids will go around the school with so much to say it's a confectionery item and he was asking, what's this called? And if you said scone, he'd shake your hand. If you said scone, he'd punch you in the face. No reason. Just, just as you do. That was the type of school I went to. Um, I, yeah, that all stuff like people would just, yeah, we have to have a good, that's why you lost your empire. Yeah. That's why we lost our empire over that. No, I just like sometimes, yeah. You should say people probably like, but it's weird that many people don't get into fights, you're right, but I don't mean like, like fistfights or anything in general. But I just mean like people don't get into arguments either. Well, if you're not willing to get in a fist fight, you won't argue. No, you won't just forget about it. You'll be too terrified. Somebody will get in your face and you don't know what to do. So you'll shut up. You'll stay quiet. And that's where that anxiety comes from. You don't know what to do if things get bad. Cause you've never handled you. You don't know, you know, when you get punched in the face and your nose broken, it's not as bad as you think. Okay. It's just not as bad as everybody thinks. Maybe you get some, a little bit of brain damage or whatever, but it heals. Okay. But you know, a lot of people just think it's your, you'll die. You'll die. If you get punched in the face, you're dead. And that's not true at all. You're very tough. You're, you're a very tough human being and we can take a lot of punishments. I'm guessing. Yes. I'm just, that's the best cure for solipsism I've ever found. Anyone who just says, anyone who just says the world is subjective. You go, okay, I'll just punch you. Right. I just punch you in the face. Like, why can't you change your mind about how you feel about that? Yeah. I, right. I don't know. You can just socially programmed to not like me punching you. Well, was this, was this the conversation that you were expecting? Sevilla. Welcome to the run. This of men. I was just happy to get in number nine. Yay. Well, it's, it's, you know, it is interesting that I think that bridges of meaning discord server has had a better track record than the bachelor at series in terms of matchmaking people. So a single women that have come here, it's been very interesting in this space because I've noticed that the women on this discord server really hold a lot of power, but it's feminine power. We might have one Cassidy might have some moderator power, but for the most part when there's a woman in a chat room, it fills up and everybody wants to talk and it's not, you know, it's, it's, it's been, it's been very interesting watching the masculine feminine in this space. That was part of the conversation earlier. Yeah. Today. We're referring to right was, well, there's this feminine power and, and the woman in the room actually said, you know, women have no idea, you know, they, they have this power and it's very devastating to a man when they betray them basically. Yeah. And for me, I was like having recently been betrayed. I was like, Oh wow. That's that's that's really validated. It's like, I don't, I don't know how I feel about being validated about my feelings in that way, but it was really good to hear a woman actually say that like, no, no, no, we can just take you out. It's like, yeah, yeah, that happened to me recently. Yeah. Yeah. Men are much more likely to commit suicide after a divorce than women are. Right. I know. Especially if you have kids. I mean, that's a dark thing to bring up, but it's, it's just the result. That's a good, that's a good staff to know. Greg Ellis's book, the respondent, he goes over those statistics. That book is, man, you read that book, you realize we got problems that no one realizes how bad they are and that that's the family court and I wasn't in the family court, thank goodness. Cause the family court just, just create suicide and wrecked children. But you know, the courts in general have many of the same problems. These, these lawyers have too much. I really think it's a lot of single mothers that cause this. I, uh, my lady has a dad and she does not, she's not like that. And I think that makes a huge difference. Every woman that I've met that has a, as a dad is awesome. And, and alternatively, every man that doesn't have a mom is really messed up. I think it's very important to interact with the opposite sex. Um, and I think siblings are important too. You know, I look at, I look at my daughters and they know how to handle men because they've handled their brothers. You know, they learned how to handle men and they're not afraid of them. And, um, they handle them pretty well because, and vice versa. My sons know about women because they've got sisters. And so, yeah, I think that's a piece of it too. Yeah. Yeah, definitely. And a lot of people don't have siblings. They have their only children. Yeah. Yeah. Like me. Go, go ahead, Savella. Well, I was, I was thinking, you know, um, what you were saying about the feminine energy entering the space. Like when I was trying to fumble around, you know, do all the stuff, trying to get on here. There was a lot of technical, you know, there was kind of an analytical discussion of, uh, I think you were talking about dynamical systems versus chaotic systems. And, you know, that particular kind of thing, I think, dynamical and chaotic are the same, I don't know, but, you know, there are more scientific terms being thrown around. And I noticed that when I came in, not, not, you know, not to point at myself or anything, energy did kind of change to where we're talking a little bit more about relationships and feelings. And that's interesting. And the other thing that I think is interesting is being in this corner. We don't deny, you know, there's, it's not as if I, I couldn't, you know, go in the space of science. If I wanted to, and you guys are right now talking about relationships because you want to, so it's not as if we don't have the capacity. It's just that we recognize the proclivity, you know, the tendency and that the energies do balance themselves out and these conversations could be all the more fruitful when you do have that balance of energy. So I think that's pretty cool. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's true. That's true. I just want to say one last thing. It's like, if you're in the, if you're in the like liberal phase where it's a top-down enforcement of no sex, sex and sex differences are very much conditioned and they're, what's the word they used? Yeah. Socially conditioned, which is so absurd because I mean, why not just embrace these differences? Yep. They don't want to make distinctions. They don't. They don't want to make distinctions. They don't, their, their whole point is they have identity problems to the point of not understanding categories and wanting to undermine categories. They want to, they want everything to be the same and everyone to be the same and no differentiation and no distinctions because any distinction means there's oppression as soon as there's a distinction, there's a, I actually understand that. There's a have and have not. Those are distinctions, but the distinctions they want are like extremely individualized. Yeah. Not even so infinite distinctions. Yeah. Yes. And also going back to like men, like going back to weird, like the men just never get literally effectively, I say bullied or something at school. And when you think about it, when boys were like bullying each other, they'd use their fists, but women, or they used to play psychological games with each other, like, and it was very, like very rarely you saw women girls like to steal each other's boyfriends. Yeah. Yeah. That sort of stuff. Or like you'd play games that literally just, oh, some psychotic stuff to do. But a bloke when he's just a boy, it's like, oh, don't like you. And that's, that was about it. And it was very like, is this kind of the difference between things? It's like, yeah, but that's like kind of like looking at, oh, there's no difference between men and women. It's like, no, no, really just look at them and you can actually see the differences just like when they're like eight years old and they're already acting differently and when women do things, all they do when they fight is just grab each other's hair and that's about it. Usually it's never really that, and they usually scratch it at other people. It's like not punching or kicking. It's very weird. It's a weird, right? Reminds me of something. Sorry. Go ahead, man. Yeah. It's a, it's a weird denial of specialization, which is part of evolutionary theory. And they're just like, no, no, no, there's no specialization. That's no good. Everyone's the same. And then they, but they dissolve the categories so that they can get to a single identity because you can get to a single identity, you can live in an objective world because that's what the objective world is. It's everything has one and only one identity. I wanted to mention when I was a kid on the playground, the boys and girls would act like they're getting married and they would go under the jungle gym and play house and I do not think they're doing this anymore. They're not figuring their roles out there. You know, the boys would get sticks and act like their guns or lightsabers and the pine cones or grenades. And the girls would use the same objects and use the stick like stirring a spoon and the pine cones are like tomatoes or something. So we're using the same objects, but our imaginations are playing them out according to our genders. And that, I think that's gone too. That play, we need to learn how to play together again, as, as men and women. Because it's always too serious or something like that. There's not a playful spirit anymore. I have a, I have a school in my backyard, an elementary school and, and really like 90% of the kids just go outside and just walk around. The playground's almost gone. Like they have some four square, they have some four square patterns that they play four square, but the four square they play is very, uh, not competitive, very friendly and very, uh-huh. And the teachers do actually tell them to do this non-competitive stuff because you need to help out when everyone's out of hand. And it's, it's interesting, but that is kind of, that is kind of told when they're kind of told to do that way, maybe, maybe I'm wrong, but maybe they're actually being kind of punished to not doing actually playing like kids. Cause you're not well, there aren't any, there's no playground equipment for them to get hurt on because we're all just terrified of getting hurt. Like everybody's just like, the worst thing in the world is my kid broke his finger. It's just like, probably once every few months. So my wife is a public school teacher and let me tell you something that the schools are always seriously concerned with. And that is lawsuits because this litigious society, I'll tell you. So then they have like these special school courts. And I remember at one, my wife had to go in there and testify. So I went there for moral support and I'm watching this thing and I'm thinking, this is nuts. This is nuts. You know, it's, it's good that we have courts and lawsuits. You need those two for checks and balances, but you gotta figure out a way. Parents will Sue. They'll ask for anything. And so, so then schools just get all the safety ism just takes hold and it's tough. Yeah. Well, well guys, I gotta, I gotta go. And so that doesn't mean you all have to go. Y'all can keep going. And if anybody's out there watching the live stream and you want to join, jump in, um, and don't bite too much. They don't. And if there's any single ladies out there, I'm telling you, we, this bridges of meaning is a world of men and they don't smell cause they're on the internet. Um, you can't smell them. Whether or not they bathe. We're not always sure. Um, and some of them have good social skills, but for the most part, if you come to the bridges of meaning discord server, you will be treated like a queen because the server loves the women here. It really does. You need some media and marketing training, Paul. I'm sorry. It just, you're the one whose videos I don't watch. Terrible sales job. Well, okay. Okay, Mark, you give, you give the pitch. Let me hear it. Oh, wait. I'm so she's here. What? Okay, Mark, sell it to the ladies. Come to bridges of meaning where we have lots of very intelligent, engaged and engaging men who are interested in hearing your opinions and understanding your needs better. See now, now you're doing, like we said, they shouldn't do you're, you're trying to mind read for a woman and I don't know that it's working. Who, who, who else? I like Paul's pitch better. Who else wants to make a pitch here? Okay. Let's, let's have another. It's fun. There you go. That's about it. Come here, have some fun. It's good chat. There you go. Whatever. Look at these men. Look at these men. We've got, we've got men. How many of you are single? How many are single? I got a lady. Look at that. Look at that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's married. Yeah. Okay. So we got, we, we got some, we still got some. So, all right, everyone come hang out. Yeah. Whether you're, you can be married and hang out too. That's, that's very true as well. Um, we've got, you know, Sherry is in many ways, the mom of the discord has been for a long time. And she hates you saying that. Unfortunately, she hates me saying that. Yeah. It's so true. It's true. It might be true. I'm not saying no comment, but yeah. Yeah, I know. But those are her issues. She is, she can't, she can't avoid it. So anyway, sorry, Sherry. In orthodoxy, the priest's wife is called her Presbyteria. And she basically, you know, she's like the, she's, you know, she's like the priest, but she, she helps everybody. She takes care of all of the loose ends that the priest leaves hanging everywhere. Yeah. It's, she's the parish mom. Uh-oh. My wife, my wife is asking me for something about dinner, so I gotta go. So. See you Paul. See you Paul. Bye-bye.