https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OsJ1vzvoH0c

 There we go. Oh, wow. Yeah, now you get a whole special warning from Zoom so that I'm not surreptitiously coming into your living room. That's right. That's actually probably a good idea. Well, yeah, so. Well, I'll just give a little introduction. This is Nate and Shelley. Those of you on the Discord server know, and they are proof that our Discord server is simply a thinly veiled, far more successful dating app than the Bachelor or Bachelorette show. We've got a far better track record and here is one of our happy couples. So. Yeah. No, it's true. And so I just have to say up front, like, thank you, Paul. Thank you, Brisbane meeting community. Cause yeah, it's really did not see this one coming. It's so funny because before you two, you know, for any of this, I had conversations with both of you and you're both asking questions about singleness, marriage. Then here we are. I was just telling Shelley that it's been almost exactly three years since I talked to you. And I think you remember I was sort of going through a, you know, do I believe in all this crazy stuff or what? And yeah, it turns out I do. So I thank God for that. But since then it's just been nonstop. And Shelley was a missionary in Africa trying to get her internet to work. Yeah. Yeah. We had almost a couple of conversations that we tried to get going and this happened and that happened. And so, well, you guys wanted to talk. I wasn't quite sure what you wanted to do at this time, but I said, yes, I was excited. So yeah, honestly, we didn't have anything planned exactly. We sort of just wanted to, yeah, I don't know. Well, let's, for the sake of continuity, you know, I had a conversation. Did we ever post my conversation with you, Nate? No, no, we decided that it was cool too. Yeah, it was pretty personal. It was pretty personal. Yeah. There are quite a few elements in there. And of course, Shelley, I had at least one conversation with you that I posted. And so let's take it back to each of you with the conversations we had, even if it wasn't posted, and then what you found in the Discord, how you found each other. Everybody loves a love story. Let's hear it. You go first? Okay. Yeah, for me, I think it was August or September of 2019 when I joined Bridges of Meeting. But before that, a friend, and I think in 2017, had shown me Jordan Peterson, and then the algorithm showed me you. And I started listening to you, and I could tell like before you even, I mean, you mentioned your overseas time pretty frequently in your videos. Before you even mentioned it, I was like, oh, this guy's lived overseas. Because at that point I had lived in America, I had lived in France, and then I had lived in West Africa. And you were just like presenting a lot of nuanced information. And I was like, this guy has definitely, you know, learned another language or two, learned another culture or two. And then I had no idea what a Discord was. I just clicked on the link under one of your, and I had been a little, I had been active in the comment section and enjoyed that. And then yeah, I got involved in Discord. At that point, I was in West Africa. So my time zone was more adjacent to the European crowd. Yep. I usually get on with Job and Dennis and Ice Bear and Ginger Bill and Carlos in the mornings. And then just kind of like read up what the American side was doing at night. But yeah, and at that point I was, yeah, I was single and I was like really okay with being single up to a point. And then I started having these maternal urges. I was always like okay with being single, but then these like, oh, I'm not gonna be a mom realizations were hitting. And that was like a lot more serious to me than I realized it would be. There you go, Nate. You're just a vehicle to an end. Hey, I'll take it. And that's, yeah, I think that's when I started contacting you Paul, just like, I knew you were familiar with kind of part of the ethos that I became a missionary out of. We're not from the same, exactly denominational background, but missionary circles in the Protestant world are, I mean, I'm sure they're varied, but I could tell just from the way you talked about it that probably some of our experiences were similar. And yeah, coming into missions as a single female is just an interesting dynamic. I've had lots of conversations since then, just like it's almost like the Protestant, like a monk or a nun for Protestants. And it was a little confusing to me because I never necessarily like signed something saying I was gonna be single, but just the way the missionary field is, like if it happens to a lot of women. And I was just having these like, realizations, I had a woman who I really, she was kind of like a mentor, she'd been single all her life. And she told me as she was 60, 65, she said, get married. And I was like, what? Because she has this amazing fruitful ministry. She's this like badass literacy teacher goes into West African prisons and does all this stuff. But she was like, it's my biggest regret. And I was like, oh, okay. That's kind of when I messaged you and we had conversations about what that looked like realistically. And I just wrestled internally about calling and all this kind of thing. But ended up coming back to America during the pandemic for, I was already scheduled to come home for a home assignment, but even then kind of thinking like, I might not be coming back, but not sure, not really ready to say it out loud, still processing very much. And for me, the epidemic, the pandemic at that point, the churches were closed. So it was kind of a blessing for me in that I could stay isolated. I wasn't speaking to my supporting churches about what was going through my head yet. Churches were closed. Like there weren't a lot of big group meetings happening. So I was just kind of processing and spending a lot of time on Discord and praying and just feeling stuff out. I guess I can jump in there and then we'll catch up and then we'll talk about when we first started meeting up. So I had a very different upbringing than Shelly. I wasn't raised Christian. My mom was raised in the Catholic church, but she left after she left her parents' house. She left the faith. So for me, Christianity was something that I was interested in for the first time as I was getting older. Before that, my road into Christianity or more of the Bible was through literature. I read a lot of poetry. I started writing poetry around 13 or 14, specifically this poet named William Blake. I think a lot of your listeners will be familiar with. Not a small orthodox Christian by any means, but he considered the Bible the great code of art. And I had sort of taken that on as I agreed with that. So I was really into the Old Testament prophets, the poetry side of things. But the idea that Christianity could be true was just seemed ridiculous to me. But after high school, I sort of bummed around for a while. I flunked out of a semester of college at one point, chasing after a girl. I was in California, living out of a car. I was doing all this stuff. And eventually around 25, I sort of got a little bit of sense in me. And I went back to school as an adult student. And it was right, 2015 was my first semester. I go into a small liberal arts college in my hometown in Central PA. And yes, I mean, it's when Peterson started getting big, the Trump election, that was fantastic to be in that environment. And Pennsylvania of all places. Yeah, and I mean, Pennsylvania, it's you got one of the settings is you got Pittsburgh, to the West Philly to the East and Alabama down the middle. And that's Pennsylvania. There's some real truth to that. I mean, there's Confederate flags, you'll see people flying here. So I was on the Peterson to PVK to Jonathan Pagio pipeline. And I had some personal stuff going on where just basically my life sort of fell apart in some really profound ways. And yeah, I had a coming to faith. It was actually very painful. I was traumatizing in a certain sense. And soon after that, I sort of flirted with a few other churches for a couple of weeks, but I settled on an Orthodox church nearby. And I started attending there and I've never really left. And it's been a real, it couldn't have worked out any better for me. So it was around, I mean, it was probably a month or two after I talked to you that I sort of had this tipping point where I decided I was gonna commit myself to a Christian life, commit myself to Christ. And that was terrifying, but also a relief. And it was, yeah, summer of 2019 where I started getting onto, I got onto the disc floor and that was just, I felt comfortable with the community. It was a place to hash things out, just be like a pain in the ass. And people would sort of put me in my place and also- Be a pain in the ass, try not to get banned by Joey. That's right. That's great. So I managed to stay on the server, but yeah. And then, I was in the process of joining the Orthodox church. That took a little bit over a year and then the churches were closing down and that just, that was hard. That was hard for me. So, I mean, my mindset going into, I mean, I was baptized in June of 2020 and my mindset up until that point was just like, I just gotta get into the church. And I knew I wanted to have a family. I wasn't like, I had no desire to become a monk or anything like that. So a couple of weeks, a couple of weeks after I was baptized, I was on Discord and yeah, Shelly messaged me and we just started messaging back and forth. We started talking on the phone. Oh, and I should say, I guess we should mention that we sort of had a matchmaker. Really? Can you guess? I bet you can guess, Paul. I think it's Sherry. You're right. Yeah, so I- She hates it when I say she's the mom of the Discord, but she really is. What's funny is she was like, Shelly, I never do this. She kept saying, I never do this, I never do this, but I just have this strong feeling. And it was all, I don't know, I felt like it was all very providential because Sherry had been helping me through at this point. After I came back, I came back in the spring, in the summer of 19, I had a really chaotic, destabilizing time with a family member and Sherry had been in a similar situation and she was kind of walking me through it. She helped me a lot. And so we had already established a very deep trust and she knew I wanted to get married. She knew the whole thing. I talked to Sherry because the poetry stuff, there's the sister Discord server, Bridges of Meaning for Writers, and we had done some voice chats and yeah, we connected as well. Sherry, yeah, Sherry saw that Nathan and Shelly talked on the poetry server and she was like, Shelly, have you considered Nathan? At that point, I mean, I was kind of like in the deepest part of the hole that I was in at that point. And I was like, you know Sherry, actually he seems really cool, but I'm just in this, you know, like they say never to try to start something when you're in a chaotic situation. I was like, you know, I don't think that's what I wanna do right now, but I kinda did. She was like, well, whatever you decide, but I think you can handle two things at one time. And I thought about it and I was like, you know what? She's right. Like I can't let this situation control any more of my life than it has, you know? So, I messaged Nathan. Yeah, and then about within a month, I think we met within a month. How far away did you live from each other geographically? I was near Tulsa, Oklahoma. And I'm in central Pennsylvania, so. That's a little ways. Yeah. But it's not California to Amsterdam or Arizona to the Netherlands as another one of our couples. Random example. Yeah. We met in Tennessee. Yeah. Cause I had read something and I'm sure Nathan had the same thoughts. I'd read something about dating online cause like I tried it a little bit before, but the article I read made sense to me. It was like, you know, just consider online as like a pool of people, but you don't have to actually do the, do as little of the dating online as possible, do as much in real life as you can, but you can meet online. I was like, that makes a lot of sense to me. So basically, as soon as we kind of like had the determining the relationship conversation, I tried, I started like scheming as to how we can meet in real life. I have family in Tennessee. It's a halfway mark. Yeah. We kind of we together and you know, we were pretty level-headed for the most part. Yeah. I don't know if we're really good. I don't know if we're the best judges of our own level-headedness. But yeah, soon after that, Shelly came to Pennsylvania and visited. You visited twice, right? Yeah. And my family wasn't like jazz that I went out there twice before Nathan came here, but it was- You went to Africa for pizza. I mean, they got to cut you a little slack. You're a big girl. Well, just that dynamic of like, he should come here, you know, kind of a thing, but it was pandemic time. Yeah. And Nathan had a job that- I worked for a newspaper as a news reporter and I couldn't, they didn't pay me enough, first of all, and they wouldn't give me time off. So- Well, and then you're at your current job. And at that time, I think you had to quarantine for two weeks after. Oh, right. No, sorry. I had just started a new job. I worked for children's services and I'd literally just started. I got that confused. Anyway, my memory's not great. You had valid reasons for not coming out. I had valid reasons. Yeah. So then he- So yeah, I went out in like October and January, and then he came in March. And I was chrismated into the Orthodox Church in March. And then the next day, Nathan proposed. Wow. Yeah. Well, let's also talk about, so Nathan hit some aspects of his entry into the Orthodox Church, but for you, Sheri, that's a bigger deal because you are already part of a pretty well-established and networked Christian community. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, that was hard. I mean, there's a process. And I always kind of maintain that there isn't really anyone like in the Discord community necessarily who's like 100% satisfied with their faith background or they wouldn't be there. I don't know if that's true, but they're at least open to discussion. Yeah. Or they're being in Discord. That's a good way to say it. I think that's fair. And well, you know how it is, Paul. I don't know if all the viewers will, but living overseas outside of American Christianity, it's sometimes difficult, often difficult to enter back in. And I'd already been feeling a lot of that over the years and it had kind of been highlighted in certain ways. Part of it was just one of the scholars that I respected had started changing his views on gender. I've been reading some stuff about gender roles. The culture here had been changing and I was just like, whoa, what's, I was just like, where, what's happening? I don't know. And I was having a little bit of, part of it was private, part of it was just like, wait, I'm sent overseas to preach the gospel to men and women. And then it came back to America and like, yeah. Depending on where you are in evangelicalism, a woman may or may not be able to preach to women and men. And this was, I never wanted to be a pastor or anything. These were just things I was wrestling with. And then the issue of the Eucharist. And I kind of looked into briefly or had a lot of conversations with like Andreas on Discord about Catholicism and was watching Scott Hahn or Zon, Scott, us watching some Catholic people and just didn't go super far into it. I was in Guinea, I was doing my thing. I always maintained, if I stay in Guinea, I can stay in missions and I can stay where I am because I'm kind of away from the baggage. Yeah, there's a lot of freedom actually when you're being a missionary overseas that you don't quite have in North America. It's kind of funny. Yeah, and in the same way, there was a lot, I was working in a Muslim culture and I was seeing a lot of what my Muslim community was doing right that I was not, I was not able to present to them an equivalent within my faith background as far as- I mean, I'm not sure if you have a question about that, but I'm sure you have a question about that because people will hear that and not know how to process what you just said. Yeah, well, just there was a lot of questions that I didn't feel like I could tell that they weren't satisfied with the answers. They would ask me, how do I pray? And within my background, there's no postural way of praying. There's no formulaic praying. For them, they have a way to pray. Right. You know, why aren't you fasting at Ramadan? Right. There's a whole embodied feature for them that everyone from a baby to a grandfather participates in that I wasn't, I couldn't give any equivalent to. And as far as, you know, just like a liturgical calendar that there were a lot of things within Islam that I thought really synced with like the deepest level of humanity that I didn't really have a way of meeting with my answers. And then, so I was very, I was like pretty open at the point of coming back. I mean, I remember talking to another friend of mine who's single and being like, I get married. They have to, it has to be about their relationship with God less than if they're Catholic or if they're Orthodox. I hadn't really heard about orthodoxy pre-discord. And Dave W and Daniel did a lot of answering questions for me on the discord. So, and I knew Nathan, this will take a different track, but you know, you joke about the Bridges of Meaning being a matchmaking place, but, and you know, I know it was a joke, but like the bachelor or bachelorette Bridges of Meaning thing. I don't think, like, I think the strength of Bridges of Meaning community is that that isn't a factor. Cause that's how I, like, that's how I even was able to trust Nathan as much to message him was like, I knew he had no, he wasn't like making his posts based on single women in the community cause there was like four of us for one thing. If you're posting on Bridges of Meaning to attract the attention of single women, you are in the wrong place. Absolutely. And he had already like said something at one point about like some like I've never dated a Protestant or something like that. I said I would only marry an Orthodox woman and I meant it. And I knew that going in and I wasn't close, like, you know, because of this whole journey I'd been on, you know. So after Tennessee, after we kind of were like, okay, yeah, we like each other in person, I started attending the Orthodox church in Tulsa. And again, I feel like that was just very providential because, you know, as I mentioned, I had been, I was still, you know, I'm still like kind of recovering from this like traumatic period I had been in in the summer of 19 and the priest there, he's a Vietnam War vet and he has done a lot of, you know, counseling and research and reading on trauma. And he, you know, he pointed me to some books, Nathan and I for our wedding present, he gave us the ethics of beauty that you've, I'm sure, seen floating around on different. And that's been, you know, super helpful for me. So I was attending, they had a class for inquirers that I was attending. And then when I was having a lot of talks with that priest, Sherry and I were kind of comparing notes because we went, you know, she's been exploring orthodoxy for a long time too. And then in March I was baptized and chrismated into the Orthodox church. So you were rebaptized. Yeah, that was- One of those orthodox. Thanks, that was the same call, you know. My dad baptized me. So yeah, you know, my family, my friends, my church circles, my supporters, there were different layers that I had to work through. And that- Go ahead. I'm sorry, I'm talking a lot. No, no, please. No, you're doing great, keep going. Well, you know, that was hard for me. I'm not, you know, by personality, the lever, I kind of like stable long-term things. So leaving the mission field and then leaving these, you know, church communities. I grew up, I grew up in the same church all my life. And then I established a really good home church in college. You know, I had really nothing for the most part, but positive as far as in the relationship department. You know, I had a lot of people who raised me in the faith. So yeah, that wasn't easy. I do feel like, you know, my time, and I'm not necessarily, you know, someone, like I feel like I did kind of go through a stage where I was maybe like orthodoxy, orthodoxy, for everyone, but I'm not necessarily someone who's like, you know, all Protestants should become orthodox. That's not where I am, but just for my- You're not an ortho bro? Right, yeah. All right, I try not to be. I think I was at one point, but I, yeah, I think it would be dishonest to say like, if Nathan weren't in the picture, things would have moved at the speed they did. But I knew when I was planning on or looking at returning home, that it was, something was probably gonna need to change as far as church participation. And it's hard to go back into the same box once you, for me, as far as where I was. So yeah. That's, there's a lot of big stuff in there. Yeah. There's a lot of big stuff in there. So how long have you two been married now? Six months, almost exactly. Yesterday was our sixth month, yeah. Well, first year, first year marriage is no small thing. So we keep hearing our priest wife say something like, she was like, oh, the first seven years are the worst. I was like, what? I think that's different for different people. I'm sure that's true. But I've heard the first year is tough. Yeah, my first, our first year of marriage, that was a tough year for us. I mean, we didn't live together or anything like that. And we did it, we engaged for, how long were we engaged? A year, engaged for a year and then married in first year. It was, it's two different people, especially, I mean, right now, so many people live together. And so I, which I still think is a bad idea, but. So how is, I mean, how then is church participation and church life being a couple? Yeah, I haven't thought about that, but I mean, it's been very different because I was, I was very plugged into our local parish. It's a small church, like on a given Sunday, probably between 40 and 60 people. Okay. It's been, I mean, I think it's, it's been a hundred year anniversary was last, it was during COVID at some point, we didn't get a chance to actually do like this. That's a small church to last a hundred years. Well, it was Antiochian. So a lot of Lebanese in the early 20s, I might not be getting the dates exactly right. And there's still like a strain of, you know, families from Lebanon. We have some Syrians as well. Okay. I'd say about a third or Middle Eastern, some way and the rest are converts. But I was pretty plugged into the church. I mean, whenever I joined or I started attending, I just showed up to everything and there's a lot of stuff going on. And they're like, oh, okay. Well, we'll put you to work or we'll do it, you know. Like there's a lot of things. What small churches do. Yeah, which was great. It was great for me. And become very close with them. And then since Shelly's been there, yeah, how's it changed for me? I'm trying to think. I mean. When he says local, it's a 40 or 50 minute drive for us. It's not in our town. Oh, okay. So that is pretty significant. I wish we're different, but. Well, with an evangelical background, I would imagine that it's a little easier to go in the Orthodox direction. Cause evangelicals are already sort of primed to, well, Baptist, you know, they've all got these labels, but as long as there's Jesus and yeah, you can do some different things, but you don't really need the skinny jeans and you don't really need, you know, old rugged cross. So your family, your family okay with this for the most part? Yeah, I'd say for the most part. You don't have to say anything you don't want to say. I'm not going to lean on you at all. I mean, you know, there was some pushback, but it was like multifaceted. It was like, wow, he's moving fast with you and Nathan. Wow, we don't really know him. Yeah. Wow, this, what is Orthodox? It was, you know, it's like kind of all combined. It's a lot of new stuff. It's all very reasonable. Yeah. Yeah. Well, what's church going to church like, because you know, like people are like, oh, it's like, hey, I haven't even visited an Orthodox church and I lie to say, I have a lot of motivation to. Every now and then I'm, you know, online. And of course, Orthodox churches were online during COVID and I'd look and it'd be like, I don't think that's for me, but. Yeah. Well, I looked at Orthodoxy a little bit and like Luke sent me like a live stream of his church. And watching the service is not, yeah, it didn't do it for me at all. Yeah. I was like, is this it? Like, did it start? Like what's happening? You know? Yeah. It's a very participatory thing. So. Yeah, I didn't realize, we were talking the other day because, you know, in all the Orthodox, I mean, I've only visited maybe 10 or so Orthodox churches beside mine, but all of them, the children are like in the congregation and they're like running around and they're crying. And, you know, people get. And that way, the children are in there, they're running around and they're crying. If you just leave that right there, it sounds, you know, that could go a lot of different ways. There are children in there and they're running around and they're crying. How schooled are they, like the way that things could be miscommunicated on YouTube. Oh, okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I just mean, like, so in one sense, what I was trying to get at is one sense, I mean, like, especially the liturgy, it doesn't, like, there's not a lot of change. Like you might change a few verses here and there, but it's the liturgy. We're not going to change it. But on the other hand, like, it's sort of free flowing. Like throughout the service, someone will come in late and they might go up to the, like, the kind of stasis and kiss it and the kids are running. And so it's like, there's like, what I liked about the Orthodox church. It's like a Haitian church. I guess. Sure. And going during the service and in and out, you know? Yeah. Much, in one way, way more formal and in another way, not. Right. So I mean, and that sort of speaks to what attracts me to Orthodoxy to begin with was, you know, there's, we have our dogmas with our ecumenical councils, which, you know, we share with a lot of folks. But like within, as long as you're not like stepping too far outside of certain boundaries, there's a lot of room to, there's a lot of freedom within the boundaries. That's been my experience, my limited experience. Oh, and you know, you're, I mean, for Shelley, for you, this is, I mean, you're used to, you know, songs three fast, three slow, one to get ready and one to go. I mean, that's evangelicalism. And you got the big sermon, you know, starts about halfway through. And it's sort of the primary focus of the service. And of course, I would imagine you have a ton of liturgy and it leads to the climax of the Eucharist. And so that's a big transition in terms of your, the practice, although again, as a missionary, that was, I'm sure for you, quite disrupted. Because with a lot of expats, even if you're, you know, for myself in the Dominican Republic, we had some mission, we had one missionary in particular that felt it very important that he would worship with the people that he was ministering to. And that would be their primary focus of worship. But what happened with that missionary was that missionary's church more than just about any other church looked like this little transplant from North America. Instead of with most of the rest of the Haitian churches, it was much more a creation that was, you know, sort of fit for their culture. But then you come in as a missionary, faith languages are so intimate. Yeah, yeah. I mean, I was part of a Bible translation work. So language is very much the foundation of, but we attended a, I think it was actually started originally by the CMA, but it was national leadership, national leadership and everything now. But we attended, we like had a goal. I think I set myself a goal like two to three Sundays a month, because that was not where I recharged spiritually. That was, I almost viewed it as more of a ministry. And as time went on, you know, and I got more comfortable in the culture, it was less of a dream, but it was still always longer than I wanted it to be. It was always, it was always hot and still in the room. It was always, you know, awkward questions and you know, unmet expectations on my end. And I hate, you know, I'm very much a people pleaser. My life in West Africa was good way to cure that, but you know, you just live in a constant state of not meeting people's expectations. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, and so church, national church was more, you know, and sometimes I don't, I really loved how much they prayed. They prayed quite a lot. And I loved that, but you know, it was more of a drain than a charge. We did a house church on our porch at night with, like a national believer and we prayed then. And sometimes, you know, and then we also did sometimes just house church with the three or five of us, whoever was there as far as the Americans, English speakers. So it was just kind of a mixture, but that was always a balance we were trying to figure out my whole time. Yeah. What's my church? What's my... Yeah. What's happening? I totally relate to that. So as far as, you know, what you said, that the songs and the music, I hadn't, I was already, you know, I was listening to you. I was already like not totally content with American church format as I knew it at that point. And then when I came back for my home assignment that spring, like I said, churches were closed. And then I started visiting the Orthodox church. So I never, yeah, it had been my plan to go ahead and do like a tour of my supporting churches, but, you know, do a goodbye presentation, all this kind of thing. But with COVID, it just, it didn't work out that way. I did like a lot of Zoom meetings with supporters and elders boards and things like that. But I think my setup might have been a bit different than the CRC, I'm not sure, but I, you know, I did all my support raising like through personal relationships and personal relationship with the churches. I don't know how the CRC did that. The CRC is mostly, it's still, it's transitioned a lot, but it's mostly still supporting churches. And that's probably true that there are individuals in those churches that support individual missionaries more, but the covenantal aspect of the CRC has been dissolving for a century. So it's more and more looking like faith missions than even when I was in it 25 years ago. So. Wow, wow. So that brings us up to date. Now, where do we go from here? Those are, that's, you know, that's my job. You guys wanted this meeting. Let's hear it. What do you need to say? What do we need to say? Well, should we tell them? Yeah. Well, we already told Discord, but this is more, yeah. We're having, well, Shelly's pregnant, we're pregnant. Ah, I thought there was, I heard whispers. Okay. So congratulations. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah, everyone's very happy. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, we live in my hometown and my parents still live here. My grandma's moving in, so everyone's very happy. Yeah. If there's a way to sort of, you know, put parents at ease and give them a shot of happiness, nothing like a grandchild. Yeah. Although you're a little further away, so they're just like, oh, I wish it was here. The constant refrain from my parents has mostly been, you know, it's closer than West Africa. Yeah. Which is true. Yes. It is, you know, it is kind of a long old drive. It's a two-day drive. But... We're gonna work it out. There's no other choice. Yeah. And we talked about that pretty early in our dating. Yeah. And I just am kind of, at this point, used to the model of moving to a new place and making it home from, you know, my life thus far as an adult. So, yeah. Oh, good grudge. I'm so, I just, I was reading a thing. I did a conversation with Kale Zeldin and Rod Drew this morning. And then I got sent another blog by somebody else. And I guess at the, at an East Coast Peterson event in the question and answer, someone asked, you know, what do you wish you had done differently when you were young? And he said, I wish I had started having children more quickly and had more of them. And of course, Mikaela is answering the question and answer totally took her by surprise. She was delighted at least. So, but no, children are an enormous blessing from God and our culture is, has a strange relationship right now with bringing children into the world, but, you know, good on you two. There's, you know, my wife and I have five children and I have, I was the one that sort of called it at five. My wife probably would have gone further. I don't know, but I have absolutely zero regrets about having the size family that we have because there's, it's, it is astoundingly meaningful. And, you know, my children are now one just turned 31, the rest are in their twenties, but gosh, what a, what an adventure. Nothing, nothing like it in this world full of digital amusements and distractions. There's nothing like having children, bringing them into the world and continuing to relate to them. So good for you guys. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah, I, when I first went to West Africa and was making friends, I was in my mid, mid twenties. Yeah. And somebody said, yeah, you're, I think they, you know, they always ask you how old you are. And at that point I was in my mid twenties and like, oh, well you need to, like, you need to do everything you can to get married and have kids, right? You know, like, and I was, you know, at the point where I was in life, I just kind of like not scoffed at it, but I was like, yeah, this is, that's the culture here. Ha ha ha. But I'm 35 now and I do, it's hard to say I wish, you know, we, it's hard cause Nathan and I always say like, if we had met any earlier in our timelines, like, it wouldn't have worked. Yeah, yeah, yeah. God knows what he's doing, but I do think I were younger, but like, that's just the way, you know. Hey, hey, mission accomplished at your age right now. Like I said, 35 is not a reach. I mean, my wife, we had, I think my, our youngest, my wife had, shoot, I haven't done the math really. My wife was 34 when we had our last one. So, so 35 is by no means, and, and actually going back 50, 70 years, women would often continue to have children into their forties and even sometimes into the early fifties. So it does get harder, but you know, you're not too late. Yeah. We were just talking to my mom and her dad was the youngest of 12 and the last, the last child she had, she had my grandpa, I think she was 40 or 41. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I'm super happy for the both of you. Thank you. We really just wanted to come on to like, to, to gloat with you. No, not gloat. Gloat, gloat. I'm, I'm celebrating with you. I mean, that's what I mean. I was being anything I've said wrong. No, no, no, no. We're just, yeah. We're, we wanted to share in the celebrating. So. Um, did you want to show that? Oh yes. Um, so the Bridges of Maine community got together and got us a Christmas gift. You probably. No, a wedding gift. Oh yeah. Sorry, wedding gift. It's Peugeot's thing. Yeah. Peugeot's thing. So cool. Yeah. So thank you guys for that. It's very much appreciated. Well, yeah, we've just been very blessed. Well, I think this is awesome. And I'm glad that we had a chance to, you're going to let me share this, right? Yeah. Oh yeah. Oh, okay. I was going to say, we did all this. Nate, you already, I mean, our conversation was a good one. That was a good conversation. And I totally get, you know, people are like, no, we can't share this. I totally understand that because sometimes we're like, I want to share. I'm like. Really? But other times, I mean, it's a great conversation. Like, oh gosh, I wish I could share. It's just not appropriate. So. Something special. I forgot to mention Cassidy got to come out for a wedding. Oh yeah. Oh really? Yeah. That was wonderful. Yeah. My idea, my hope had always been for Sherry to come as she was kind of the, not only she was, she's the one that got together, but then for me, probably not for you, I don't know, but she was the encourager along the way too. Yeah. So like, if I had a free gap, she'd be like, Well, Sherry's, you know, I mean, I had Sherry as another one of those early conversations that I had. And she had such a powerful story, but you know, Sherry's, Sherry's lived some life and she's got wisdom. And that, and if you've, if you've lived life and you've got wisdom, and if you're in bed in a community where the majority of people are younger than you are, and they have to figure out how to make their way and making your way in this world is not easy. Sherry's doing what Sherry needs to do in terms of sharing your wisdom. And because by nature of sort of this weird community that we've got, we've got way, we've got way more older dudes than younger dudes too. So some of these women that are in the community that have some life wisdom and they got to step up and do what Sherry's doing. So, I mean, I know, I know she's irritated when I say what I do about her on the discord, but it's just true. She's, she's, she's helping, especially the women along. And, and she does it so, she does it with, she does it humbly and without presumption, but also candidly and forthrightly. So that's just who Sherry is. Absolutely. Yeah. You're preaching the choir, Paul. Yep, yep, yep, yep. He wasn't able to come for the wedding because of COVID, but we honor. Oh, we also met Nate, who you spoke with. That's right. Which Nate? The one in Nathan and Tulsa. He- Engineer, well, was an engineer, has- Was Episcopalian. Has an Oklahoma accent. Oh, okay. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That was a fun conversation too. Yeah, we had some, we had some fun conversations with Nate, so. Oh, good. Yeah, that's good. Well, I'm, I, you know, I really do hope that in the future we can have more in-person meetings because that is really fun. I got the chance to, you know, I haven't, I haven't met so many of you in person, which is kind of too bad. Sometimes people swing through Sacramento, but you know, Cassidy, I met Cassidy when I was in Tucson. She came down from Phoenix and so it's really good, so. Yeah, I did get to stop in on the Arkansas camping trip. So I got to meet Sam and Jeff and Jacob and someone else. Yeah, yeah, that was a cool thing, their little camping trip that they did. And the guys became Orthodox. I don't know. Sorry, you know, sorry, yeah, it was neat. It was neat to meet people in person. Yeah, and they did one, they did one in Europe, in Germany they had one. So it's totally cool. Well, you guys, this has been great fun and I can't wait to post this and share it because it's helpful to, I mean, it's a little weird, it's a little weird, our little online avatars and our little stories, but I think it does, I mean, these stories are very real and I think they do help people. Everyone's story's different, so the people are pretty good at sort of learning from them and gleaning a bit of wisdom and hopefully helping them on their way. And who was, I forget who it was that, you know, again, we were joking at my house about Bridges of Meaning, Discord, and there was some woman, oh, it was, it was the recent villain in the Bachelor story, Shanae-Nae or something, Shanae, something like that. That was not right. You're more up on the Bachelor. Yeah, and my wife's like, you should recruit her for the Bridges of Meaning and I thought, well, you know, Bridges of Meaning, she was a rough one, she was a villain in that show, but hey, Bridges of Meaning, folks, they're not wilting wallflowers on that Discord. It's a- It is a rough and tumble place. It is a rough and tumble place. We do practice rough and tumble play with each other, at least in a virtual way online. And so yeah, now, if you wanna, if your court's sort of shy and reserved, probably you jump into that Discord, and be ready to speak your piece and, you know, defend what you think and stand up to people, they'll respect you for that. Yeah. Anyway, you guys, thank you so much for this. Thank you, Paul. When's the baby due? Any ideas? End of July, 1st of August time. End of July, 1st of August. Yeah. All right, all right. Well, we look forward to that. We've been, you know, Job, of course, had his baby and I think there'll be more. So look forward to seeing pictures. It's extra special with Job because when I was first on and, you know, we had all these real talks on there and he talks about, he was really sad that he wasn't gonna be a father. Yeah. And I had a private message and I was like, you know what, I feel your pain. I'm really sad that it looks, I mean, just, you know, on this track I'm on, it doesn't look like I'm gonna be a mom. And, you know, we just kind of commiserated about it and now we're- And you're both on the way. Yeah. So cool. All right, you guys, it was great to talk to you. You too. You too. Take care. Bye. Bye-bye.