https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8EPlLve_o84

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to give more details of the appearance that I'm going to make in Melbourne, Australia. Some of you have been coaching me on how to say some of these names properly. So Melbourne, Austri... maybe I'm getting it wrong. Write it in the comment section. March 30, 2019. The name of the event is the Melbourne Conference 2019. What can we learn from the Jordan Peterson phenomenon? And I will be there. It'll be a day-long conference. I have links both to this website that talks about the conference and also the Eventbrite website where you can purchase tickets. Speakers. Jordan Peterson will not be there, to the best of my knowledge and purpose, in person. But our hopes, and we still haven't... Peterson has agreed to this, but we don't have a date for videotaping this. But the idea is that he and I and John Anderson will have a three-way conversation about the kinds of things that all three of us are interested in, I suppose. And that video will be played at the conference. And that video will premiere at the conference if we can make it work. At this point, I believe John Anderson will be there. So he and I will have an opportunity to talk. I will be really giving a lot of summary to everything I've learned over the last year and the kinds of pulling together. My videos are really much more first draft things. And what I present at the conference will much more be integrated, edited, distilled down. And obviously there'll be opportunities for questions and answers. There'll be breakout sessions. It should be a really fun day. I will have all the details to the event in the... They'll be on the websites. They'll be in the notes here. So this is the announcement. If you live in Australia and you're anywhere near Melbourne in that time slot, put it on your calendar. Get yourself a ticket. Seats are limited. And I'd love to meet you there.