https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8ANFxQBn8NU

 Hi, this is Paul. In case you have not watched it, definitely go and watch the channel. I'll put the link to it below on Molly Worthen's story of entering Christianity. Now, the first 30 minutes of the video was sort of in-house, evangelical talk about all kinds of things. You can skip that if you're not interested in that sort of stuff. There's some Francis Safer stuff in it, but definitely catch her story because it's an incredible story and it's well told. Those of you who have been watching the channel for a while know that I read her book, Apostles of Reason, years ago. It's a terrific book on the history of neo-evangelicalism. She's a tremendous historian and a scholar and she's been teaching. I'm not going to do a commentary on the video basically because I think my commentary would distract from it. Basically, just dive into this video and listen to her story. I'll just play a little bit at the end. She's just so transparent and honest and I pray she can stay that way. I don't know if she has any understanding of the power of the internet and what something like this can do or how the rest of her life is set up, but I just really wanted to draw your attention to it. I'm grateful for the opportunity to talk through with a seasoned Christian like you because, as I think I said at the outset, I still can't believe that it happened. I think I have the self-serving motive of hoping that sharing my story with your listeners will introduce me to a few more Christian friends. I've made a few really important Christian friends over the past year, but I still feel isolated. I'm still looking for people who can mentor me because, you know, in some ways I bring to my new Christian identity a lot of a certain kind of knowledge, but it's a very narrow kind of knowledge. So, you know, a lot of people are like, oh, you should talk to her. Obviously, if she wants to talk, I'll talk. She doesn't know who I am. I'm not going to really butt into her life. The whole story is just incredible. Where all this goes, you never know. One of the things that you learn as a pastor is that every story is different. Everyone has an individual path. Everybody has their ups and downs. The whole story is just absolutely incredible. I just want to do a little video. I'll put the link down below. By all means, watch it and let me know what you think. It's really astounding.