https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ELo279fyc3Y

 Miss anything. How have you been? Well, life here has been unpredictable, interesting. It hasn't turned out quite the way I expected, but that's life. Never does. Yeah. So, but no, I'm no longer working with the museums that I thought I was going to work with. Part of that, it's a long story. You can pick up a bit of it in the recent essay I wrote on my gravity from above site. But basically though, I'm still staying here. And it's just, you know, it's like I, you know, I realized at a certain point, I'm not getting out of it anything out of this other thing, but there are all these other things here. I am getting something out of and they're good enough to make me just go like, okay, let's just cut the cut what we're not supposed to be doing and do what we are supposed to be doing. So I look at it as a good, it was like God's joke with me to get me, not on me, but with me. Yeah. Because I assume certain things happen as soon as I found out about them, even like going back months. I, as soon as I did it, I just started laughing and not because I just, it wasn't just that it was absurd. It was just like, okay, yeah, that was a good chess move to get me here. Play it on my ego a little bit. Yeah. Yeah. But it's, I don't know. You're you've had such an interesting life and I very much admire your, your devotion to your devotion to the art and and the art of following and you know, I, you know, I don't listen to all your stuff, but you know, I can, I can sense the struggle in terms of, well shoot, guys got to eat. George is a little cheaper, but you know, you know, you're not, you know, you're not, you're not Jordan Peterson getting 10,000 a month on Patreon. Oh no. But fortunately the, the, you know, the people I have had on my account have kept help keep me afloat whether they know it or not, you know, just through a lot, you know, I realized how much money I spent getting here, putting my stuff in storage, renting all this money. I could have used for something back in Alaska. Yeah, but I say no, it's right though. You know, it's like it's it, you know, and part of it is also it's so easy. When you get older to fall into certain habits just because they're comfortable. Yeah. And I felt myself kind of slipping that way and I just said, no, it's time to stick my finger in the electrical socket, you know, time to just, you know, and it was great. I had some friends visiting. I took them up into the high caucuses which are absolutely astounding. I mean, you're at like seven, 8,000 feet and you're looking on either side of you in this narrow Valley and it's just going up on either side. It's just the smoothest pasture land going up another 3,000 feet. And people I was in the small village show with just all this ancient stone fences and stuff. It was really quiet and I was with my friends. We were going to stay in this largerville place that was had more like tourist amenities, but I was so glad I chose the smaller place because I was just so cool. People driving cows through the village and and you could just look up in the mountains then way off. You'd see the really tall like 1500 15,000 foot mountains and stuff and it was just like wow. So but it was just that helped kind of renew myself. Okay, that's part of what I'm doing here because I haven't really explored that much. I had a lot of mountains in Alaska. So I wasn't really rushing to go do that. Well, the mountains don't go anywhere. No, you know, unless somebody with the camera. Kind of faith that Jesus talks about tells him to up and move short of that. Yeah, they're staying put. This big. Sometimes I wish I had that much. That's right. That's right. That's right. Well, and some of the pictures and video that you've sent of Georgia, you know, just seems to be a fascinating country, you know, beautiful country. It's not a place that North Americans think about much except of course, where Stalin came from but you know beyond that. I mean do they do people even know that these days, you know, it's like true. I mean, you have someone say under 40 years old, you know, what do you know about Georgia? Maybe they know more now because it's starting to get a little press but but speaking of Georgia, I just started a new third YouTube channel called Georgian Crossroads and I put up one kind of introductory video on it. I'm about to put up the one called basic facts of Georgia, but I've got tons of stuff but it's it's kind of like juggling this but now that I'm no longer thinking about the museums and stuff. I'm getting a regular rhythm for how to produce videos more and such. So well and you've obviously got some mad editing skills for for resurrecting and saving that video of the Joker that I did. I really appreciate that. Yeah. Yeah. Well, one of the things I've learned I'm did you have a chance to watch my video on the Joker? Yes, I did. I thought it was tremendous. I thought it was so helpful. Some of my editing skills, especially in the first couple of seconds there. I have all the jokers laughing at the same time over each other. Yeah, I thought that was a tremendous video. I you know, I knew nothing. I mean, I love talking to you because it's sort of like visiting the library or or do googling some interesting things because you have so much knowledge of so many areas that I know so little about that and you know, the the tradition and the history around clowns and jesters. I thought all of that was just so tremendously helpful. Yeah. Well part of it is because I've been interested in puppets for a long time, but going back before that I've been interested in horror films for you know, since I was young and I'm also interested in, you know, fantasy science fiction. I am interested in just plain history. So it's like I juggle these things and the way I look at my knowledge is. Yeah, you your your video froze for me, but your audio was still coming through. We'll see if we will see if we still have you. Oh, I you know, I wouldn't when you dropped out. I thought could be the internet although they've been working on the internet here. So mine hasn't been too great here at church lately, but also could just be the power because when I lived in the Dominican Republic, you know the power go off power come on and we know it's just internet. I think I have a very old modem. So it's it's just very funky and I just have to kind of go over turn it off and on let it reboot. But first I have to you know, I try it here and then I go over there anyway. So where were we? We're talking about we were talking about well, you're you're you had an interest not only in in puppetry which gets no respect but also because I was listening to somebody else and they were be puppetry just gets no respect but then clowns and I thought it was so and also horror films which is unusual because to me they're all connected and yeah, well and I'd like to know more about how they're connected and I really was interested in, you know punch and Judy how that came through. I thought you brought that through nicely in your video and that's punch and Judy is something that you know knowing puppet history the way I do. It's just like second nature to me to know that and and once you know the story of Punch and Judy as I as I mentioned in the video Punch and Judy comes from the Italian Commedia Dell'arte which involved the masks and the masks come from the carnivals and the carnivals like the Venice Carnival still has the mask today and in fact they become more popular in the last few years and I think it's partly because we've entered this very strange time where the mask has taken on a new significance in culture. So whether it's Antifa or the clown mask like you saw in the Joker movie or you know the Hong Kong the Hong Kong protests. They're all very nice masks. Yep, and it's a you know, it's obviously for Antifa in Hong Kong. It's a very pragmatic attempt to mask identity exactly but this is all still there. That's right. Yeah. I mean if you remember the 60s it wasn't there right even though there was there was a lot of you know protesting and marches and was wearing masks. Yeah, you know, yeah and I've actually been thinking a lot about the award of this particular time and I think a lot of it goes back to Seattle in 1999. There was that big upset protest then that had to do with left-wing kind of stuff and they had they they brought puppets to it this big cardboard turtle and stuff like that and that was connected to the earlier kinds of protests, but it started something new at that point and I think we would have seen a lot more of that at the beginning of the the odds had we not had September 11th and then what happened was once we got to about 2008 Barack Obama suddenly this stuff slowly started coming back in more and more although in Europe it was kind of had was mutating that's where you get the Antifa and all the rest of it. So but anyway the the clowns and puppets to me. I mean to me the most fascinating thing about the clown as I point out in that video is that we live in the most fun obsessed age there ever was you know, I think was Pascal said you know people live for diversion. They would rather he's talking about playing pool. He said they'd rather push a ball around in a on a table then they would think about their lives and think about God. You know, he said the hardest thing for anyone is to sit in their room for an afternoon alone. So we live in this very strange age where we have endless distractions and we've also these distractions that they tempt us back into this well, you know, use the word adult tests or there are other words to describe this prolonged juvenile period that people are now going through when I was young you didn't meet people who there was nobody who was like acted like children for so long, you know who now play Yeah, play board with their family, but it wasn't like an obsession the way video games are they might be into movies, but if they were for instance in the 60s and 70s way people were into movies was on a very scholarly level, you know, I mean that was like the heyday of film scholarship really and film criticism and you had all these repertory theaters and people would go and I remember going to see Fellini films and Bergman went into everything was Star Wars and that started everything where we have where we are now. You know Star Wars kind of starts this new kind of culture. It wasn't obvious at the time because I think most of the Star Wars fans were like me or like a lot of people are in Georgia. It's just a fun movie. You know, you just went and saw it. No, I was nice but you live there. Whereas now people live in Star Wars. They live in the Marvel comic universe. They live in the DC universes, you know, they live in all these things which is what makes the Joker such an interesting home because the Joker says you can't live here. That's the first film to come along and say that it doesn't tempt you. You'd have to be an idiot to want to live in that world, right? You know, I mean it goes back what it does is it goes back to the 70s and picks up that dark times. I like what you were saying. I heard your video today where you're talking about, you know, Patterson, New Jersey. There was New Jersey and they went and filmed in New Jersey and you know, we were both we remember those times in New York one way or another. And you know, those were not, you know, those are darker times. Oh, they were they were and and what were you in New York during the Bernie Getz shooting? I mean, yeah, yeah, yeah, that was a huge deal in New York during that time. And when I and so when I saw that scene in the Joker movie, it's like, oh, this is a very interesting twist on Bernard Getz and the subway shooting and the big, you know, you know, that was, you know, it's it's weird because the 60s are really sort of 65 to 75 and the 70s are really sort of 75 to 85, you know, when it comes to New York and then after, you know, the late 80s you have the the friendification of New York and Rudy Giuliani who of course takes on whole new meanings today. It's the it's the they were still dark in the 90s. I left in 96 and in 96 as I was leaving I could feel it all starting to change really coming. It's becoming the new like the shopping mall, New York. Yes. Yeah. And you have these big stores coming in and you had Times Square was changing into whatever it is now. This chaotic jumble of screens and sounds and noise and there's most commercial stores on earth. You know, I remember when you could go to Times Square, you know, you go into some arcade and get an ID a fake ID made for yourself or you could go to some store that had like they were having sales on rugs. They were getting rid of and another store that had all these like weird trinkets, but it wasn't it wasn't Hard Rock Cafe, right? It wasn't that, you know, the the Major League Baseball, you know that I kind of it wasn't these huge franchises that came squatting down there. Well, and so, you know in the in the late 70s, you know kids from our Christian school would sneak over to Times Square to go in the peep shows and so then when I when I hadn't been so I left, you know, I went to college in 81 and then I was back and forth in New Jersey until about 90 when I went to the Dominican Republic at married in 88 and after that, you know 90 I went to the Dominican Republic and so then it wasn't until 2006 that I got to New York City and I'd grown up there and I went there with a bunch of guys who hadn't been to New York much but what was so funny that prevailing, you know inside joke throughout that trip in 2006 was I didn't know the city at all because the city had completely transformed from one from the city that I had known into this other and and the Joker movie sort of you know, you know exactly right. It just it just put us right back and it was like wow, right. It was here. Go ahead. Here's the interesting thing about Todd Phillips the director a lot of people immediately will say well he directed movies like old school these other comedies and stuff and some of those like the hang on old school are pretty nihilistic on a certain level. Yes, they are and I don't think that's an accident and here's the important thing his furball was a documentary on the most scabrous punk recognition there ever was Gigi Allen who used to take his clothes off defecated on page and throw the audience in the documentary about these these the really the most low-life punks you possibly imagine following this guy until he eventually killed himself and he killed himself about a block away from where I live. So, you know, and I was there at the time so all of you know, I seen that documentary once and was just like oh strong. That's a strong drink of medicine because it's it's about how dark things got so he was connecting with this early late 80s early 90s in New York was actually a very interesting time culturally. We don't have a name for this time right now. I just use phrase post-modern we talked about alternative music and stuff, but it was really a time it was the end kind of the beginning of New York's if if let's say we could bracket it something like the post-war era you had Jackson Pollock and you had, you know, Willem de Kooning and all these artists you had the beat poets and all of this and this whole period with different waves of different kinds of you know hippies and pumps and all this stuff different kinds of artists art scenes and such performance artists and what not and this period I came in in 1982 and left in 96 but by about 94 you can feel 94 95 it was ending and that is like New York as Bohemia. I came back in 1998 and there was an artist who was good friend of another friend of mine who was an artist and my friend said there is no more Bohemia. There is no more countercultural Mecca that used to be in New York and it wasn't even about the internet yet. I mean the internet was coming in but that wasn't it. I in fact I went to there was a one of the hippest places in New York City in the early 90s was a weird zine store where they show sold all these like magazines homemade magazines about different mute counterculture project scenes and I went into this one store and I said to the guy actually was in 2002. It was after September 11 and right after I came back just to see what the city was like and and I went to this guy's store and I said, you know, I left here in 1996 and there doesn't seem to be any new mixed scenes that are represented by magazines. You should there be like a new music scene every other year there and he looked and suddenly he got this like weird looking as I said, you're right and the place was closed within a year. It just that was like the sense of being on the edge there was just disappearing and so I'm part of it by that time. It was all going into the internet this the weird chaos of different cultures and such but so that you didn't need a physical place but but no Todd Phillips was definitely soaked in this aesthetic of of artistic nihilism and such and in a way there was an honesty to that because you know, they looked around and they saw I mean if you if you looked at someone like G G and and you saw the extremes to which and he was certainly wasn't the only one going to extremes the extremes to which people were taking the music and the sounds and and how purposefully ugly people were making things and you said to yourself how much farther can this go? In fact, I remember going to a concert at that time by these guys from Pennsylvania Pittsburgh came in and they were doing noise concerts and it looked like a rock show. But when you went in there it was like 45 minutes of the most ear splitting pure noise I had heard and I went up to the guy afterwards because by this time I was I you know, I've been studying all the stuff for a while and I just walked up to him. I said the point of that was to create pain cause pain wasn't it? He goes like you got it. You got it. That's it. You know, and then then week I was talking to some other guy who was doing electronic dance music and he said to me. Yeah, I just want to do something that's just involving like pink noise. It's like high and I just want to people's ears and it was this kind of like, you know, violent sort of aggressive take this nihilism wanting but I think it was all about wanting to I mean even Gigi Allen for all his scatological just, you know, blasphemous actions was about trying to wake people up to the truth and of course his truth was there was nothing right. So you're going to wake up and then what right, you know, right. There is nothing but I think Todd Phillips comes out of that and so you feel that in the Joker. Yes, you do. In the movie Joker and I think Joaquin Phoenix actually present perfectly. Yeah, you know, well, you know one of the things that I think about in this. I mean, I love how you phrased it in terms of this movement from it kind of it kind of left the city and went up into the cloud into the internet and and and so then what replaces it because I remember, you know, just hearing because I'd be back in New Jersey just every now and then on home service and things and then I would hear these echoes of of grumbling from people of the city that you know, you know, basically Disney is destroying the city. Disney is destroying the culture and and but what you know what when when that kind of bleeding edge of even nihilism was in the city at least it was embodied and so, you know the the video that I just released this morning, which was kind of a failed at most of my videos are failed experiments. Was that the two-hour one? Yeah, it's a two-hour one. Yeah, I just watched most of that. Okay. Well, you know, you so you get to you know, you get to rationality rules and the you know, the environmentalists are complaining about the young people who will show up at all the protests right and give you all the talk but will clearly not embody, you know by even making relatively small changes in diet clearly not embody the the message and so, you know, not only I mean beliefs are just so completely disembodied right? Well, the problem is though there's a deep misanthropy in the the extreme eco movements and that is to say they would much rather save the planet and get rid of the people right? You know, and I'm I am waiting for the day when someone and you can almost hear it with someone like Greta Thunberg this anger and you know, the thing I saw in her like speech to the United Nations. It's just like oh my goodness. She disturbed. Yes. Yes, you could just see it in her face. Yes that that that you know, just this fanaticism and such but you know, I'm just waiting for someone to come along and say well the problem is we you know, and people have already said humanity is a virus. Yes. I mean, oh yeah, by comedians and rock musicians and agent Smith. Yeah for ages. So just waiting for someone to come along we need to cure the virus. We need to eliminate a good chunk of the population. It's Thanos. Yeah. Well, and exactly except of course that's like fun. You know, it's a fun Marvel movie. So people don't think about it in terms of themselves. But the truth is when you see stuff stuff like the what is it the extinction rebellion people the kind of crazy stuff they've been doing in London or you see just the you know, when people get this look in their eyes, you know, you see it in Antifa, but you can see it on the right as well. This the sense of we've got to do something and I don't know if you watched any of my time videos, but the most recent one that I put out it's it's I'm talking about evil and time and the thing about evil. It's interesting is it always seems to go with entropy and to increase the entropy where love always goes against entropy. So one of the things I point out is how much easier it is like if you're walking down say a street in New York how much easier it would be to do some random act of evil or your it's something that someone will remember for the rest of their lives even walking up commenting some snide comment on their nose or making pushing someone into traffic or swearing and so on the list is endless but to do anything genuinely loving to someone at random walking down the street is almost impossible because even if you give money to someone you don't know what they're going to do with that about the only things you can do is prevent an act of evil from happening. That's true. So it's love takes time and and and trust and knowledge and it doesn't happen immediately. So we live in a time where people are saying we want to change it now. We have to do it now or else and it's that now or else where the evil resides. I think that's where Joker is also brilliant on that level as well because it it it shows these people who are going crazy. You know, they've connected whatever their messages to Joker who is not saying the same thing, but he's just like becomes the God of Chaos to them. You know, he I'm convinced that's that movie is a warning to us that and I also think the movie is a game changer in the sense that there have been only a few movies that have been serious game changers in history. Psycho was one and psycho changed everything and essentially got us ready for the darker movies at the end of the 60s and the 70s. But then Star Wars is another because Star Wars creates although the jaws was a blockbuster before it Star Wars is is jaws was like a double. Star Wars was a home run followed by close encounters of the third time a year later and those that told the industry, okay enough of this soul-searching existential, you know, navel gazing, you know, let's cut this out. In fact, there's this long Western movie Heaven's Gate. Let's kill that thing in its infancy and you know, apocalypse now that will be near the end of raging bull. Okay, it's about dead now King of Comedy was one of the last ones like that interestingly enough and but you know, while the 70s style was dying what was taking over was this new blockbuster mentality, which is work thoroughly inside of that now with blockbuster mentality with these kind of like sarcastic postmodern Indies on the side and that became the reigning to strains of filmmaking. But I think that Joker just did something very fascinating. It hit the ball out of the park and if you go back to psycho the critics a lot of the critics hated psycho when it really came out. Oh, yeah, well, yeah, absolutely come out 1960. Okay, and they hated it and then by the end of the year they were putting it on top 10 lists. Interesting. Yeah, the same critics who like despised it in the New York Times and such so it's and because I think people felt attacked. Yeah, film does make you feel attacked but it was something very different that no one had ever seen before and only someone like Hitchcock could have gotten away with it because he was so respected. And I think he just said I'm just going to push the edge. But yeah, but I think you know, you know some people it's amazing the conversation that Joker engenders. Yes, and people, you know, I saw someone the other day whose film reviews I usually like and she could tell she had been reading all the people who were saying this Joker is a dangerous movie and such what even the fact that you think it's a dangerous movie. You know, you have another big problem to explain how is it making so much money? Well, and so, you know, I you know, I live in a I live at a very multi-ethnic area of town the film theater I go to mostly you know, African-American Asian. I mean not a lot of white folks around here. But those are great theaters to go to. Yeah, and so I went to all it's kind of a weird. I mean, it's kind of a weird California thing because the city of Sacramento built a new commercial area trying to recap money from the more distant suburbs that kind of took it away from like 20 years ago. And so there's this war back and forth between the city and the surrounding communities. But anyway, so so, you know, I look at you know, it's always interesting going to a going to a movie and looking around at seeing who else is seeing it and I would so love I would so love to you know, you can't do it of course in modern theaters like this, but I would so love to after a movie like that turn on the lights and get up in front and say tell me about what you just saw. Right exactly. Let's talk about this thing and that is what I saw here. Really the first time I saw it. It was a pretty crowded theater. But when I left there was about 15 Georgians who are just sitting in different parts of the theater talking about it as when the credits were finished rolling and I thought ha never seen that here before and then I went and saw it again so I could get some audio and also just to see it again, but to get some audio for my video and I thought okay and when it was done they applauded. Wow, this was like a week later. So how does this play in a I mean, I mean every even within you know, one of the things about the United States that you don't appreciate until you leave it is just how massive it is and how wealthy it is but also how how diverse it is really because and not even just ethnic diversity, but you know, Sacramento is different from the Bay Area, which is different from Southern California, which is different for New York City, which is different from New Jersey. And so, you know all of these all of the audiences have zip codes and all of the reactions will be different as well. So, you know watching movies when I lived in the Dominican Republic was always fascinating was fascinating to see what movies really got traction and people really loved in the DR. So a movie like Joker, how does that play in Tbilisi? I mean, what what is that? How does that interact with the culture there? Well part of it is understanding how all of American culture interacts here. And of course American culture is the dominant global, you know soft power as far as yes, you know, so wherever you go, there's American movies and and of course, it's really strange talking to people here about New York City say or or in California. Yeah, I mean, you know, here's what America is from here. There's New York City. There's Florida. There's Texas. There's California with Los Angeles and San Francisco maybe Seattle when I mentioned Alaska. They seem to know what that is. Although some of them might think it's Canada, but basically that's America is these these points and it's funny, you know, it's just and but there is an effect of American culture here or the West in general here and there's definitely a split here between the people who want to go with the new changes and the people who want to retain their Georgian identity and some of the people on the retaining the Georgian identity side are quite extreme because they feel completely threatened in a sense. You can get it with you know, the idea of Putin and stuff. Although these people hate Putin but still and then some of the people on the other side think they're being pretty cool because they're getting tattoos and dyeing their hair like a you know, kind of a washed out green or something like that and and what's funny though is, you know, I talked to them and I say like, well, you have to understand that to me even the supposedly coolest person here isn't all that cool because you're you don't get the context, you know, I mean of either here or Western Europe and so you're you know, I had a talk with a girl who's studying to be a lawyer and she was saying like, yeah, we need to loosen up and stuff. I knew what she was talking about, you know, talking about the personal freedoms and all this stuff. I said, yeah, what's funny though is like you're on one side of it. We're on the other, you know, you're on the side of looking at those kinds of freedom saying wouldn't it be great if our society was more like that and I'm on the side of saying that we got all those freedoms and I'll tell you it's becoming a real problem because after a while one person's freedom fights against another person's freedom and there's no cohesiveness anymore. And you know when I tell Georgians, you know, you know, I've talked to Georgians who you could tell are just like very like in their society. They think they're they're really out there and I talked to them. I said, well, let me tell you what's going on there and I just start relaying events and events and events, you know, like the kind of thing I read today where you know, what was it someone was well, there was something like last week where a kid was convicted in London of just you I think was using a word. You know, just one of the words you're not supposed to use convicted of that and then in Oxford today, it was reported that the clapping is been is there thinking of making it illegal to clap at Oxford. You can only use jazz hands Oxford. So, you know, this is what and I tell people the stuff here and they just don't believe it and I said, yeah, well the what you want is you want something between these extremes. Yeah, you don't want to just be stuck in the past, but you also don't want to be like there's no point in trying to be cool. You know, you know leads you to a dead end and I and when I've talked about the Joker movies people I go like and that movie is about the dead end. Yeah, you know, that's about the kind of things we are struggling with as a society and they kind of they don't quite see it like that because they don't have the call the context, but they certainly realize it's an important film, you know, and what's interesting here is that like, you know, we'll have we just finished having a Woody Allen retrospective one of the theaters here and couple weeks back before the latest Quentin Tarantino movie. We have a Tarantino retrospective you go there and saw in English, of course and but what's interesting is when I talk to people I've it's amazing. I've talked to several people say yeah, I want to go live in New York City and I said, I mean, do you have any idea for instance how much it would cost to live in New York City and they go like yeah, and I start talking to them and they start saying things like I hear the following word Woody Allen I'm going like that New York doesn't really exist anymore. Yeah, that's the New York I went to. Yeah, New York. I mean, I always look at my New York was a triangulation between me Woody Allen and taxi driver. That's what New York was about 1980, you know, and when I went there and but yeah, it's just it's a totally different place now and it's so it's so interesting the so I just this morning I finished watching actually watched it a couple of times this conversation between Tom Holland and a guy. I didn't know who he was. I I'll you'll be seeing this video because because I'll be making videos from it, right, but you know Holland is Holland is talking about, you know the at the the coming of it. He quotes and he quotes an Indian scholar who basically said, you know the West, you know, the West basically pushed two religions at the same time. One of course was Christianity and the other was this idea of secularism and secular culture and you know, I you know what you how you how you just described Georgia is so true of so I was in the Dominican Republic from 1990 to 1990 beginning of 1997 and you know, there were so America in the Dominican Republic was Nueva York, which is New York and Miami that was that was America for Dominicans and you know outside of Santo Domingo New York City has the largest concentration of Dominicans anywhere in the world. I used to live near a whole bunch of them. So the Lower East Side. Yeah, and and so, you know, it's it's so interesting how I think you I think you phrased it quite right quite correctly that we're we're sort of on the other side of this thing. But you know that the disneyfication is is a you know, is in a sense if we can't how can I get my words together here? I mean, it's I mean pluralism is of itself a place you can't live because by definition you might become a you might become a mosaic of entities from different cultures, but one person can't fundamentally be pluralistic and maintain an integral whole and so what happens is you know, we we went from movie theaters where people would would gather together and to Netflix where we're watching alone on screens. Now you probably don't have Netflix in Tbilisi. Actually, actually there is a system here. I won't go into it too much where I get almost everything from Netflix without paying for it. Yeah. Well, that was kind of the Dominican Republic as well. Right. You could you could get you know, the rest of the world massively rips off, you know, intellectual property rights. They don't pay for it. But it's you know, in many ways, it's the heart of the American religion, you know going out with I love how Jonathan Peugeot mentioned, you know, he was talking about this weird YouTube dynamic people watch you on and Jonathan Peugeot notes. He says well when you're looking at a screen you're seeing a being of light and it was like, huh, huh, this is this is really fascinating. But the how can America how can America address the pluralism and and resist the embodiment? Well, it does through just essentially through, you know, pure distraction. All we all we are left to do is distract one another and we have the we have the disembodied stories just a sequence of disembodied stories from, you know, a hodgepodge of cultural backgrounds and an incoherent cutting and pasting of messages and this reminds me of some some of what CS Lewis noted in the screw tape letters where you know screw tape notes to Wormwood, you know, the best way to have the best the best way to finally guarantee the the procurement of a human of a human soul is to essentially keep them distracted until they die. Just keep them in one long state of distraction. Right. Don't allow any silence in don't allow any real thinking in just keep them buzzing keep them and then boom and and that's that seems to be you know, what what America is pushing and of course, it's it's it's broad spectrum and I you know, one of the one of the crazy things. I don't know if you see it there but one of the crazy things is if you go into a restaurant, so there's a there's a Chinese buffet just down the road and of course Chinese buffets are all over the place and it's a seafood buffet and you go in there and what you see often are families where the entire family is sitting around a table each looking at their own screen. They've gone right right. They've gone out to eat. That's right. And they're eating and they're going through their screens and then you go even to some better restaurants and you know now you know, I one of the things I love to do is take my kids out to eat because it's like, you know, there's no screens. There's no distractions. It's it's pure eating together. But you just watch this thing happening and you just say well yeah, humanity is a virus and you know, maybe the embodied people will imagine, you know, killing people for the sake of the planet. But but people seem to be doing that quite readily themselves just by well, the thing is those embodied people are also just a disembodied, you know, and yeah distraction. It's endless and I'm convinced that's why fantasy has become such a big deal and as much as I like Lord of the Rings, poor old dear old token opened up a Pandora's box there that you suddenly everyone else started doing all this world building and creating a stuff and I know people who are Christians who just get sucked into this hole of you know, whether it's a world on a video game or a you know, one of the franchise things, but it's always some bigger thing. It's not it's not like they're making their own unique worlds or ideas. They're not creating a world where that no one's seen before there. They're inventing someone else's version of a fantasy world and then slightly tweaking it to make it their own if they're creating a whole world, but if they're not then they're totally invested inside say Game of Thrones or the Star Wars universe or whatever they're invested in this thing. I mean, I'm convinced one of the reasons why people got so upset over Game of Thrones ending. It wasn't simply that they thought the writing got bad. It's that it ended. Well, I know one of the what a real movie moment for me is right there at the end of the Truman Show where you have this complete engrossing in this story of course with Kristoff in the sky and this whole thing and then of course once he walks out the door gives his tagline shuts the door the show goes off and what do people do? You know, I love that the security guards. Let's see what's next on TV. Exactly. Exactly. Where today it would be swiping. That's right. Well, and I you know again, I mean maybe this video is two old guys lamenting the loss of New York City and the loss of the the world they grew up in but you know, I talked to people who you know, I look at these, you know, one of the interesting things in my local meetup that we talk about fairly often is what I call the loss of the generational handshake where you know father and mother have children children from different families meet create a new family have their own children. I mean, this is this general just generational handshake that goes on again and again and again and that has that is severely disrupted in the United States. Oh, yeah. And part of it is, you know, well, how do you meet someone? Well, I know that I began noticing about 10 years ago that when I would start talking to young couples, maybe I would marry them and maybe they just came into the church. Maybe I just met them. Well, they nobody would want to say but they met online and a lot of people would meet online. But of course that meeting online was something like eHarmony where there's a little profile is sort of like doing a magazine quiz to meet somebody else and there's right. Right. And then they chatted for a while and then one would fly over to the other and you know, that was 10 years ago. That was the online version now, of course, it's in apps and it's I mean, I've never why would I download tinder? I've been married for 31 years, but I even tinder though. There's something and I pointed this out in my most recent discussion on time. There's something evil in the concept because it takes what is the deepest most important relationship in one's life. The relationship to you know, one spouse and turns it into an instant like there's a photo of someone presenting themselves visually and there's a brief description that's supposed to tell us something about this person. It's like it's not reality. And so people are presenting themselves rather than allowing themselves what and here's what I think the Joker did so well. Is it stripped off all the masks of the these the CGI superhero extravaganza? You know, and what it said was no, well, let's look at this as if it happened actually, you know, and let's not play the game that way and many people pointed out well this film could have just been called something else and would about been about, you know, some guy going crazy or whatever and if you but but then again, no one would have come, you know, because it had to have that name but that's to me the most subversive part of it is that it had the name Joker it it gave the people who wanted their fantasy world that excuse to come but then when you got there it did something totally And it really forced you to look at this weird strange world and even to think a little bit about the history of those times and its relationship to other films. I mean one film that people didn't talk enough about while they were talking about Taxi Driver King of Comedy is they didn't talk about network and it's a lot like I'm mad is telling I'm not going to take it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, especially given the I mean given the scene on the on the talk show exactly which is the climax of the Joker movie in some ways and and that with that that with network. Yeah, exactly very much. So so so which was also one of those very dark 70s film. Oh, yes. Yes, it's amazing how how dark the films of the 70s were and were very popular. Yes. Well the 70s. I mean and I often think about that now. I mean the 70s were a dark time. I mean you had bombings. I mean you really had a sense that I mean people look at like 1968 and but 68 as the beginning that was just the beginning. That's right. Yeah. And no, I think that's I think that's true. You know part of also in so at the end of the movie during the during the riot scene, which is you know, when he's when the King is finally coronated but again all of the masks on the crowd and of course, you know, you connect up with Antifa and and now you know, you're gonna have some questions. Well, okay. Well, how does Hong Kong fit into this but but the you know what that does to a and of course of again, of course that their clown. I mean anybody who's watching this really does have to watch your video on on clowns because again to me that gave so much backdrop but the the emotional the emotional sense of okay, you're looking at a mob and they're all wearing these clown masks and of course the clown mask. They're wearing our uniform. It's not a diversity of clown masks. No, no, but but those those are a lot like the anonymous mask. That's right. That's right. They're a lot like you were talking about. No, but I you know, I I still haven't processed enough. I want to go see that I'm going to go see the movie again and I'll probably see it. Did you hear the way they really wanted to end the kind of coronation scene when he's they are all getting around him and he puts the blood on but what they really wanted to do was have him cut his mouth open. Yeah, so that he would be actually Keith Ledger had a Heath Ledger has that same kind of cut there. Yes, but you what it goes back to is the man who laughs. Yes. Now it's a good thing they didn't do that because that would have been a bit too extreme for the movie. I think but but I understood it because the man who laughs is all about a guy as your traditional clown image of the the smile on the outside the darkness on the inside, you know and but what's happened is Victor Hugo invents these come crack to code. So are these people who kidnap people and do things to them to create freaks, you know, and so they in in the man who laughs he's got this huge grin of Conrad Veidt does an absolutely incredible job. I highly recommend that silent film. It's one of the last silent films was made by MGM. Absolutely. I mean, it's just got scenes and it's just like it was it was badly reviewed at the time. They were trying to compare it to the Phantom of the Opera. It's a very different kind of beast because it's obviously it's a tragedy but with these weird elements in it of this and it also gives this very interesting view of Carnivals and entertainment, you know, like back in the late 17th century and which is a time I find very interesting as a Christian because that's the point at which we started to lose our footing in the culture. You know, if you go to the beginning of the Baroque era, all of the the thinkers and such are Christians. You know, so whether it's Descartes or Christian von Huygens who invented like telescopes or Galileo who he passed the telescope to or Copernicus all these people in that the Renaissance and Baroque era were still Christians. They were using their minds. They were you know, Christianity and science were not in any sense at odds and it's only in the period after the when you get to the 18th century you start getting into what we call the Enlightenment and that's when you have the break but that 17th century period is very interesting. So it's very interesting to go into that in this film. But of course the whole point is he's laughing on the outside. He's making people laugh on the outside but inside he is just so sad. Now the the actual book is even more extreme. You can imagine it a much bigger grin. Victor Hugo's book. Yeah, Victor Hugo's The Man Who Laughs. You can imagine a much I read that a long time ago and was just really struck by it way before I knew there was a movie or that the Joker was based on it or anything like that. But Joaquin Phoenix is very hearkens back to The Man Who Laughs because he's physically laughing but he's not actually laughing. So he's laughing, you know, he's and so he has this weird condition where he laughs at inappropriate times whenever he feels nervous. It's a psychological break. And so he just starts this crazy laughter and that's very much The Man Who Laughs. So if they had done that at the end there was this whole line of thinking that's why people who say that to me and it's like oh, it was just the taxi driver again. It's just like no. It was like saying Shakespeare was just doing Romeo and Juliet the same story these other people done it did Hamlet. Yeah, they already told that story too. No, I'm sorry. You know, it's like well, it's important to remember that the taxi driver was what 1975 or 76 76. Yeah, this is a very different world than 76. It's not just because it's set now and you know, I think in many ways that image as you just laid it out. What a powerful metaphor for amusing ourselves to death and our culture and the disnification of the culture where it's all it's all laughter on the outside. But right. Well, that's why one of the things I mean, I wrote about I don't know six or seven essays about this on my website about the origins of this modern concept of fun and it's a teleological concept. That is to say we get our meaning from fun. Nobody in history has ever had this concept before we think it's just normal when people say as long as everybody's having fun, right that was fun, right? It was you know, as long as it's fun. It's gonna have fun. That's that. That's now the it's not be well good day. It's have fun. Exactly and the strange thing about have fun and it's capital F fun. It's it's this used to be fun with something like if you went to a carnival and you go there and you need popcorn and cotton candy and you ride around on the Ferris wheel or the or the roller coaster and for a while you'd have a little fun and then be done you go back to work you go back and everyone would assume you just go back to normal life. Fun was like, you know having a water melon spitting contest seed spitting contest. It was you know having a picnic could have been fun. Sometimes they weren't fun to have people got into a big argument or whatever. But you know, that's what fun used to be this temporary state in which you left but now with the distraction you're supposed to stay in the state right and if a thing is not fun that gives you license not to do it. Because it no longer has meaning that took over church in North America. Yeah, because you know it, you know church was I mean if you look at forms of let's say the the Dutch Reformed Protestant Church that I I didn't really grow up in it because I grew up in this weird thing in Patterson, New Jersey with black church. I mean, but kind of on the edge of the culture right if you if you went to say a real Christian Reformed Church in the 1960s and you look around at everything and you understand a little bit about history. Well, these are all the people coming to the Monarch weekly to and the whole liturgy enables this to you know to greet our Monarch to express our gratitude to our Monarch to give our gifts to the Monarch to hear the Monarch's mandate for us and then we go out and implement it. It's a very it's very much lodged in European Monarchy. The the liturgy that that we got brought over by the Dutch the United States sure so but then when you get to the seeker movement you you get this so you just watch what the boiler plate becomes for so when I came to Sacramento in the 90s, we were just at the end of the seeker wave of church planting and the way you would plant a church is that you would send out postcards to people and basically what you would say is remember Church when you were a kid how boring it was well Church isn't boring anymore. Right and that was the way that you get people into Church and in this world of fun boring is the sin. That's right. That's right. Boring is the cardinal sin of Church and that that swept the board in Church and the whole seeker movement, you know and then the idea was there was sort of a bait and switch and evangelicalism of course has been doing this for years. You you know, you like you know, it's a clown show you like fun kids come on in and once we get you in there, then we'll tell you what a sinner you are and then we'll give you the answer who is Jesus and then okay now we're going to put you in the clown outfit. You're going to go out and recruit some more kids in I mean, that's how evangelicalism has worked in terms of evangelization and well I I tend to think Vacation Bible School is like that. Well, that's exactly what it's like. I tend to think that I mean when I first got to Alaska the small Presbyterian Church we went out and had a ceremony the first Easter I was there where they took a Styrofoam cross and they attached a bunch of stuff to it. I don't remember exactly what and then they put a bunch of balloons with helium on it and sent it out as a witness. Of course the funny thing to me is we're 70 miles from the nearest town. You know, this is just going to fall off in the forest and maybe some bear will get the witness but you know, I am reminded though you remember the Toronto blessing. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Yeah, and that was this weird thing that came kind of before I mean the fun was already entering the church but is this weird thing where suddenly all these people were going up to Toronto and having the strange experience in these charismatic meetings where they would just break into fits of uncontrollable laughter. And I was just thinking about that as you're talking about the church as you know us being like clowns and such. Well, this took over eschatology because when I talk to people today and say, okay, so so you got the basic Christian narrative. Okay, Jesus died for your sins and that enables you to be able to go to heaven. And so, you know before just before the seekers of course, that the other paradigm was evangelism explosion where you'd knock on a door someone answer it. Hello as if they'd actually answer the door and not think you're a Jehovah's Witness and then and then you would say if you were to die tonight, which is a lovely way to begin a conversation, right? You know, what would you say to Jesus to let him into your heaven? Now, of course, if you would try this today in California, you know, that that whole cultural assumption is just completely gone. Sure, but so then the idea was okay now heaven is the safe harbor, but all the focus is of course on hell. And you know, why does the devil get all the good music and so but now heaven is for people I think just maximal fun forever and I think that's how people imagine so that is now taken up eschatology. Right. Well, here's the thing. So as I trace back there's another concept that goes with this that I get into as well in my essay site the anadromous life and that is cute. Yes, we often think of you know, we're surrounded by these images of big-eyed creatures with little mouths whether it's coming from Japan or coming from Hallmark cards or whatever, you know, but and we tend to think somehow that's normal. And it's actually a very recent development. If you go back a hundred years it the concept is hardly there right and and I realize what this stuff all is is it's a weird spin-off of romanticism and the romantic philosophy of putting it on your feelings and emotions and and it becomes this thing of sentimentality and I always define sentimentality not as just simply having emotions but as having inappropriate emotions emotions which are not appropriate to the object of that emotion. Now this goes back about a hundred and fifty or more years where you started getting this reaction but for instance in Christian churches you see it the first time when people like Dwight Moody and these people went out and did these evangelistic rallies with like Homer Rota Heber. Well, I'm bringing in some nice names here. There's a new one to me. Yeah. Well, you know he wrote a Heber I believe was the one who wrote in the garden that song. Walks with me and he talks with me and he tells me I come to the garden alone while the bloom is still on the meadow. Oh, yeah. Yeah, that's now that is total, you know romantic mush in both senses of the word of both being like kind of romantic and dreamy but also it's it's you could call it the the dying the heretical version of real romanticism and but it enters the Christian Church around the around 1885 and prior to that the churches had all been more dour and you know, I kind of glum and you go there they'd be very you know, most Protestant churches like we don't want any art on the walls. We want really nice, you know, some churches no organs, you know Dutch were fortunately smarter than that. But you know, but but huh sometimes sometimes. Yeah, there's always these these weird sectarian arguments about that stuff and I've met a few people from churches without any musical instruments and whatnot. But but then what happened was it was through these evangelistic rallies, you know, next stop on the line was like Billy Sunday eventually get to Billy Graham and each of these people had like their singers with them. So Billy Graham had George Beverly Shay and you remember those Billy Graham meetings and such but what they did was they appealed to the emotion. Now if you go back to Dwight Moody and his man Homer Rotohiever Rotohiever was influenced by what was then the blooming just beginning to be commercial music commercial music is not something that is eternal. We tend to think there's always been pop music and other has You know, I think it starts with minstrel music in America, which is a whole subject. I've done a quite a bit of research on and it's the most taboo subject in America, but I also find it one of the most fascinating because that's the first time not only do you get people playing banjos and see origin of country music. It's also the origins of things like the barbershop quartet and Broadway musicals that as you get these people playing you would have a man pretending to be a black man on a plantation slave singing about his mammy, but he's white with this black face. And so what you get is someone you know singing this sentimental song. It doesn't really sound like anything black people saying but what it is it doesn't quite sound like the older European song sound and he either they've kind of blended it but they turned it into this commercial thing and it was what most people don't realize is that the most successful music in America has ever had that lasted the longest was minstrel music because it started in the 1830s. And there were still minstrel shows in the 1950s. Wow, and Enos and Andy was from minstrel type shows and that went into the 1960s. Really? Because I've heard of Enos and Andy but I've never heard of it. Bing Crosby was in minstrel shows and there are several films where he puts on blackface. Really? There was a revival of the Al Jolson's life when they put out a movie of his about right after World War Two in 1946 the Al Jolson story and my mother performed in blackface when she was in junior high school around that time because she was so struck by it. So minstrel music just is this long history, but it's also essentially a lot of American pop music from the early part of the 20th century. If you want to understand what minstrel music is just put blackface on all those people and you pretty much know what minstrel music was like. Interesting. It was all of it was the same. What happened was slowly they took the paint off you might say and that became American popular music. So connect that then into... Okay, so what happened was then the commercial music that was coming from this secular form starts blending in with also there was the English music hall styles coming at the end of the and they were also very much influenced by this romantic thing as well and came and that was like folk music that was turned into the sweeter stuff. They all blended together and started to create the new Broadway stage, but you have these I can always tell these tunes from the beginning of the end of the 19th century first part of the 20th century. They all sound like they're from the carnival. They have this... Yes. Oh my heart there rings a melody. Yeah, that's right. That's right. That's right. And they all have this feeling if you start to imagine all those being played on a circus calliope, you're not going to be very far wrong. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well roller skating me I always because we in junior high we go to these wrote this roller rink and they had a little organ and it was like a calliope and you know, then I go to some churches like this is just like I used to hear in the roller rink. But it's the... Yeah. Yeah, because it's all from the same place and what happened was this music became the dominant strain for white America. By the time you got to say the 1960s, this is what everyone was listening to, you know, the the gathers and these various pop records that were done at that time and so then came along with Jesus movement and they kind of challenged it and then they made it worse. There's a period in the 70s where there's a challenge to that. Why does the devil have all the good music, you know, Larry Norman, but then what happened was the commercial structure come goes into place and by the end of the 1980s all that stuff now is just a market and it's also filled with sentimentality. So in a sense what happened was the sentimental thing was like a drug that the Christians took. Now the Christians weren't the only ones. The whole culture, American culture has taken that drug, but what happened was the American culture was starting to get serious challenges to it by things like the hippie movement, although the hippies were totally romantic. But by the time you got to the punks, no, this was something totally different. This was a group of people saying I don't want that stuff anymore or even a good rap music is like I don't want that stuff anymore. You know, it's like I want something more real that represents something that I know. Whereas this stuff almost always comes from above. It's sold to us. It's packaged. I look at it as the musical equivalent, pop music in America is the musical equivalent of McDonald's hamburgers. That is to say it is, someone the other day was online. They were criticizing what I was saying about something and they said, oh, we talked it was about Marvel movies and I had written something like, yeah, well Sporcesi was right when he said Marvel movies are like theme parks. And this person said, you don't know what you're talking about. I felt something when I saw, you know, went to Endgame and I go like, yeah, and I taste something when I go to McDonald's too, but it's not necessarily fairly nutritious. You know, but what it is is McDonald's does what this music does what the whole culture does is it finds the lowest common denominator that will make you feel something and it's a substitute. You know, we get back to distraction that what the distraction in pop culture gives you the the the the bad parts of pop culture is they give you a substitute emotion. So rather than feel real pain. I mean, I've been to funerals that just make me want to just shoot myself because there's no real emotion there. You know, someone's playing some piece of music on a recording that someone had the the the terrible music that is played the sickening sweet music that is played at the funeral home or you know, I went to one Christian funeral where they were singing shine Jesus shine during the song, which is like one of the most frightening pops Christian pop praise songs I've ever heard, you know, and but that's what's happened is it's taken over. Now the funny thing is as the culture is tempted to come out of it Christians are left holding the romantic bag. And suddenly it looks like we're the only ones holding it. But of course wherever you find Disney culture Disney culture holds it, you know people who grow up with but just with better budgets. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. And people who grow up in the listening to like a lot of what's happening in musicals. They too are, you know, really holding that romantic sentimental bag. But then again, Marvel movies are totally sentimental. Oh, yes. Oh, yeah, totally. American movies. I mean even comedies if you go to even these really scatological comedies made by people like Judd Apatow and Seth Rogen and Todd Phillips, they will often end with everyone. Everything works out. Okay, and it's a sentimental ending even though that what you've been watching is just one like, you know, and that's it's such a that culture but that I think that culture is beginning to wear on us and create the disturbances in our in our psyche, you know to use a Freudian Freudian Union term there. Well, there's a lot of dissatisfaction with you know, there's a lot of dissatisfaction with of course what Disney is doing to Star Wars and the last the last Star Wars movie. I think it came out a couple Christmases ago and I thought oh, let's you know, I'll buy some tickets and kids are home from college and we'll all go together. I'm really curious what they're gonna have to say and so, you know, most of at least the family is living in Sacramento. We all went to Star Wars and it was so interesting because after the movie because they're not there and they're in the family. They're in the car on the way back home and I could hear what they think about it. Most of the kids are like I'm never going to go see one of these again. I thought that's interesting. Well, here's the interesting thing is the Marvel movies ended this year. The one particular series Star Wars is ending this year. They're supposedly going to try to wrap up whatever the kind of chaotic mess they've created and there but other things that have been and game of Thrones ended this year. But what started this year? Joker. Well, see and that's interesting by that is that what I think we're going to look at the 20s when we get there. Yeah as being oh Joker was the beginning of the 20s and movies just like Psycho is the beginning of the what we call the new Hollywood of the 70s. Even though it was 1960. It took a while for that effect along with all the foreign movies and other things that had happened. But that was the first sign that oh my goodness. What is this thing? So you think there's going to be more to come in terms of what we saw Joker coming down the line. Well, it's that I think what we're going to start seeing is we're going to start seeing these things the other things failing. Because it's just like at the end of the 70s. We already had Star Wars and what's 77 7 7 Star Wars was 75 and then I know 76 was the dark years. Now was a taxi driver Network carry 77 was a but that's our strikes back Rocky. So it was the next year. Okay, so the next year after Rocky was Star Wars. So but it was that it didn't immediately change Hollywood. That is to say people then by the 1980 or so it was like you get one of these movies a year and then what started happening is you after a while the whole industry started saying we really have to knock them out of the park every time we need this big deal. So you started getting these event movies, but I think the event movies are you know killing what's an event movie? The movie is something like endgame. It's something like the next Star Wars film. It's this big thing, you know is coming. Okay, you know and you know, of course more of the Marvel Universe is like all of that, you know, everything Star Wars is an event movie. So after a while what Disney has been doing is you know milking the cow dry there then they're there, you know, a lot of people think like, okay, the next you can already see what's going to happen with the next round of Marvel movies and that is they're going to follow the the Captain Marvel. Sorry got a hair in here Captain Marvel wokeness. You can see it coming and you can see stuff like that happening also with the the normal DC stuff. But Joker isn't the normal DC. So that's right. Well what there is a lot of discussion I heard because apparently Joaquin Phoenix does not do sequels and I thought what are the most critical things about Joker is that there is no Batman and you know, he's now you see little Bruce Wayne and but but you know, I think I think they're I mean, especially if they manage to leave it just hanging out there on its own. Well one thing you can be sure they're doing is putting some serious pressure on him. I'm sure they are especially after they saw the box office and the funny thing about that is that's gone around the world with big numbers. I mean really selling out here, you know, and we don't have that culture here. Yeah, but but like I say, I think it's the kind of thing that people recognize it. It hits something on a lot of levels and and and to get back to what we're talking about at the beginning of this culture of fun. The clown the client it's the strangest thing the clown who used to be the figure of that older version of fun. You go to the circus and they'd be the clowns. Yeah, you would laugh. Yeah has become horror in the new world that we now live in where fun is our daily life. Who is a strange figure here who reminds us of different kind of what and what's funny is it's not just the Joker or it's not just clowns, but it's anything that feels handmade and strange from the past so you can find people's creepy old Halloween mass when people just make masks out of burlap sacks or or paper bags or whatever and you find these old photos of that people say, ooh, that's creepy. It's handmade stuff. But you see I think they're also secretly they're looking at this handmade stuff and say this is a lot more interesting than the culture we have which doesn't feel hand which feels you know, I mean if I walk there's there's a mall or two here you walk into them and you could be in any country USA, you know, it's like any city that has a mall there. They are around the world. They all kind of look alike. You know, we live in a time when everyone's looking at their palms at their and it's the same culture on there. You're seeing the same thing. So in a sense, I think we see a we're seeing a battle in a sense between the the new things which are sleek and shiny and all basically they're kind of a lie and the old things which were handmade and rough you and you know, I mean just the quality of work that used to go into say furniture. It's just amazing. So any old piece of furniture now is considered some sort of treasure because our new furniture is so bad, you know, and you know, I of course have gone into all this with texture and stuff but it's because and I find this is what makes puppets interesting is that it's the texture. It's the fact that they have this handmade quality. I'm not talking muppets here. I'm talking, you know, the kind of stuff that's very uniquely one-of-a-kind and I think one-of-a-kind I think, you know, it's funny how often times this stuff gets called creepy. And I think that's an interesting word and it's a word that's evolving, you know, girls often use that these days used to be creepy was like kind of scary but now it's it's used in strange ways. So a younger girl looks at an older man and he looks at her the wrong way or something and go, oh, he's creepy. Yeah, yeah, yeah, or you look at an old Halloween mask and a photograph from like the year 1900 you're like, ooh, that's creepy. It's this weird. I don't know what it is. It's it's it's related to things like age and it's related to things like like, you know, what used to be considered haunting or haunted is now this weirder word creepy which is developing and still gaining new momentum as far as what it means, but I have hope and this is the reason why I got interested in puppets as an alternative to so much of the modern culture. I have hope that there is you know, it's kind of like if you don't have vitamin C after a while something starts going wrong with your body. And I think we're missing some ingredients that have been stripped out of our the nutrition that makes up a culture the the ecological nutrition of what a human environment needs and we're starting to feel the effects in our souls of these things. And so as we do we start to look out at you know, that's what gets me about puppets. I go like oh, there's a lot of nutrition there just just visual nutrition because it doesn't feel like anything you would find in, you know, just all the replicated kinds of material. It feels like something dense. It's like that's why I like the Alaska. That's why I like the mountains in Georgia or the old streets here that we have these wonderful buildings where they're all on these dilapidated streets and stuff. And at one point the there was a president here wanted to get rid of a whole block neighborhood of just the most beautiful old strange buildings to put up new pieces of junk and people protested here and they kept that it's an amazing neighborhood, but that's because these you know, a lot of people in power think what people want is this new shiny stuff. Well, they can be tricked into wanting but what they really want is it's just like they really want not just an internet community, but a real community what they really want is not just to live in a white box in an apartment, but they want to you know, they really do like wood and and these natural things and and there's the story of I maybe I told you this before but there's this there was this old story. This was actually in a Christian like Jesus people magazine. It was called the parable of the the orange juice and this guy is his spends his whole life doing nothing but he drinks Tang and he drinks like Kool-Aid orange. He loves these flowers and one day someone says he says yeah, I really like orange juice and I look at him and they go like that's not really orange juice. He goes like yeah, but I really like it. He goes like yeah, but it's really not orange juice and they go so the person recommends to him that he go down to the refrigerator section in the store and they get one of these cans that has the concentrated orange juice and you take that and you pour it you mix it up and then the guy tries that and he tastes it goes like wow, this is so much better than that. I really love this. This is like so, you know, it's just like orange juice. Then one day someone says I'm sick. I was like that's not really orange juice and they go like what do you mean and they go like but look they're having a sale on oranges right now. Let me do this for you. So the guy takes and cuts the oranges and and and squeezes them all and gives them fresh squeezed orange juice and the guy goes. Oh my God. This is the real thing and I think it's the real thing that we have been like and what's happened is for for quite a while. Our culture was living on the concentrated orange juice. Now we're actually living on Tang and Kool-Aid. I mean, that's where our culture has moved so artificial. We are so mediated between things. There's so little reality left to what we call life. But the thing is deep in our hearts. We're still looking for orange juice. We don't even know it. But once you get it you suddenly go like oh this is there was just a glimmer of this taste in the this these bad chemical things and then it was kind of like it in this frozen thing, but this real orange juice. So it's like to me that's that's what I'm seeking to pass on to people a little bit of whatever knowledge I have of orange juice. Well, even even though I think we could keep on going for another couple of hours and keep you up all night. That's probably a good place to stop because I think that's a beautiful that's a that's a very that that brings me to CS Lewis and one of these days so I've ever had the discarded image. So I am I do want to talk to you about that book. But I mean because that's very Lewis because it's you know, Lewis of course had this idea, you know that okay, so we're tasting we're living here on Tang but our hearts long for oranges, but we've never I would say orange in a Jersey way our hearts long for oranges in a world that we've never seen one and so now I think that you probably go on you probably go on tour instead of tour to. But speaking of Lewis and the discarded image. I actually have just made two videos of book recommendations. Oh good. I haven't put on on yet. I'm waiting to put on one more time one and then I'm going to put them up and I've got them finished and they are one of them deals with like all Inglings related stuff and I really get into the the deeper work. So I don't do the obvious. I do all the stuff like discarded image experiment criticism preface to Paradise law stuff like that, but I also deal with barfield and Charles Williams and and other people related to him like Dorothy Sayers and such. Oh wonderful. And then the second one is like the Russians like Solzhenitsyn and also people like Jackalole and Walker Percy and such. So so anyway, so you'll have my take on discarded image there. Oh good talk about it. Yes. Well send me send me send me an email with any of the links you want me to include with this and so I'll I'll you know get them out there and but thank you. Thank you so much and well, it's good to talk to you again. It's been a while. I haven't wanted to I you know, let a bunch of other people talk because I got my own form now. So I get out there and blab and I you know, but it's great talking to you and so I'd love to see more people watch your channel because again you have I mean I I used to have a friend. I used to have a friend here in Sacramento who went to this church his name was Neil hand. He used to be the buyer. He was the buyer. It was the classical and opera buyer for Tower Music when Tower Music was in its heyday and he was such an encyclopedia for me of of pop culture and movies and of course, he was a huge opera fan. So we knew everything about he died and left 12,000 records in the house, you know in the house that his poor widow had to figure out what to do with and at least as many CDs and cassette tapes and so it was just right, right. But but you know, I don't have I understand. So yes, I really I really appreciate this, you know getting to talk to you and getting to hear you, you know share everything that you've accumulated through your lifetime. So it's it's a yeah. Well, there's there's lots more part of the reason I'm doing these channels just just to get stuff out of my head because I I'm haunted by the fact that I've spent so much time thinking about this stuff and I do write but it's you know, it's going too slow. So this gives me a chance to at least say, okay, some of the stuff is getting out of my head and you know, there's lots more to go. But you know, at least I can say okay, I mean that's one of the reasons I'm putting my time series out there is because I think that's one of the most important things that I come across in my life. So I'm trying to put these things out there in a way that other people can at least say, oh, there's something there maybe and and have a look at it, you know, but yeah, there's lots more to go. Well, send me the links that you want in here and we'll put them down and hopefully more people will migrate over to and and the problem is you're like me. You put these massive videos out and and you have to be ready for long form to to digest your stuff. So yeah, although I do have a short one coming. I'm just going to talk about the time elements in the series dark. Oh, I'm really fascinating and there was a whole thing in that where this one character says God is time and we're here to kill God. And which which dovetails perfectly with my ideas about time and God. Yeah, because it's like we relate to God through time and you know in our our time life and but but the thing is it's like that when I heard this I was like, oh and so I just recorded I went and purposely jacked it off the screen. It's all in German so I had to get make sure I had subtitles and but just a short section just because I felt it was important and there's some other stuff that I want to do this shorter when I say shorter, I mean like under 20 minutes. Well, I'm glad you live outside the intellectual property police state. So oh yeah, tube is within it. Oh, no, no, no, I get I get copyright claims all the time the way it is now my most recent time video. I I didn't even play the music but I put some of the imagery from a video by Billy Eilish is this current singer who's is interesting and strange at the same time and I made a comment on it and I got immediately copyright struck by Universal Music not struck but claimed and then they were rejected and you normally I get the fair use thing, but I'm going to actually go back one more time and say well, wait a minute. I can use this. I don't even use the song at all. I'm just using some imagery and and it's an important point to discuss her use of fashion and becoming a visual image, you know, so it's like any it's it's what it is. Well, Paul have a good morning. I guess it's yeah, it's still morning. It's almost noon. Yeah, and I will have a good night. Okay, burn great talking to you. We'll talk again. Okay, take care. Bye bye.