https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=dylKtgXVWkw

 Our moderator tonight is Ryan Willis, a steady beach reporter from the Sacramento Beach. Now with that, we'll get started. Thank you, Ryan. Thank you. You're okay? Thanks for having me. I owe you an OID, so. And we'll start. Did we do a question at the end of the first question first, or? I think protagonists go first. Is that right? Okay, great. So I want to start with a question about the neighborhood. Oh, I'm sorry, you're absolutely right. We've talked about that for so long. So let me start with three minutes opening statement by both sides. We'll get you set up tomorrow to bid the campaign for Metro. Great. Can you hear me? My name is Josh Wood, and I'm bidding the campaign for Yes Sunday as well. It's on the ballot, so they've heard a few days. What it does is it updates the city charter of American House of Governments and a package of damage forms. 70% of the cities on our side use this form of government, and they do it for a reason. There's been a ton of cities that have gone to this form of government, and in California, that's Los Angeles, San Diego, Fresno, Oakland, San Francisco. They do it for a reason. It's because you know when you elect a chief executive of a city that they can be accountable to you. There's really three main portions of the convention. There's accountability through the American House of Governments. It's also known as strong mayor. But what does that mean? It means that the chief executive position of a city, the city's most powerful position, is elected by you and accountable to you instead of an elected bureaucrat. The second piece is it has transparency put into the city hall because you create an embassy committee, a code of ethics, an independent redistricting committee, an independent budget panelist position. And a lot of other things, such as a sunshine ordinance. And all that is about is making the city hall more transparent and more open. And the last piece, it's trial. In six years, we're living in 2020. And either we'll say we want to keep this because it makes sense for Sacramento, or we don't. So really what we're proposing right now is a change to the strong mayor form of government that most city cities use, and we're doing it for a short period of time. And it's got the support of a ton of different organizations, including the Sacramento Bee, the Sacramento Police, the Fire, the majority of the Sacramento City Council. There's a great article on that today that you guys should read. There's some news clips that we've sent out. In addition to that, it's business and labor, community organizations, Republicans and Democrats. This is one of the most broad-based historical issues in the history of the city because you have people from all walks of life who want to have a city government that's more accountable and know where the buck stops. Hello, my name is Paula Lee. I'm President of the League of Women Voters Sacramento Police. And with me is Pinky Zapp, a longtime League member. We're both actually longtime League members. And Pinky was co-chair of a study that the League of Women Voters did on city governance. So we have a position on city governance. This measure out of proposal is not an initiative by the way. An initiative is put on the ballot by the people. This was not put on the ballot by the people. It was put on the ballot by the mayor and council. And very, very close vote by the way. The mayor cast the breaking tide. So it's the fourth attempt in six years to change our current government. And despite its name, the checks and balances back in 2014, the League of Women Voters believes it's actually the opposite of checks and balances. It was studied by the League, Pinky as I said co-chair of the study. In 2009, it was also looked at again in 2013. It came back in several iterations. And it was also studied by a council and mayor appointed turner review committee. They studied it for 11 months and they voted 10 to 1 to reject it strongly after the proposal. The yes or no folks will say, oh, we need this to be a big city, a world class city, world fashion, nothing's happening, 100 years in this city with the charter. That's not true. In action 71, we went to see council districts. Prior to that, council members were elected basically from Wann Park, Curtis Park, East SAC, and then we went to council districts and now have a more balanced council. And we have a city of neighborhoods. And we feel that our city government is working just fine. And then overhauling the city charter is not good for our city. Also, our city charter has changed again in 2002 when the mayor became a full time position. You know, we've had strong mayors. We've had Phil Serna, Phil Eisenberg, I mean Joe Serna, Phil's son, Joe Serna, Phil Eisenberg, Andrew, Heather Fargo, and now we again have a strong mayor ever since we went to a full time mayor. We have Kevin Johnson, a very strong mayor. And this current system that we have, the council managed system did not prevent these strong mayors from getting things done. And we think we should keep our system. Because under the current system, under the proposed system, the mayors removed from the city council and we think that that is going to remove the voice of neighborhoods and people from city hall. And we believe our whole mission is citizen participation in governors. And so we believe citizen participation is imperative, especially at the local level. And we hope that we will vote no on it. Okay, so that was my first question and I guess that will go to all the members. What do you think the impact of Metro Elm would have on neighborhoods like Newport, Larkin, and Medallia? Can you repeat the question? Newport, Larkin, and Medallia. I'm sorry, before we start, is it two minutes per agent? Yes. So what would the impact of Metro Elm, what would the impact of Metro Elm's passage be on neighborhoods like Newport, Larkin, and Medallia? Oh, okay, well, what impacts neighborhoods is the relationship the neighborhoods have with their voice to city hall and that's their council member. And we feel that without the strength of the city council, which this proposal does shift power, it shifts power from the city council to the office of the mayor. For me, I must say, this is not about this mayor either. This is about city governments. And so this mayor will not be the mayor forever. There may be other mayors. And by shifting all of that power into the office of the mayor, the council member will have a different relationship with the mayor. Because the mayor will no longer be part of the city council. So for example, if you would like to put for your part, if something about your neighborhood is being discussed at a council meeting, the mayor will not be there. The mayor won't be listening to that discussion. The mayor then, however, could veto anything that that council votes on. He could veto by the mayor. So we think this is not great for neighborhoods. Also politics comes into play. You see, when the mayor can veto something, he can either promise something, he or she. He or she could either threaten something. So I think that if you know what you want for your neighborhood, like a new library or something like that, could be vetoed if you're not in favor of the mayor. So that's how we think an NRL could negatively impact neighborhoods. The other thing that we just see a lot of is they could be going to the council meeting to tell what they want from what they don't want. And the decision maker, the mayor, won't be there. So no matter how much they persuade the council to vote their way, the mayor can just veto it. I'll give the necessary question to the supporters of what will be the impact that's going to help the neighborhoods. What metro is going to strengthen neighborhoods? Right now, the chief executive of the city doesn't have to be elected by you, doesn't have to be accountable to you. And if I asked you, if most people in the city were to ask, who's the CEO of the city, most people wouldn't even know the name of the city manager. But that is the person who makes the decisions on day-to-day operations in the city, the person who recommends the budget. And we believe that you have that much power, but at the end of the day, you should have to be accountable to those. It's about the mind, the accountability. The metro well strengthens neighborhoods. It creates a neighborhood advisory council. And what does this council do? The idea that Jay Schenaer on the council had was that you would take the neighborhood association presidents from the cities, and you would bring them together. You bring other interested groups in the cities together. And you would use the neighborhood advisory council as a place for them to come together and reach forward ideas and learn more about public safety and have faster transfer of information to the neighborhoods. But it's even more. It's when you're a council member and you want to make something happen in your district, including how do you put leverage on the city council? And again, look at who's going to be on the city council of everyone. And let's look at who wants to be there next year as in who's not running for a higher office to lead the council. And you look at either Andrew Ashwood or you look at Alan Warren or you look at Jay Schenaer or you look at Regina. You look at our council, what it's going to look like. You look at the city council. You look at the city council. You look at the city council. You look at either Alan Warren or you look at Jay Schenaer or you look at Regina. You look at our council, what it's going to look like next year. Those people are pushing from edge rail because they think, and they said yesterday, it's going to strengthen neighborhoods. It's going to strengthen their ability to advocate for neighborhoods. At the end of the day, if you have that much power, you should have to get down with the folks. So next question about jobs and economic development, both of which are priorities for a lot of neighborhoods in South Carolina. Especially... Do you have that area? Okay. Better now? Is that an app? Is it better? So jobs and economic development are priorities in many neighborhoods in Sacramento especially here in South Sacramento. We have caught oneBlue County at the bank from Entertain, where it sat to the right twice,maybe for that personally the fact that it was picked up for its 24-hour嘛 thing. especially here in South Sacramento. And so, I guess I'll let this question go first to Sacramento tomorrow. What's specifically about Measure L to help create jobs in Sacramento? Well, I would say first and foremost, it's about accountability. So right now, if you're a business and you're trying to start a cycle, or grow inside your own creative jobs, it's difficult to know who to hold accountable for your legal needs. Permits, licenses, you can go to your council member or your council member's ones of nine votes. You can go to your mayor, if your mayor has one of nine votes. You can go to your city manager, but the city manager operates at the behest of the city council. There's no one person who you can hold accountable for a delay or something falling through. This is about creating a clear line. So, if something doesn't work out economically, if there's some economic development project that doesn't happen in Sacramento, people can point to the mayor and ask why their rights not happen, and the mayor will be responsible for dividing the interests. But one thing that does, if you look at every single economic development organization in Sacramento, whether it's the Metro Chamber, the Hispanic Chamber, the Asian Chamber, the Islamic American Chamber, the Black Chamber of Commerce, all of them have endorsed this because they deal with this reality every day of when you're trying to do something to help a business and there's just finger pointing because there's no one to hold accountable at the end of the day. And Metro Bell creates that system where you do work to lose accountable at the end and voters get the accountability of the day. Okay. So, yeah, that's all. I'll ask the same question, but also a little twist, which is how does the current system of governance in the city hall foster economic development in jobs and is it doing enough to do that? Okay. I think it was, first of all, to say that being able to complain to someone, accountability, isn't going to foster jobs. We have to have something happening to foster jobs. And we think that the mayor, using his bully public being so leading in Sacramento, has done some of that. And I think there will be more of that regardless of what kind of governance we have. But when saying that, oh, you can go to the mayor and you imagine that each of you could go to the mayor and speak to him about your problem, unlikely. I spoke to someone recently and they said to me, well, you shouldn't have to be able, this is someone who can paper this, but you shouldn't be able to go to the mayor and speak to him about it. I talked to someone, but not the mayor. The point is that neither of these two kinds of governance specifically will help with bringing more jobs into this community. What we have to have are leaders who will do things to bring more jobs into the community and just say that, oh, but because the mayor will be in charge, somehow your rack will explode, we'll have more jobs. It's just making it up. This isn't gonna solve everything in the world. I think I would add that the clear winners here are the people that voters will, the people that voters long time has been very concerned about money and politics and we ask the voters to look at who are funding these campaigns, both of them, and see who may be the winners here if the better health passes. So I'd like to ask the same question through the point of view of public safety that our government, how do you believe that it adequately addresses public safety concerns, again, a major concern here in the state and in the federal business go bar. Does it adequately address public safety and how? Well, again, we don't think changing the form of governance is going to have an impact on public safety. The public safety has to be properly funded and we have, our city has under the current system, has restored services, public safety services, and other public services have been restored under the current system and that's because our current system is collaborative and well balanced. It's a mayor as the political leader of the city and a leader of the council and a council that listens to constituents in their districts and a city manager who carries out that policy that's developed by the mayor and the council. That city manager works for the mayor and the council and it's, while the proponents say it is not held accountable, that city manager is held accountable every day by the mayor and the council, his boss, or her boss, whoever it might be. That person could be fired every day. A mayor, maybe it could be recalled, but that's a very expensive, very difficult effort and it's not something that can be done every day. So this issue of accountability, transparency, these are beautiful good government words. They're the words that the people of the voters love, but they're meaningless when it comes to measure out. So this is the same question for you guys. What will be the impact on public safety if this measure works? Well, the stronger a global government is, it's difficult to say for the period. That's about question. If you look at, we had a press conference yesterday and we had the vice mayor of Goldman come out and he talked about decreases in problems that have been happening and he talked about representing a district, you know, but they've had a ton of crime and how they've been decreasing because they had a system that was better. But it's not just that, it's who should pick the police chief? You know, right now the mayor doesn't, and not the assistant you want to get to, but shouldn't he have a role? I mean, think about it this way. The current chief of police for Sacramento was picked and the mayor finds out through a tweet from me. And when other major decisions like the first budget surplus in seven years comes out and the mayor finds out through the paper set up on the staff, when the mayor's running down the street one day, ACR comes out and jumps out and they start building in and say, hey, why don't you lay off these offices? And then what are you talking about? And if you look, you know, a little bit later he gets an email talking about, oh, by the way, we had to do some reductions. How can you govern a city if the person that you elect doesn't even know about the major decision that happens until they're already in the paper? At the end of the day, what is your ultimate accountability? I mean, those are just some very specific examples, but if you look at it, there's a reason that public safety organizations like police and fire are behind this is because if you look at other stronger cities or around the state or around the nation, they perhaps have more police coverage. Because what is, why? Because that's what voters want. And when you have to be held accountable every cycle, every election to voters, you're going to do the things that voters want to see. Voters want public safety. They want to have safety in those institutions. And so at the end of the day, Metro without a doubt is good for public safety. But at the end of the day, that's not all it's good for. It's good for the entire city because it's about creating a system that's accountable and that's not just a buzzword. At the end of the day, if you're not elected, if you have a lot of power, you should have to be accountable. Or, second of all, opponents of the measure have expressed concerns that the system you're proposing is going to inject politics into a lot of decisions, including, as they said tonight, which neighborhoods will get priority and attention for decisions. And also, it's the important jobs. What's your response to those concerns? What happened? What happened? The truth is, there's a few things when it comes to that. So if you look at it within our city, if you look at the campaign playground, whether it's the slogan, stop the power grab, or if it's not broken up, fix it, the whole campaign on the other side has been about fear. And it's been about fear of the current mayor and I think a lot of the stuff that can be accomplished. At the end of the day, there's nothing that Metro Bell does to hurt or empower the council or empower the neighborhoods. And if anything, it strengthens it because you have to have accountability in the system. And again, 70% of the cities are outside of using this form of government for a reason. And if you look at it in California, all of those different cities, they transitioned to this form of government for a reason, they've never gone back. There's a reason they never went back. It's because this is just a better system of government for our city. If you look at the argument that it's going to create all of these new state scenarios, they're gonna sit down about a lot of things. And for the most part, many of the people who make up the opposition have always been people who oppose our mayor and every step. But this shouldn't be about our mayor. At the end of the day, this should be about what's best for Sacramento. And it's not gonna be true for those new state scenarios because this is the first time in our city's history we'll actually be able to hold the chief executive of the city of counter. And that's why if you look at it again, the Sacramento City Council, the majority of them supported. And that's, if you look at District 1, the Gatsby, District 2, the Warren, you have Steve Cohn, Jay Shneer, we got Greg Jakes coming on the council. I mean, there is a movement among our city and among our neighborhoods to have more accountability at City Hall. But the mayor has used this term, half democracy, to describe the current and historical government. He's arguing that the person making many of the important decisions at City Hall, the city manager, is not someone who is directly accountable to the citizens. What's your take on that? Well, to repeat, the city manager is actually directly accountable to the voters because the city manager works for the council and the mayor. And they have a voice through their council. I would like to address the press conference yesterday and the reference to all these council members that are supporting this. I think it's better, interesting why they're supporting it, but I just want to remind voters that those were not the council members that voted to put it on the ballot. It was a very close vote to put it on the ballot. And those people that were standing there, Jay Shneer and the new council members, what do they have to lose, actually? What do they have to lose by supporting this? If Measure L passes, hey, they were on the right side with the mayor, that's probably gonna be good for them. If Measure L fails, well, they're just where they were right now, acting in the best interest of their constituents as city council members. And also, I would remind you that some of these council members were elected with outside money and thanks to connections from the mayor. And maybe some of them even want to be mayors and make themselves. In addition, we should look at the funding of the campaign. It is obvious that the people who donate $100,000 will get a lot more here than the people in charge than the people who donate $10. And so we have, I think it was $750,000 that was collected by Measure L. And most of that money came from people outside of the city of Sacramento and their new people. So there's a couple things that are accompanying this matter. The ethics committee, the district data commission, give us your take on some of the things that are outside the transfer of these duties and things that are being attached to them. Well, first of all, the ethics committee may be, it may happen, it isn't required, but all these are great ideas. We need a woman voter to let us do what we do. I need a little extra time. We need, within an ethics commission, rather, would be a better case for our city. An ethics committee has absolutely no teeth. It's meaningless. An ethics commission is what you find in most strong mayors' duties. It is a commission with teeth, with enforcement power. So it's an independent and district committee. We also think it's a great idea, and we would encourage the council to do that immediately. In fact, all of these, what the league calls sweeteners, to sweeten the deal, all these good government words, good government ideas, are great ideas. And you don't need to overhaul the charter and change our form of governance in order to do these things. We can do it right now. We would encourage Steve Hanson to bring back to campus the way it is. We have a little bit of time. I would just like to say hi, everybody. I'm Councilmember Hanson. Much has been written about me, mostly by Mr. Liltz. Good stuff and bad. I think the issue here with the ethics commission and these committee, excuse me, the neighborhood committee, is that there's no details in Measure L that will tell you what you're gonna get. They want you to trust them that after the election, they'll give you what they've said. And if they really meant it, they would have put it in black and white. You would know if the neighborhood committee would have any power, but it says specifically, it's not a commission. It won't have any powers. But what is it gonna do? Is it just a place for people to go and complain but nobody has to listen to them? In LA, they gave that committee power. Other cities have ethics commissions that have enforcement opportunities. This is not gonna have any enforcement team with this ethics committee. And so it makes me think that they didn't really intend to do these things the way that they talk about them. They haven't told us what they're gonna do. And I'll just say, much of this could be done any Tuesday night. We could pass an ethics committee on any Tuesday night. We could do a neighborhood advisory committee. I have a neighborhood advisory committee for my neighborhood. And we meet quarterly, sorry, for my district. And it's the neighborhood association president who gets together and talks with the issues that matter to them. But I think you need to read the polls and see what you're getting. And so, like the pro side also explained, from your point of view, the added elements of the matter that the ethics committee has created. Okay. Any questions? Well, it's the same question, just from your point of view. But what do we think about those additions right now? Why are they part of this? There could be a city-wide neighborhood advisory committee. There could be an ethics committee. There could be a community of ethics. There could be an independent redistricting committee. There could be an independent budget office. But there's not. And those have been all ideas that have been around for years, and they haven't happened. And this, when special help goes in place, it puts it in the charter. So now, instead of words, you have actions. Because it requires within 180 days for those things to be in place and run. And by the end of the day, we can talk about a lot of things that, oh, we could have done this, we could do this. Measure L makes it so that instead of getting promises, you get actions. And if you want a neighborhood advisory committee, that's CY. If you want an ethics committee, and a program of ethics, and an independent redistricting committee, and independent budget analysts, and Sunshine Ordinance, maybe some documents are available online, what you need to do, do you need to vote yes or no, because that's what's gonna make it, so that instead of getting words, you get actions. That's what that's all about. Yeah, so. So, you know, as a new council member, council member like coming into the system, and learning everything that's going on with our current system, and the proposals, the measure L. The question I ask myself is, why now take bits and pieces of a great idea, and wanna take parts of it, but not all of it? Why now? Current system is 93 years old. This has been under debate for the last six years, and has been vetted out in the public for the last six years. Now we have a proposal that's in front of us, that makes sense, as far as where the accountability in the vote stops. So, I don't believe that you just take a piece of the idea, and make it, and take that piece. What stops us from taking the whole idea, and putting the accountability where it belongs, like other cities? We had the Vice Mayor come in yesterday from Oakland, and he made the statement of saying, there is no way that Oakland would ever go back to its old system, even though they had a chance to go back. There is no way. It does not take power away from the council members. It does not put more power in the hands of the mayor. It has its checks and balances, and it is good for the city, and it has made a difference, and there is no way that it would go back. They believe it is a system that can move their city forward. So I think we're gonna move on to the closing statements by both sides. Start with you guys first, and then Gio. So I think it's really important that we look at how we're gonna move the city forward. It's too many times when I get into these discussions, it's not about what good governance is, it's not about what's best for Sacramento, it's about the personality of a person that's in place. It's about the fear tags, it's about being on all different fears of what could happen, or what possibly could happen. I think in government, we have to start looking at best practices. And the best practices that we've seen in other cities, like San Francisco, like in Oakland, like San Diego, like Los Angeles, like in Fresno, when we start looking at those best practices, why not Sacramento? Have we not grown to that point where we need to leave from being a pow town to a town that's on the move, and it's making progress, and putting some of those best practices that have been in place for years in those other cities, putting them in place right here in Sacramento. So what is our greatest fear in moving this away? It's not that I, as a council member, lose responsibility, or I lose power, or I lose the ability to make an impact or a decision on the budget. It's not anything, but I don't have those fears as a council member. I don't have any fear of including the power and transferring the power from the city manager to the mayor. I don't have those fears. I don't want you to have those fears either. And I don't want you to look at just the current mayor as the person who we're giving these powers to. I want this to be a decision that we make as what is best for the city of Sacramento, no matter who that is. If I'm lucky enough, if I'm lucky enough to one day do a great job as city council member, and you recommend that I have the opportunity to be your next mayor, I would want those powers. I would want the ability to put the budget forward. I would want the ability to work with my council to be able to make a difference in the city and move this city forward. I would not want to come in and be a figurehead and one of nine members on the current city council. And that's what we have now as a mayor. You want a great job as a man, but he is a figurehead. Thank you. Let me just address a couple things there. We're not all negative and fearful. We're actually saying that our current form of governance work, in fact, this is something we both agree on, that our current form of governance works just great. We think it works fine. So we're not being all negative. We, in fact, formally go to this position is that Sacramento as a city of native people is actually better suited for the current form of governance. And that's why we supported so much. The components like to say that this is going to move Sacramento forward and talk about all these cities that have a strong name, lots of big successful cities, much larger than Sacramento, have a council manage the form of government, our current system, very successful cities, Phoenix, San Jose, Dallas, many. And so we think actually that this form of governance, the strong mayor, takes us backwards. In the 1920s, reformers were looking for ways to combat corruption and cronyism in big cities, Detroit, Chicago, and the city manager form of government was stuck in the middle of the 19th century. Form of government is born because the city manager is not a political office and a professional job. We want to do it that way. My great grandmother, she used to say, if it ain't broke, don't break it. Our system's working. We've got an arena built. We're under construction in record time. That was a big decision. We've rehired police officers. We've reopened libraries. We've been doing a lot of really good stuff on the city council. I think the idea that the mayor's just a figurehead, that's just campaign rhetoric because the evidence is what's going on in our communities. Now, you've heard people say, well, if I were mayor, I'd want all these powers. Well, certainly, anybody who's in charge doesn't want to have to talk to anybody else. They don't have to run to work with the community. And part of the reason the council manager works, and I heard it directly from my colleague, Paine Pennell, before she retired, she had a seat at the table. She had to be respected, not just in passing a new law, but in making decisions about how departments were run because she had an equal voice. And what this does, this eviscerates the council with all due respect to my future colleague. I see it day in and day out how my ability to set up the table with the city manager helps me deliver for my neighborhoods. Street lights, cops, getting things done. Measure L will take that away, and I think it'll take it away from neighborhoods that have less power and give it to neighborhoods with more power. Thank you. So that concludes the Measure L portion of our program tonight. Thank you everybody for taking part. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.