https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_AJEOhvkps8

 you you you you you good morning welcome to the Friday live stream at the bridges of meaning I do for a little while I will be gone for three weeks next week we have a special guest I won't mention his name so as not to flood the discord server too badly so that the discord members can have their opportunity to ask this individual questions got some other guests that are coming some from some other weeks and so I'll be back in late August to pick this up again so I appreciate the volunteers who have are filling my slots on Friday for this live stream I never really intended to start a thing but a thing has started so there's a lot that goes on like that and life I'm kind of behind in question so I'll try to see if I can catch up so some of these questions don't have to wait for a month in the discord server so I'll begin with father Big Mac's question how do I pray with my eyes closed is that what he's asking over the years I've I've had lots of different prayer regimes praying through the Psalms is something I enjoy a lot of it a lot of my regimes have depended on what I've needed at the moment and what my life has afforded currently right now my practice is first thing when I wake up in the morning and last thing before I go to sleep at night those are kind of the two times of regular prayer I will wind up praying during the day some of those prayers will be more impromptu prayers if there's something that comes up maybe I'm feeling anxious about something or maybe a need is presented to me as a pastor I regularly have people asking for prayer for things and so one of the things that I've learned over the years is that I've been praying for a long time and sometimes I I'd feel guilty if I'd say I'd pray for something and then forget to pray for it and some people have elaborate note taking devices to remember to pray for things I haven't really developed that and so what I'll usually do is pray for whatever I've said I will pray for something to pray for it immediately that way I don't forget it like I said I'll often pray with people who come to me asking for prayer for this or that I'll pray during the day for impromptu things if I see a need but my two main times of prayer are morning and evening I will often just use silly little tricks like adoration, contrition, acts, adoration, contrition, thanksgiving, supplication that's a little way that you can structure and organize your prayer so that your prayers aren't always asking and begging and pleading and supplication but your prayers have adoration which is taking some time to enjoy God and adore God for who God is confession taking some time in prayer to ask forgiveness for my sins thanksgiving taking time in my prayer life for gratitude and then supplication which is taking time in my prayer life to ask God to meet my needs and so currently that's sort of the regime I'm using I've done the Brother Lawrence thing at periods of my life where you sort of have an ongoing dialogue with God throughout the day I've practiced at different times in my life different more meditative practices of prayer there are a variety of books out there one of the more famous ones from the 1980s Richard Foster's A Celebration of Discipline learned a lot more about Richard Foster when I read the Dallas Willard biography that came out just not too long after his death it was kind of interesting the way Richard Foster sort of came into American evangelicalism and he and Dallas Willard and others sort of revived spiritual disciplines among Protestants so I've practiced a lot of different things over the years and usually it's some combination of something that has to fit my life circumstance and when I find my life circumstance changing I don't being a father of five and a pastor of a church and now the steward of a YouTube channel I don't have a lot of time management is always a struggle because where do you put your time what demands your time what requires your time and obviously your prayer life has to fit into that economy of time and so part of the reason I've had various different chapters in my life with prayer sometimes I mean sometimes prayer life revolves around when I can have quiet and solitude and that can perhaps sometimes be if at a certain time in my life I have a lot of time behind the wheel so you can actually have solitude behind the wheel it's changed via technology once audio books and podcasts and YouTube came into my life I rearranged time so that I could listen to audio books and podcasts and get some of that stuff and so it fits into the overall economy of time and but it is it is an important part of my life and it's important part of the Christians life and I think there's a lot there are a lot of different methods to try to arrange someone's prayer life and prayer time and there's actually quite a few resources out there Protestantism obviously has a pietistic movement that will have quite a few resources on prayer so yeah there's a lot that can actually be subsumed under that question and of course in Roman Catholic tradition rich rich tradition of means of prayer the monastic movement created a lot of resources so there's a lot out there but that's how I organize mine second question who does God speak more through the living or the dead I don't really quite I mean the question is more more in terms of volume more in terms of impact and and what would we include as the living and the dead the living would mean friends and neighbors the church church leaders those kinds of things or the dead meaning scripture or the dead meaning some kind of communion with the saints who have gone before us so I'm not really quite sure how to answer the question the repeated question about Burnham's inside I again as I've said many times most of my TV watching is with my family and so mostly what I'll do just because I've got some of my adult children living with me and I know that as a window I will usually hand them the remote because I'm curious about what they want to watch and part of the reason I do a lot of things fairly strategically and that's part of it because if I have learned over the years that my children depending on their age and community and what they're into introduce me to different aspects of the world which is helpful for me to know the world better so I get to see the world through their eyes and that keeps me in touch with popular culture to a degree so we usually watch what my kids want to watch when or what my wife wants to watch there are a few shows that I get a chance to say I like alone I don't know why I like alone but my viewing habits are different for my kids and so I've been trying to chip away at inside and I'll keep chipping away at it Job how do I quiet this baby I have no idea I've never met your baby learning how to hold the baby and gently and one of the funny things about babies is that they have all that time in the womb which is they are part of the reason I think abortion is a horrible thing because they're alive in the womb they suffer they have consciousness they don't have a lot of memory but if you have a child and a newborn you very quickly realize that especially as a father your experience with that child began after birth but that child has been your child before birth and so often you know it's going for car rides in the car seat the car often puts them to sleep holding them I would often and my wife would give me a hard time about this I'd be like well I'll go put you know I'll go put the baby to bed and because I would especially when they get to be toddlers they kind of watch you and so I would you know lay down with them and act like I was sleeping only problem is I'm a real fast sleeper and so I would I would lay down especially if we were at that point when we were being missionaries who did a lot of traveling so you'd be staying at other people's houses and be very tough on kids so you'd kind of kind of act like I was sleeping you'd maybe put the kid in the porta crib and then lay my head down next to the kid and I'd close my eyes and they kind of get the message okay it's time to sleep then I'd fall asleep and the kid would still be awake and then my wife would come in and be like great you went to put the kid to sleep you put yourself to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and you'd be like oh I'm going to sleep and then the kid's still awake and now I have to take care of it so so I don't know every baby's different rocking car seats all those things do work all those things do work Paul you found it an estuary so now you have to comment on the pope I didn't find a catholic eschewary necessarily so today the pope released his oh yeah this is a big consideration Um, so today the Pope released his, oh yeah, this is a big deal. Montu proprio reverting the work of Benedict the 16th and repressing the Latin mass. For instance, the Bible readings must have made the, um, must be made in Verac, in vernacular and founding a new group is prohibited. How do you interpret this kind of repression of tradition? See, again, it's, it's weird because as a Protestant, I should say, Oh, absolutely have Bible reading in the vernacular and homilies in the vernacular and mass in the vernacular, but also being a Protestant, I will get a little bit of pragmatism and say, well, it seems quite clear that especially in North America, some of the people I talked to have found significant meaning and importance in the Latin mass. And I think there are psychological, you can look at the verveky work. I think there are psychological reasons why people are finding that conducive to their spiritual growth. Why would you stop this? Let it, let it grow organically. But now the Roman Catholic church is a very large organization. I can't account for why someone would make this decision. Part of this gets into, you know, again, when I was reading the book reformations, part of what happened in the Roman Catholic resistance to Protestantism and the counter-reformation was modernizing of the church and an aspect of modernity is homogeneity. And so, you know, the Orthodox as being an older tradition tends to allow more diversity and there's upsides and downsides to that. And so this move seems to be against, this move seems to be towards homogeneity in the Roman Catholic church or standardization. And I, I, I can't account for why he made, but I'm no expert in Roman Catholic internal politics, but I, I hear the complaints of many in this corner. And, and so I just wonder about its wisdom. Um, Kayl Zeldin sent me a note and said, not that we've not heard a peep from Bishop Baron about this, which is interesting too, you know, part of the difficulty of having a global church is, I don't know, I, I, I tend just temperamentally to be high in openness. And so I tend not to, I avoid standardization and I prefer to let smaller communities develop what it is they're developing. And if a clear problem develops, yeah, shut it down, but I don't see, you know, are they trying to discourage conservative Catholicism in North America? That's clearly the message a lot of people are getting. And I don't understand it because the Roman Catholic church is a conservative organization. Why would you want to repress conservatism? Yeah, you've got a bunch of conservative, cranky Catholics that are out there making noise. Well, I show me a church in which you don't have cranky people making noise. Even a little church like living stones has cranky people making noise about certain things. So I don't run my, I don't run the church on the basis of cranky people, either trying to suppress them or trying to encourage them crankiness as part of humanity and you're going to have cranky people and there are worse things than you could do then have a Latin mass. So, you know, at the basis of it, people will start to learn Latin. That seems like a good thing. I don't understand it. I don't understand it. So Job 716 yesterday, I recorded a podcast with a church member who's spearheading growing young in our church. Do you have an opinion on efforts like this? What do you think about prioritizing the youth within a congregation? So this is the, this is a book and an effort coming out of Fuller Seminary, Kara Powell, and this has been around for a few years now and it's, I think it's a good effort. I'm, I'm glad, I'm glad they're, they're doing it. And her effort is basically trying to find ways to integrate multi-generational contact in a congregation. And I wholly support that idea. I wholly support that idea partly because younger generations need the wisdom of older generation and what we have developed in our community is that we have developed in our culture because of, I could say because of capitalism, but I think that's too broad a brush to paint with because of the consumerism and because basically our commercial culture has realized they can extract more money from young people by destroying wisdom. And so you separate the children from their parents and you make the children boss and you basically destroy wisdom in a culture. And that's what's been happening in the West really ever since the counterculture. We have, you know, so you've got Vervecky and many others trying to encourage wisdom and not enough people have really called out, even though I don't like call out culture, have really pointed out the fact that in many ways since the counterculture, the, one of the most powerful aspects of our culture has been systematically undermining intergenerational wisdom for the purposes of extracting money from young people. That's basically what has been happening. And that has happened in the church. And so any effort to increase wisdom among the youth by putting them in contact with older people who helpfully have gained wisdom is a good thing. That colors the second half of my answer to this question, which has been that I think there have, I think some of the problems in the Protestant church, at least in the culture that I'm most aware of has been this sort of consumerist focused on youth. And they've sort of put youth in charge in order to placate, attract, curry favor with the youth. And what that has caused is a decrease in wisdom in the church overall. And so I think churches, I like Kara Powell's approach of increasing intergenerational wisdom transference in the church. She wouldn't use those words, but I think you open the door to a lot of difficulty if you just simply make attracting youth the focus of your church, because wisdom has been stripped from the youth. They haven't have time from the culture that is being given to the youth. They haven't had time to generate enough wisdom themselves. And so I see sometimes churches that very specifically attempt to target the youth have a decline in wisdom. So I'd say overall, I think it's a great thing. I think it's especially a great thing because it's increasing the amount of intergenerational wisdom transfer, which I think the youth need. All right. Probably I'm moving through questions today. How about that? You know, I got a lot to go. All right, here we go. Grim Grizz. Hey Paul, feeling charitable this week. Well, that's good. So all I have is this. Do you have any safety tips for your internet flock for when they might encounter the mentally ill like outside your church and other salty waters? Like online. Like, you know, I'm not going to be able to do that. I'm not going to be able to do that. I have an Instagram accounts go grab things, Тутcamera, Mateta, or Sonoma. Anyway. Thank you Paul, for all the specifics on the worship issues that you've put within your church and feel öl Cuando interacting with them. Keep saying God bless you, Michael. And I'm happy to see some comments, but keep talking to your closer long-term approach. Chad the alcoholic, I'm feeling very neurotic. Have a taken the news to have you taken the news too far? Nevermind you said Jesus with testicles. I don't think you've taken the news too far. I mean, YouTube, the internet should be a place we have fun. There are places on the internet where we can take things seriously and YouTube is a great place where we can do long form serious discussions. That's a terrific thing. But YouTube is full of cat videos. YouTube is full of pranks. YouTube is, you know, so I, I think if we can't laugh at ourselves, we have real problems. So I don't mind being trolled and memed and mocked. I don't mind it at all. Because in my opinion, it keeps me from taking myself too seriously, which usually isn't a problem. So I haven't had a problem with it. But at the same time, it's a good question. And it's a good question to ask. You should have people in your life who you trust, who have wisdom and check in on them. And if they push back on things, listen. And, you know, I look at a lot of people in the comments that I listen to, you know, Anselman is almost always there. And, you know, Anselman doesn't always agree with what I put out. And I appreciate the fact that when I put out something that he disagrees with, he lets me know. And he tells me straight. And he tells me I'm wrong or I'm all wet, or I shouldn't have done that. And now I don't always necessarily agree with his, with his take, but I listen to it and I take it seriously. Because, you know, trolling and having fun and mocking and having a good time. I think that's all potentially healthy and appropriate within degree into its place. But I, you know, as a person who, you know, the last video I did on psychedelics, I mean, that was sort of rantish and a little trollish and a little mocking. And of course, those kinds of videos there's an audience for on YouTube and it's fine because, you know, part of why we liked Peterson was he could get that way to a degree too, but you have to be careful if you have that side of you to not let it take over your whole being. And so there's a time to be flippant and trolly and have fun, but you need to, that needs to always remain only a part of you. So it's good to ask questions like this and to check in with others. And so I appreciate the question. If you're worried about me being offended, when I feel myself being offended by something, I really try to pause and say, okay, what's, what in me is being offended? And is that a good thing? And examine myself when I feel offended. Sometimes things are offensive and are inappropriate, but more often taking offense is, is a bigger problem. So that's good to check in with other people. Reform Templar Colton. Hi Paul, I was tempted to ask a question about Calvinism to divert the current server animosity towards myself, towards you instead. That's fine, they can be, you know, be animosity towards me, it's totally good. However, I decided against it. Oh well, I've reneged and decided to ask a related question, so forgive me in advance. You're forgiven. I have gone all in on reform theology. Oh boy, the Roman Catholic Church is apostate. Election is particular. The sinners cannot save himself. God's grace is effectual. Penal substitutionary atonement is true, along with imputed righteousness. He's gone the whole way. Et cetera, the whole nine yards. The harmony of the Old and New Testaments in this view is organic. And I no longer feel I have problem passages. I no longer ask the rhetorical questions raised in Romans nine upon reading about predestination, the will of man, election, et cetera. However, this view isn't popular on bridges of meaning. Oh my goodness. Indeed, sometimes I feel as if I do not worship the same God as others. And see, in the Christian Reformed Church, we, the Christian Reformed Church has been able to maintain both a, an appreciation for what I'd perhaps call the 17th century expressions of the Reformed faith that you just laid out here, and also I think a broader 16th century view. And I think both of those views have to, live together. And bridges of meaning will be, I think, a lot more conducive to the 16th century rather than the 17th century. This, this gets really complicated. Because in the Christian Reformed Church, two of the three confessions are 16th century and one is 17th century. And I think the 17th century confession needs to be contextualized by the 16th century confession. And this is getting, part of the reason the tensions are growing is because the 17th century confessions have a deep tie to modernity. The philosophical waters beneath the 17th century confessions had changed dramatically in 100 years. But the tide was already going that way. So, and what this has created is, for those who are really doubling down on sort of 17th century Reformed theology, which I think is an accentuation of some of the seeds of the 16th century, sort of magnified by philosophical developments, economic developments, political developments in the 17th century, what that has created is a rather intense version of Reformed theology. Now, I think every Christian tradition, by virtue of something like a temperamental bell curve by historical changes, will have intensified areas of their theological tradition. And I think, going back to the question about the Latin Mass, perhaps part of the reason the current pope wishes to subdue the Latin Mass is because he is trying to reduce the influence and power of a rather intense corner of his church. And I, on one hand, suspect that these corners of intensity have value, or they wouldn't continue, value in terms of the overall ecology of the church. Those who are in these rather intense corners have their own dangers, I think, of becoming sectarian. So it's a dicey dynamic. And I think there is sort of an intense corner of, there are various intense corners of Calvinism that I think sometimes, I mean, I don't disagree with a vigorous doctrine of election. I think penal substitutionary atonement is a super helpful atonement theory, pastorally, practically. I think it's biblically justified. I don't think it's the only valid atonement theory. I love preaching imputed righteousness because so much of what comes out of the Protestant Reformation comes from preachers, not just abstract theologians. And the Protestant reformers had an idea about how to do pastoral care to people. And so many of these intense reformed doctrines are so pastorally potent, that's why they don't go away and why they're so useful and why I think generally healthy church traditions can grow around them. But if they become sectarian and overly exclusivistic to begin developing oversized animosities towards other Christian traditions, problems develop. Because I was just talking with someone yesterday, not online, it's not recorded, but about revivals. And I don't mean things with sawdust and tents. I mean periods in the history of the Christian church where Christianity seems to just explode in a healthy, beautiful way that transforms whole peoples and cultures and cities. And when revival happens, it usually is broad spectrum in that worship is more vivid, piety is more intense, generosity of the poor and the longing for justice take steps forward. I mean, all of these things that right now Christians sort of fight amongst themselves over, what happens when God sort of says, puts his finger, let's say on North Korea at the beginning of the 20th century and say, I'm gonna take this little piece of Asia and I'm gonna make, I'm gonna make a, I'm gonna Christianize this right now. It's like he almost puts his finger on something and bang, revival happens and you can find these hot spots in church history. And when they come, it's always a surprise. What happens is never quite predicted. You see that in the book of Acts, that's what you see. You know, in Antioch, this church develops and it's like, wow. And the church in Antioch seeds the church throughout the rest of the Roman world and it transforms Christianity. But again, when revivals come, people of different traditions find themselves energized and they don't necessarily become less reformed or less Catholic or less Orthodox and their distinctives don't necessarily disappear, but their distinctives don't cause conflict in an unproductive way with other elements and communities within the Christian faith. It's like the rooms in the hallway and in CS Lewis's mere Christianity, the lights come on and the whole thing and God just moves and it's powerful and it's glorious and it's brilliant and then it stops and we don't know why. But this, now I'm revealing some of my Calvinism that, you know, this is God's work, this is God's effort and when he brings the whoosh, it's a beautiful thing. So I don't think one needs to give up their distinct reformed beliefs or passion and be on good terms and grow an appreciation for what God has done in other places and times and other traditions. And to me, that's part of what an estuary is for. You can have your hardcore, young, restless and reformed congregation and still have an estuary. And I think actually, again, because I'm a Calvinist, I think it's easier for a Calvinist because God is so sovereign and God is doing this work. And so if he's making Orthodox and Roman Catholic believers, who are you to, you know, who are you, oh pot, to talk to the potter when you're looking at the other pots on the shelf? God is large and in charge and he's sovereign and he's gonna have his way and the mission is his own and his Holy Spirit is surprising and refreshing. And that does nothing to undermine any of the doctrines of grace that you hold passionately. So just, you know, don't become a tyrant. I'll keep reading the question. Indeed, sometimes I feel as if I do not worship the same God as others, oh, you do. And it is difficult to discuss anything at all since the reformed worldview is contrarian to many of the convictions many people have. Well, that's okay. If you talk about more things, you're gonna find more things that you disagree with them on. Love is, I love this, you know, I got this from Peugeot. I mean, part of the definition of love is its capacity is to span over differences. You're not in charge of their soul. You're not in charge of their brain. You're not in charge of their destiny. If God wants to turn them into Calvinists, who can stop him? So that's what's beautiful about the Calvinist perspective is that God is in charge. And God being in charge just gives you remarkable freedom. You don't have to go around and be the judge of the world. The world has one judge. Make your contribution, make your appeal, but love as you go. Many unrelated discussions just evolve into Calvinism. Yeah, yeah, don't let that bother you. People do that all the time. Oh, but you're a Calvinist. Yeah, I'm a Calvinist. Get over it. If you wanna keep picking at it, pick away. You know, God is large and in charge and you know, the pots can rattle and shake and show their cracks, but it's the potter that counts. I find myself defending the character of God in heated exchanges. Okay, well, defensiveness is often a revelation of insecurity. And as a Calvinist, because you have outsourced, you have put the source of your convictions and your salvation so fully within the will of God, there should be, I mean, part of the beauty of Calvinism is a lack of insecurity. And that's the way I see it. And so you should be the least defensive person because what God does in them is what God does in them. You're not in charge of it. You don't need to defend the character of God. Now, give a testimony for the hope that is in you and tell people exactly what you think, but you don't have to get upset. And I know that takes some time and some practice and some maturity, but you don't have to get upset. I know that takes some time and some practice and some maturity learning how to do it, but God's in charge of them, not you. God's in charge of you. So again, I think Calvinism is potentially a terrific tradition to hold to actually get along very well with others because you don't have to be defensive. And constantly having to reassure myself of my own convictions because I cannot move beyond the fundamentals of reform theology and discussion. You don't have to. That's the point of reformed sovereignty. I look at the five points of Calvinism as sort of five fingers on a hand. And the palm of that hand is the sovereignty of God. With a God that sovereign, God doesn't need you to defend him. God doesn't need you to change your neighbors. Now, again, in some, how that played out in let's say early 20th century aspects of the Christian Reformed Church, there are a group of Calvinists who are completely against evangelism because if God's gonna save somebody, he doesn't need me. Oh, okay, that's true. But Calvinists should be devoted to the scriptures. And what seems clear from the scriptures is you're invited to participate in this glorious work that God is doing in the world. So maybe he doesn't need you, but he sure is inviting you to participate in the harvest. What a glorious thing. And if you come to the harvest as a Calvinist, that's even more, it's even better because you don't have to be anxious about what God is doing in their heart because God is large and in charge. So I see, so I understand what you're saying and I've seen many Calvinists feel those tensions too. But I think the error in that is actually a lack of firmness of your Calvinism, ironically. Let them be them. If somehow Father Big Mac, because he's a Roman Catholic priest and in the discord is a threat to you because he's smart and he's educated and he can give maybe answers that you can't give, well, you're just a pot. If Father Big Mac's, some of his answers and some of his theology is insufficient in your mind, he'll have to answer to God for that, not you. Make your case, but relax and be his friend because God is large and in charge and God will do with this world and with other people what God will do. Just be faithful and accept his invitation to the evangelization of the world and do so with your own distinctives. And again, I think Calvinism should give you the most security. You can't, perseverance of the saints. You haven't earned this thing and so you can't lose this thing. And so I think the Calvinist perspective is potentially the least defensive, the most secure, the most able to reach across theological traditions and differences from any of the traditions. That's how I see it. And so if you're feeling threatened or insecure, I would say don't give up your Calvinism, be a better Calvinist. Go deeper into it and live in the security of God's election towards you. And if you're concerned about others, pray for them, but be the best, most loving witness you can. I have problems with some Calvinists when their Calvinism, okay, so there's a value hierarchy. What's at the top of the Christian value hierarchy? Love your neighbor as yourself all the way up to and including your enemies and love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength in the other order. Love God, love your neighbor. There's a hierarchy. Nothing about Calvinism changes any of that. It's all in scripture, sola scriptura. Okay, it's right there. Look at that start of the Heideberg Catechism. Very solid reformed confession. And I prefer it to the Westminster. Well, I'm a Dutch Calvinist. Beginning of the Heideberg Catechism, misery, deliverance, gratitude. It begins with the summary of the law. Love the Lord your God with all your hearts, soul, mind and strength. Love your neighbor as yourself. That's the beginning. And so your Calvinism is downstream from that. And I think your Calvinism helps you be a better lover. At least that's the way I see it. So it's not your job to change anybody else. It's your job to be a witness. You can't change their hearts. You don't have that power. God has that power. And as a Calvinist, you believe he really does. And you have doctrines around that that say he's absolutely large and in charge. Now it was Calvin himself in his commentary, I believe on the book of Daniel, that said to the degree that you worry, you doubt God. And I would take that another step. The degree that you're anxious or defensive, you're doubting God. You have a doctrinal tradition that should give you absolute security and is tremendously powerful in reducing anxiety. Go deeper into it. But the deeper into it should make you less sectarian, less defensive, less judgmental and more loving. Because again, if love is at the top of the value hierarchy, your tradition should be in the service of love, not of a whole bunch of other unloving aspects that I've seen played out in various conservative Calvinist traditions. So let's see. Yeah, constantly having heated exchanges. Well, that's at some point, that's on you. That's not on your tradition. Figure out how to have productive exchanges and have them be less heated. It's hard, I know. I've been in many heated exchanges and I still fall back into them. I find this very chaotic for the development of my infantile faith. Is this estuary full of heretical mischaracterizations of God's healthy, God healthy for a new reformed believer? Well, that's a very valid question. And there's a place for that. There's a place for a greenhouse and there's a place for an estuary. And an estuary is going to have higher degrees of chaos than a church. And if you need to take a step back because this is undermining your faith, it's tempting you to sin, then take a step back and maybe come in less regularly. But I don't see anything. I think actually an estuary is a terrific place for a Calvinist to be because again, just thinking how I piece this together for myself, I think my Calvinism affords me enormous security and effective powerful tools against anxiety, against defensiveness, against all kinds of bad habits that I've seen in the reformed tradition. To love my Orthodox and Roman Catholic and atheist and Islamic and Jewish and spiritual but not religious and all of my neighbors as myself. Nothing in Calvinism takes away that command. And Calvinism, I think rightly construed should help you to love your neighbor as yourself all the way up to and including your enemy. And if Calvinism is not helping you do that, then you might look at some of things that have attached themselves to you. But I agree with what you said here that an estuary, if you're insecure, might be a challenging place. And I would then admonish you to reengage in your spiritual disciplines, whether that's reading Calvin's Institutes or I would recommend devoting yourself to the Heideberg Catechism, the Belgian Confession. So I'm a Dutch Calvinist and even the canons of Dor, and studying it in its historical context. And the Christian Reformed Church has traditionally used the Heideberg Catechism the most. If there's one way to understand the history of the Christian Reformed Church, it is a deep attachment to the Heideberg Catechism. And I think the Heideberg Catechism in so many ways figures out how to both maintain its Reformed theological footing and a generosity to the rest of the Christian tradition. It's a tremendously sweet confession. And so it's right there, it's in the public domain, it's on the website of the Christian Reformed Church. The Christian Reformed Church for many years, and I think it has suffered because it has lost some of these traditions. The morning service was kind of your standard service, and the evening service, 52 Lord's Days a year, irregardless of holidays, was the constant study of the Heideberg Catechism. And for the generation that is now dying who was reared and steeped in that tradition, they had many spiritual blessings from it. So if you have to take a step back from the estuary for a while, that's absolutely fine. The estuary is connected to the church. Swim back upstream to the walled garden of the church. Devote yourself to that. For me, again, my perspective is, I think Calvinism is the best. If I didn't think it was the best, I wouldn't keep being one. Now, obviously there's huge difference of opinion in this community. There aren't even a lot of Calvinists here. I don't know what that says about me, but I dare suspect I'm sneaking, I'm doing a bunch of Calvinists smuggling in all these Orthodox and Roman Catholics, perhaps, and hopefully, welcomingly so, and with a particular sweetness. But I think Calvinism in the doctrines that you have laid out is impressively equipped to create Christians that are both secure in themselves, generous with other Christians with whom they have differences, and sacrificial towards their enemies in the world, because that's at the heart of Christianity. And so Calvinism should come around that. The difference between Calvinists and Roman Catholics and Orthodox, absolutely there are differences, but those are, we hold Christ in common. We have lots of conversations about all kinds of other things. And as a Calvinist, I learned continually from my Orthodox Roman Catholic friends. I learned continually from my atheist friends. I learned continually from my non-theist friend, John Vervecky. I learned continually from Jonathan Peugeot, this crazy postmodern, ancient, Orthodox icon carver of all things. I gotta tell you that when I first started listening to Peugeot, I had to sit there and say, okay, I'm gonna be listening to another icon carver. And I know colleagues of mine in the Christian firm church that have icons in their offices. And I don't go there, because it makes me nervous. I'm deeply Calvinist. But at the same time, it's because of, it's because my faith is not based in me. My life is hidden with Christ in the heavens. That I have that security where, on what basis wouldn't I call Jonathan Peugeot a brother in Christ? Has he not been baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit? Do we have differences theologically? But he's baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. He's my brother in Christ. So by all means, if in your case, you need to take a step back, because you find yourself tempted into heated, unproductive squabbling, by all means, take a step back. And then maybe come back when you're feeling secure enough to have a productive, vivid, difficult conversation, without having that shake your love for the person with whom you're talking. So that's the goal. So it's a great question. I'm really glad you asked it. All right. Marka Fisherman. Marka Fisherman. Hi Paul, with the greatest respect to your religion, what does Jesus add to the monotheistic in the Jewish sense enterprise, other than an intermediary, a more easily digestible step towards interacting with the ineffable? That's not a small thing. We all need baby steps. I was having a conversation again yesterday with an individual who's followed my channel right from the start, and he's never been on my channel. I have conversations with certain individuals who have followed me very closely. So many of them support this channel financially through Discord or through Living Stones. Because of the jobs they have, and in some cases the status they have, they don't want to associate with me publicly. And then that's absolutely fine. And we were not only talking about revival, but we were talking about virtue. And we were talking about how virtue, C.S. Lewis points that out in The Abolition of Man, virtue is like this bedrock throughout, across human, across world religions, atheists, I mean it's just this, it's natural revelation, it's general revelation that virtuous living yields blessedness. What does Christ bring? I'd say especially from a Jewish sense, Christ is the, Christ is the better Job in his crucifixion and resurrection. Christ is the better David in his kingship. Christ is the physical witness to the promised resurrection. Christ is the chief witness that sacrificial living is not irresponsible. Christ is the ability to love your neighbor at the kinds of costs that everyone around this world says isn't worth it. Christ is the fulfillment of the promise given in the Hebrew scriptures. In my men's group Wednesday night, we studied the section of Matthew 8, right after the Sermon on the Mount. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus says, I have not come to abolish the law but to fulfill it. What does that mean? Well, Matthew chapter eight shows that a leper comes to Christ and says, if you are willing, can you heal me? And he touches the leper. You know, usually in the Mosaic law, if common comes into contact with unclean, common is defiled. Jesus comes into contact with the unclean and the unclean become clean and not just ceremonially clean, but physically clean, all the layers down. And then Jesus says, go show yourself to the priest and give the sacrifice prescribed by Moses, completely within the Jewish context. The next story is Jesus talks to a centurion who has quite likely a Jewish slave. And this is in Capernaum. And everyone around should be saying, Jesus, if you were a real Mosaic, you would kill that centurion and free the slave. And instead, Jesus goes on to say, this centurion is showing greater faith than anyone I found in Israel. And then suddenly everyone around Jesus is offended. And then the centurion, then Jesus goes further to say, when it comes to the banquet of the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, there will be many, he basically says, there will be many Gentiles who come in ahead of some of those who imagine themselves to be close to the patriarchs. And at that moment, so in the story of the leper, Jesus shows himself to be an absolute son of Israel, intensifying the promises of Moses. In the story of the centurion, Jesus shows himself to be the king of the world, that a centurion himself has now come to and completely understands that Jesus should not have to go to his home. And Jesus doesn't need to go to his home. So in that second story, Jesus is revealed to be the king of the world who has claims not just on Jews, but on all Gentiles. And then in the third story, a tremendously intimate story where Peter's mother, Peter's mother-in-law is ill with a fever and Jesus touches her and she's clean and she gets up to serve, which sort of ties the other two stories together. And then the next story where nighttime descends, and again, I preached about this a couple of years ago in Mark, because why would the gospel make the point that nighttime is descending? Well, that's a symbolic point, because nighttime descends and the people bring out the demon possessed and Jesus drives them out with a word and heals everyone. That's a picture of Jesus. And he fulfills what God began in Israel and he shares that fulfillment to the world. Now, this week in my sermon, I'm preaching from Acts 13, where for a long time I read the book of Acts and I always wondered, what does Paul, Paul always goes into the book of Acts and what does Paul, Paul always goes into these synagogues in the Roman Empire and he preaches and some people are like, wow, this is amazing. And other people are like, we gotta kill this guy. And I was like, what does he preach? And so I'm going through the book of Acts and I realized in chapter 13, what Luke has given us is probably Paul's main sermon that he gave in all of these synagogues in the diaspora in the Roman Empire. Paul lays it out and it's analogous in many ways to what Peter gives in Acts chapter two, but it's slightly different in some aspects. And you can see, because of course, Paul was doing this before the gospels were written, you can see elements of the tradition that were already among the apostles that will get recorded in the gospels. And you can see what Paul does and he emphasizes the resurrection and to the Jews, to the Romans, as in what I preached on last week, he goes up to a Roman official and he demonstrates the power of Christ to a Roman official who would be looking for signs and wonders. But it isn't just signs and wonders he gives, he speaks reason and he articulates knowledge and wisdom. And so the Roman is impressed by the wisdom and impressed by the miracles and impressed by the display of divinity. And he becomes a believer as it says. Now, what kind of a believer? Well, that'd be an interesting question. I touched on it in the sermon. Now to the Jews, Paul says, Jesus is the better culmination and fulfillment of everything that David pointed to. And they're like, well, is he going to raise up an army? No, but Jesus' conquest doesn't kill the centurion, but makes the centurion a faithful servant of the most high God. And now I'm a Christian minister. This is what I do. But that's my answer to what Jesus brings. Jesus brings in flesh, in the physical world, the beginning of the fulfillment of the law in some ways that are stretching and extraordinary, but that's what he brings. And so I'm also a Protestant. And so I totally understand how some Jews, some Jewish converts in Jewish communities have formed different Protestant practices and traditions to reach out to their culture. And I think that's absolutely in line with what the apostle Paul did. When the apostle Paul returns to Jerusalem before he is arrested, he goes back to Jerusalem to fulfill his vow. And what the apostle Paul's consistent message was in the New Testament was the Jews should be better Jews. And so they continue to practice circumcision. They continue to participate in their dietary restrictions and their laws, and they continue to do those things. And Paul himself, when he's with the Jews, continues to do so. But to the Gentiles, as he says in the book of Galatians, is you don't come to Christ through those practices. He has come to you. And it's that church that begins to expand quickly where the God-fearers who are meeting, because they're fascinated by this God of Israel and this Jewish way of life, but they're not wholly convinced that they haven't gone all the way to circumcision. These are the people that Paul breaches, and Paul says, you don't need to be circumcised. But then you have this huge sorting out, well, how do I relate to the laws of Moses and the covenant with Israel? And so Paul does a lot of that sorting out, and the churches continue to have to do that sorting out. And if there's any disgrace in the history of the church, it's been how they have treated the Jews. And I think the Lord will judge his church harshly because the Lord of the church is a Jew. Salvation is from the Jews. So, yeah, I think Jesus completes it and fulfills it and universalizes it so that he's not just king of Israel, he's the king of the world. And the fulfillment of the prophecies of Isaiah are met in him. I think that's what Paul saw, that's what Peter saw, that's what the church saw. And then with Jesus, it comes physically, not by the blood of our enemies, but by the blood of our Lord. It's just an astounding, astounding thing. So that's my answer. Topher the Salty, hey Paul, your metaphor for the enlightenment and darkened mint modernity of humanity closing one of its eyes is useful and intuitive, but I'm curious if we could workshop it to improve it. In particular, how does the metaphor work prior to the 17th or 18th century? Did we have both eyes open, the other eye open and the scientific eye closed? It's a great question. And I think it can be workshopped. And I think actually one of the ways to workshop it would be with Barfield's initial and final participation because I think Barfield is sort of a way of getting at this because in one of the ways to look at the scientific vision versus the manifest image is heaven and earth. I think it maps onto those. I've been thinking a lot about, so I've mentioned in some of my videos, I've been going through a great courses series on the history of the Vikings and just enjoying it thoroughly. And the runes, the Vikings had the runes. Now the Vikings were not initially, and this comes out in these shows that I've been watching, The Last Kingdom and Vikings. They weren't illiterate people. They didn't have a literate culture. They eventually did, especially with Christianity. But why the fascination with runes? Well, runes are in some ways something out of The Age of Decay in a very platonic sense. And so they saw that power. And this week, and a big part of Paul's sermon in Acts 13 is why is Jesus a better David? Because David lies moldering in the ground. Jesus is risen, not subject to decay. And Jesus will raise David. And when Jesus raises David, he will not be subject to decay any longer. Now, David, as with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as with the Lord, but not physically. We're waiting for the... Oh, I hear voices, Rick. Okay. Can I say, am I hearing voices, Rick? Rick, don't tell. I have a lot of conversations with people, hear voices. It's contagious. It's COVID schizophrenia. Oh no, the Delta variant. So what Jesus does is says that David will be more than he is right now again. And so will my father. And there's hope in Christ by virtue of his resurrection that I'll get to meet Moses and David and Abraham and Isaac and Jesus. Not just, let's say, as Paul saw Jesus from heaven, but I'll get to meet them in the flesh. And God has more chapters to come further up and further in. And people like LARPing dressing up like Harry Potter or Luke Skywalker. And that's sort of in line with our imagination for the resurrection. But one's heart's desire to visit Hogwarts or to fly in the Millennium Falcon is far closer realized in Christ. Because who knows what he has planned for us? And again, the Good Place and Upload, they just show the limitations of our imagination. Who knows what Christ has in store for us physically, all the layers together. Again, I don't hear any better gospel. I haven't seen any better gospel. I haven't seen any other hope that draws me. And oops, I'm answering the wrong question. Sorry, Topher, I'll get back to your question. I haven't seen any, I think you get me preaching. I haven't seen any better gospel that draws me to that hope. So getting back to the mapping of heaven and earth, you can take Barfield to a degree and map that onto a lot of these other mappings of the age of decay. And so when, hopefully Thunder Bay is gonna get back on, and those of you in the Bridges of Meaning Discord server can ask Catherine about that, because in case you didn't know, Catherine is one of the planners for the Thunder Bay event that perhaps will happen in spring of 2022. I hope so. Where was I going with this? Mapping Thunder Bay. Da da da da da, how did I get to Thunder Bay? How do I get to Thunder Bay? All of the mappings, I think Barfield is helpful because initial participation is in some ways, perhaps, pre-fall, where heaven and earth are together, where heaven and earth are together, spirit and matter are together. Loss of participation, and we see this sort of fractaling throughout. You see it in the Bible. And Jesus isn't satisfied until Shalom is fully manifest. And we see that in the Hebrew prophets where people are saying, just like the pagans, and this is something that I kind of learned from John Walton. The pagans around would say exactly what Israel was saying in Jeremiah, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord. And God says, no, you don't understand. The reason that your sacrifices have to be in harmony with your fulfillment of the covenant, which is the love of your neighbor and the welcoming of the stranger and the feeding of the hungry and the healing of the leprous. The reason that the ceremonial and the physical, the social, the familial, the relational, the reason they all have to be in harmony is God is going to re-knit the world together. And in that process, he's going to re-knit you together. And that's what the resurrection is. So that re-knitting, it's very interesting, and I really have to think a lot more about something that Jordan Peterson says often, because he says, via Jung, well, basically, doing all the ceremonies in church wasn't yielding the kind of shalom. And so they decided to pursue mastery of the physical world. And I think on one hand, that's blessed and good because science comes from the church and we have certainly been blessed by it. On the other hand, as in almost all powerful things, there's also idolatry that came in through there. And I think what we're doing in modernity is sorting through a lot of that idolatry because technology and magic in some ways are parallel. And these lines get very complex. And so these tensions that between the scientific and the manifest are easily mappable upon the physical and the spiritual, upon the loss of participation and final participation. All of these things can map. So yeah, it can be workshopped, it can be broadened, and I'm quite sure of that because the science and the pre-science and the magic and I mean, that's why Jesus' miracles aren't magic, but they are physical. And I think Lewis brings this out nicely in of course, his wonderful book, Miracles, something that I've pointed to many times. So great question. Okay, I'm catching up, 45 minutes, here we go, more to do. Julian, one of my ongoing critiques of Peugeot has been that he seems to confuse Christianity with the kind of religion that is necessary for the maintenance of proper civilization and familial life. See my recent conversation with Byrne, the anadromist. I'm finding that hard to square with the Jesus of the Gospels who says, "'Whoever does not hate his family is not worthy of me, "'and those who live by the sword die by the sword,' and so on. Could you comment on the basic tension I see in Peugeot's anti-revolutionary Christianity and the non-violence yet revolutionary spirit I see unleashed in Christ's life, death and resurrection? I agree with what you see there, and it's the tension between the kingdom having come in Constantinople and it's the tension between the now and the not yet. And these tensions don't go away. And different traditions express those tensions in different ways. The Anabaptist tradition, of course, which Julian is a part, really beautifully expresses the non-violent revolutionary aspect of Jesus, which in some ways critiques Constantinople and says, wow, that's an impressive expression of Christ, but it's not there yet. But the Anabaptists, they have their own challenges, and so they put together a community where they're practicing X2 and X4, and they're holding things in common, and they're radically pursuing this, and God bless them. That's difficult to scale up. And there's a reason Anabaptists, this stuff is so complex. And I like the imagery of resolution because we're always dealing with the now and the not yet. And in one hand, what is true of Constantinople is perhaps true of Geneva, is perhaps true of America, is perhaps true of the British Empire, is perhaps true of the French monarchy, on and on and on and on and on. On one hand, Christianity for its witness needs to be instantiated. On the other hand, all witnesses are insufficient. And they are insufficient because in this age, in this dispensation, we don't fully get there. That final getting there is finally a gift. And I think that is what we find in the book of Revelation, where Jesus brings heaven back to earth. It's what we find in Colossians, where our life is hidden with Christ and the heavenlies, and in the last day, he brings it down to us. And so you're right, Julian, that there are certain tension lines within every expression of the faith that keep getting mapped down the further in and the further down you go. But the mapping in down further doesn't in some ways undercut the impressive instantiations that are expressed in the here and now. And so Constantinople and the Byzantine Empire, Justinian, it's a beautiful instantiation of the kingdom come. Every church needs to be that to one degree or another. At the same time, we have the testimony of the Anabaptists that say, you can do farther, you can be less violent, you can be more generous. And so the Christian traditions work that way. I see Calvinism in a similar way. And so the Anabaptists are always sort of the yeah, but, and they function and they have a prophetic function. But of course, the Anabaptists have all of their own tensions all the way on down. They're just as fragmentary as Calvinists. So yeah, I think you're seeing something. I think that's all right and it's all there. And it's sort of the, you know, so Nate's Christian anarchism is a similar thing. And oh, I forget his name right now. Ivan Illich and his critiques, similar thing. They're powerful critiques. And when I read Ivan Illich, it's like, as soon as you instantiate institutionally, you've lost something, absolutely. Must we instantiate institutionally? Absolutely. Will it happen even if you're trying to have as weak and fragile an institution as possible? Absolutely, because even a Hutterite community one way or another only exists because of a rule of life that they commonly share. So I wonder if how we talk about religion, S or W on this channel doesn't lead us to think of Christianity more in those kinds of civilizations, sociological terms, rather than something eschatological breaking in and disputing our status quo. And this again is sort of this prophetic, this is sort of this prophetic tradition of the Anabaptists, which is powerful and which I think is helpful, but is tremendously hard to maintain. It's sort of like revival. When revival comes, it's amazing, it's beautiful, but it goes. And Jacob with a powerful critique of my religion says, okay, part of his problem with the resurrection is the ascension. And I think it's basically asking the same thing as Dan Fogelberg's song, why can't we make love stay? And the song, if I could put time in a bottle. And I think the answer is the current dispensation of the world is unable to at this point sufficiently embody God's desire for it. And so this is why a new heavens and a new earth come in the consummation. And critiques are right, but at the same time, I'm not ready to dismiss Constantinople and its benefits because the Christian church also resides on that. In some ways, if Christ hadn't been instantiated in the American constitution, the British common law tradition, liberties, all of those things contribute, however deficient, to the witness of the Anabaptists. And I think that point is made by Peter and Paul in their respect for the sword that would eventually take their life, a far more corrupt Roman empire than what we find having gone throughout the world by virtue of Christ, again, Tom Holland's dominion. So yeah, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep, but I can but the prophets too. And the prophets, you know, Nathan, couldn't decry what David did with Bathsheba and Uriah if Nathan didn't at the same time admit an instantiation of God's grace in the present reign of King David, despite all of his shortcomings. So I think this is a function of the age and the dispensation that we live in. Holy cow, I'm just catching up. Okay, now we're back to this week. Sherry, or not even this week. Paul, recently I ran into the idea that Jesus was working towards the perfect timing of his death. That's true. I am aware that Christ knew what he was on earth to do and what he was willing to die for us. Yep, that is, that much is obvious from the scriptures, but there seems to be the other idea that Christ was actively asking people to keep their healing, keep their healing a secret, for example, to avoid being killed too soon and then keeping silent and not defending himself before Pilate in order to hasten his death. Could you show me how this is the case if it is? For me personally, to think of Christ in this way makes him sound like some strange cult leader with a Messiah complex. Jesus had a right to his Messiah complex because he was the Messiah. The question of the secrecy about healings is a big one. And actually again, on Wednesday night with my men's group, it's not recorded. There's a lot of discussion about that and there are a lot of variables that are potentially at play with that in terms of him along the way modulating his opposition so as to, it's hard not to read something like this like what Jesus says in Matthew 8 and imagine his public ministry lasted three years. And in fact, there's evidence in that that there were numerous attempts at Jesus' life before he orchestrated his death outside of Jerusalem. And one of the perpetual questions about Jesus' death is why didn't they stone Jesus like they did Stephen? Because it's a little bit strange that there's these comments that basically say the Sanhedrin at that point didn't have the authority of capital punishment. And a lot of people have pushed back on those comments. The difficulty that we have is our view of history is so we have so little data to work on that there very well could have been just at that particular time between Pilate and the Sanhedrin that Pilate had basically said now maybe a whole bunch of people had been killed, maybe a Roman citizen had been killed for some reason. And so there's all this ongoing political stuff that is constantly happening which would completely not be visible via the very few strands of outside biblical history that we have onto this period. So it could be very well be that Jesus himself was basically planning to be killed by the Romans. And so was delaying making sure that he would be brought up on charges so that he would be killed by the Romans because Jesus being killed by the Romans, was it my last question answer last week that I was talking about this? If Jesus was simply stoned by Stephen, the story would be different. And I don't think we would have had the Roman, the evangelization and conquest of the Roman Empire. And I don't think we would have had therefore the Christianization of the whole world. And so Jesus needed to for so many reasons to be killed the way he was killed. That's I think absolutely foundational to the story, not incidental. And I think the Gospel of John, I think the other Gospels bear complete testimony that Jesus completely understood when and how he was going to be killed and that he would rise from the dead. And Jesus says that three different times in the Gospel of Luke to his disciples before his death. And quite understandably, they don't get it. So did Jesus have a Messiah complex? Yeah, and he's the only one that has a right to have one. And in terms of how this feeds into the secrecy that very well might've been a part of it. He didn't want to die in the Galilee that wouldn't have fulfilled scriptures in the way that he ties in the prophetic tradition of the Hebrew scriptures with himself. He needs to die in Jerusalem. Jerusalem's that important. He needs to die outside of Jerusalem. He needs to die like the prophets. He needs to initiate this tradition which Paul will pick up on. There's so much in that Acts 13 passage. I have nowhere, really with a sermon, if you're gonna keep the sermon to less than 30 or 40 minutes, and you're gonna have an introduction that's gonna be broad enough to hopefully connect with a lot of people, you only get 10 minutes of real teaching even in a 30 minute sermon. Everything else is just setting up for it. And so that's part of the reason in my preaching, really what I try to do in my sermons is I just try to set up the biblical passage so that people can hear it better. I think that's something that I've developed in terms of my own preaching style. And there's some strengths to it and some liabilities to it. And sometimes people notice that my sermons are a little strange, but that's what I'm really doing in my sermon. I want people to hear the scriptures better. And so, but yeah, no, Jesus had a Messiah complex and he deserved to have it. The reason a Messiah complex is a problem with us is because I am insufficient to die for the sins of the world. And again, my basis for that is the Heideberg Catechism, who, and this is also my resistance to Sam. What kind of sacrifice must we have to accomplish what Jesus accomplished? He must be fully man and fully God. And the Heideberg Catechism walks through that in the simplest, easiest way to see. So, yeah, the reason Messiah complex is a problem is because we are not Messiahs. It is not a problem with Jesus because he is. Matthias, Paul, our recent conversation meant a lot to me and it got such a positive vibe out of it that it still remains. So I want to thank you for that. Well, I thank you for that. I thought it was a great conversation. I really loved it. My question, last Sunday on the Catholic voice chat, some participants said something like, Protestant should make up their mind and return to the one true Catholic church. And the Orthodox said, oh, those Catholics should get over that whole Bishop of Rome thing and understand that Constantinople in the Byzantine Empire was the true Roman church. And we're at least not so, we don't have a Messiah complex that we imagine that only one of our bishops is the true one. The introduction of the Orthodox give the Protestants a little cover because they didn't sort of say to you two, if you two make up, well, and in fact, I had a Christian foreign minister, a friend of mine say exactly that. He says, you know, if the Orthodox and the Catholic make up, I think we got to go with them and point taken. Even though I am still in the process of connecting to some Protestant splinter communities, I am willing to listen to and contemplate such statements because I think we should all wrestle with those kinds of questions. I think you're right. But for most folks, I don't think such statements will achieve the supposed outcome because they will lead to reactive behavior and more protestantism. No, I think you're exactly right. In one of your Q&As last December, you talked about the tell-offs of Protestantism and you stated, one day the protest needs to end. Yeah. Which in your mind is one of your most important statements. Do you have a specific ideas of how Protestants should work towards the day the protest ends in their communities? I think estuary is, I think that's something that can happen in estuary. And that is something that I have been blessed by. I mean, we started this bridges of meaning discord server as sort of a meetup and we didn't know that all the Orthodox and Catholics would come in. And they've certainly created an ecumenism here in this space, which I think is, I don't want to be disrespectful towards sort of the high status theological, ecumenical conversations that are having between theologians. I think that's very important work. I think evangelicalism in many ways has been an ecumenical movement in the United States and increasingly so, even though there are obviously still some big tensions with Roman Catholics and Orthodox. So Christ praised that his church would be one. We should work towards that. But I'm not about to tell Julian to stop being a Hutterite to join the Calvinists. Would I like it if Julian became a Calvinist? Of course. Would I like it if everyone in the bridges of meaning discord server joined the Christian reform church? Of course, I wouldn't, I wouldn't. Cause then I wouldn't, you wouldn't be helping me in all the ways that you help me. But of course, you know, if you have an idea, it's because you believe it's right and you want the whole world to believe it too. That's natural. But a Messiah complex is doubling down on that and insisting that they do. It's only Jesus that gets to say, there's my side and the other side. There's my way and the wrong way. Jesus gets to do that. Paul VanderKlaai doesn't. So I think Protestantism has helped the Roman Catholic Church in some ways, probably heard it too. I think it's probably going to help the Orthodox Church, probably heard it too. So yeah, it's a big deal. And so I think this estuary for me is really a wonderful place where I get to, you know, the Anglicans, that's been a cool thing. Getting in touch with the riches of the Anglican Church. I mean, because before any of this, I had a whole lot less knowledge about many of these other traditions. And now I don't have knowledge of these traditions via theological differences, which is sort of the mappings I had before. I have a much richer knowledge because it's not that I can read Catholic theology and see where they differ from some Reformed theology. I can have fellowship with Roman Catholics and see where we're alike and we're apart. And of course, Roman Catholics are a tremendously diverse bunch of people. So yeah, it's a big conversation. So I think what we're doing here in estuaries are furthering the union of the Church. And do you think the end of the protest simply means all Protestants become Catholic? End of story. Is the Catholic Church today what it was in 1517? No. What is the Catholic Church? It's a structure, it's a tradition. There's an entity there, but the Pope is trying to abolish the Latin Mass. Is the Pope Catholic? I mean, a lot of Catholics are asking that question. Or is the Pope Protestant? We're part of Christ's body. We're baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. I know I'm probably annoying Sam when I say that. Hello. I'm not sure if I'm saying that right now, but I think the question is, is the Pope Catholic? Is the Pope Catholic? Is the Pope Protestant? Is the Pope Protestant? I don't know if I'm saying that. Hello. Anyway. So the Catholics have a structural, that their focus is on a structure. The Orthodox play differently with structure. The Protestants play differently with structure. As a Protestant, I look at how much structure is there in the New Testament for a church. The Christian foreign church tried to map onto that in some ways, elders and deacons. But they always have to sort of fudge around the ends too. And so as a minister of the word and elder, I know they differ with the Presbyterians on some of those things. So it's, yeah, this'll be with us. Well, and so we'll keep working on it. Seconding Topher's question, did that one already? Back to Bo, the guy on Netflix. Feature bug. Hi, Paul. I was fascinated to learn about two recent conversations that symbolize the inversion of fool's pattern of Peugeot, Rousse, V. Ex-pickup artist converted to become a devout Orthodox Christian and Milo Yiannopoulos recently convert to Catholic, Catholicism. I don't know how recent he is. He just decided to, Milo, what a story, what a story. It's easy to be dismissive of Milo. And, but every now and then, yeah, the fool. I think Peugeot has a great point with that. And they had a fantastic, Milo had a conversation with, oh, I'm gonna have to watch that. Oh, he linked good. He had a conversation with, oh, I'm gonna have to watch that. He linked good. That'll be interesting. Boy, the central point of disagreement was Rousse the Orthodox. My primary concern should be to grow in holiness and save my soul. I need God. God doesn't need me to save the world. Sounds like a Calvinist versus Milo Catholic. No, holiness is important, but we can't just be praying all day. We need to engage the world and save them. Well, no one ever, well, here's the irony of Calvinism to get back to that point. Calvinists can be extremely activistic, which you wouldn't expect from a theological tradition that seems enormously passive, but this is kind of how these things work. Even how particular theological traditions forefront themselves, they don't always live out well. Calvinists strangely keep going on about the sovereignty of God, and then some Calvinists get tremendously anxious as to whether or not they're saved. And it's like, you're sort of missing the point of that doctrine. And then Calvinists are like, well, God is doing it all. And then the next minute, Calvinists are working harder than anyone else to bring God's kingdom into Geneva. You know, all these crazy human contradictions within these traditions, even my own. And so for that reason, you know, I look at my own and I take it seriously, but I don't take it idolatrously. Because to take it idolatrously, idolatry is almost always pushing something beyond what it is. You take a good thing and you make it an ultimate thing. And God is ultimate. God is the only ultimate. Holiness is a gift. Holiness is something we must strive for every day. Both those things are true. We need to engage in the world and save them. It got me thinking, if Orthodox, Catholic, Protestants lay themselves out on a scale of being more internally focused in their spirituality to more externally focused, would you agree with that? No, they're all shot through with contradictions. I mean, so let's buy for a moment the current, which I don't think is terribly accurate, idea that via Jordan Peterson that, oh, the Orthodox have theosis and nobody else does. I don't think that's true. Well, then why did they build Constantinople? Well, because that was reaching towards the heavens. Yeah. So is that spiritually? Is that spiritually focused? Or is that physically focused? Well, it's both. And, you know, Calvin's Geneva, same thing. New Haven, Connecticut, same thing. Puritan, same thing. Anabaptists, I mean, Anabaptists are the most organized anarchists I've ever met. This is the way these things go. We're anarchists, let's have an anarchist meeting. Isn't that an oxymoron? Maybe an anarchist conversation is an oxymoron because conversations are ordered. Now, but they're order and chaos. So it's all of these working through these dualities and different mixtures. And so, and the same thing is about, yeah. So I'm gonna have to watch that conversation. That's gonna be quite interesting. Also, your recent conversation on Existential Delight podcast was wonderful. That was a terrific talk. I really enjoyed that one. That's why, you know, my wife sometimes, you know, I keep the randos line open and I take, I say yes to interviews on podcasts, seemingly no matter how small. And some of them go better than others, but to keep sort of a line open that I don't control is just an opportunity for being blessed in ways I can't anticipate. There you made a deep point that I understood as the trend towards orthodoxy is a reaction to postmodernism. But the problems questions which led to the Protestant Reformation are still unanswered. So there will be deconstruction again. I think that's true. What are those questions? Those questions involve this. How do heaven and earth match up? Should you take a vaccine? Is Constantinople the kingdom of God instantiated and what does it mean that Islam ate up so much of the orthodox church? I mean, one thing I hear, you know, there's a book that Philip Jenkins wrote which hasn't gotten, an orthodox priest who was writing an exhaustive history of the church, he sent me an email of stuff to respond to him. Once, you know, was offering to send me his books and so that I might treat them on my channel. And I'm excited to do it, but I'm nervous about my own ADHD that I won't give him what he wants in that. But the Islam is something that the church continues to need to think a lot more through. Why did the kingdom come and go away? Now, of course, Chesterton, and to a certain degree, Peugeot is talking about that. I don't think it's disconnected with the deconstructions that we have in American Christianity right now. Church, Christ lets parts of his church die, the burn off old wood, mortification, purification, testing, all those themes are there available. There are issues. The truth of science cannot be denied. Some of those truths challenge some other things we in the church hold dear. We have to keep working through those issues. And I think they impact Catholicism in different ways than Protestantism, yes. And Protestants can learn from Catholics, yes. But I'm not sure we by any means have all the answers. And I think it's for these reasons that God keeps working on us through all these different things. So these questions of science and technology and religion, of heaven and earth, of initial participation, loss of participation, final participation, scientific image, manifest image, the relationship between symbolism and, let's say written text. Relationship. So many, so many aspects that, yeah, Protestantism, and lately again, I'm reading this book from a professor of mine in college, The Religious Roots of the French Revolution. So after I go, I'm gonna cue up a whole bunch of, cue up a whole bunch of videos to be released while I'm away on vacation. It won't be up to my usual pace, but there's some great conversations that are coming. And one of them was with someone on the Discord server who is a Roman Catholic in Quebec. And she and I were talking about the history of the church in Quebec and Peugeot has touched on it. It's fascinating what happens when French Roman Catholics deconvert and how that gets manifest in their take on secularism. And she was telling me about how all these massive, beautiful churches in Quebec are getting sold for a song because, and then how Quebec is in some ways more secular than the rest of Canada, which is already pretty secular. So there's a ton here. And again, my thesis, which I asked my former professor about, did the French Revolution happen because they suppressed the Protestant Reformation? I think there's a lot of truth to that. And we, they deal with those questions academically, but we've not even scratched the surface. And so then the secularization of Quebec, the caving of the church in Quebec, and for Peugeot's family, that led to, I mean, the church started going in a bad direction, the Roman Catholic Church, so Peugeot's parents went Protestant, and then Jonathan Peugeot went Orthodox. Right there in that family story is a fractal of what was going on in Quebec, which is a fractal of the relationship between the French culture and the Protestant Reformation. Don't forget, John Calvin was a Frenchman, and Geneva was flooded with French Protestant refugees. And that then, you know, there's so much to work through. We don't have time in this dispensation. Part of what we'll do probably in the age to come is to continue to work on these things. Now, I think it will be in an improved dispensation, but we don't know about the God ordained limits of that dispensation too, in terms of what all God has in store for us. And again, if you believe God is good, if you can trust God, we should be nothing but excited about the challenges and the glory that await us. So, yeah. Are those doctrinal differences part of the natural symbolic order? Oh, natural symbolic order. You put those three words together, oh boy. How dare you do that when I've only got 15 minutes left? I'm not even gonna touch it. You just blew my mind. Natural symbolic order. I mean, talk about the prophet of purpose and nothing is arbitrary, and Jonathan Pujo, natural symbolic order, holy Protestant Orthodox Catholic convergence, Batman. Just those three words. So, big gold star in putting those three words together because that's huge. And it's why I see myself as so incredibly blessed by you, the people in this Discord server, and you, the people listening to the livestream. I'm just astoundingly blessed by Christ's gift to me of knowing you and having the opportunity to explore and be a part of what I think is such an exciting new work that Christ is doing in our midst. And you might say, well, it's a great thing. It's just a few hundred or a few thousand people that are doing this. Yes, but so what? Jesus only had 12 apostles. Jesus had a little inner group of 120. You know, we're getting the opportunity to mend fences and repair ties between parts of the Christian faith that have been fighting each other. I so look, and even someone who is a, you know, one way to think about John Vervecky is self-imposed exile from the church. And so I really look forward to Thunder Bay and meeting Jonathan Pujo. Welcome back to ALI. And John Vervecky and sharing a stage with them and sharing a meal with them. And getting to know them. And I get to do this. I'm thrilled, I'm excited. Yeah, there are days that I think, what have I done? What am I doing? Why am I doing this? This is nuts. All of the hassle and the bother and the, but then, you know, Richard Zurich was, he and his parents were at Living Stone's last year. He and his parents were at Living Stone's last Sunday and they took me out to lunch. I forgot my wallet. It was so embarrassing. You go out to eat with someone, it's like, oh, I can't afford to pay because I forgot my wallet. And, but they, you know, got to meet his parents, his father and his mother, and he's on a college tour. And it was, oh, it was awesome. It was awesome getting to know them. What a delightful family. What it was so wonderful to hear their story. And there's just one little family. And, you know, now, you know, to have my friendship with Rick and my wife sometimes is like, you know, she's a little jealous of Rick sometimes, you know, oh, you and Rick, why don't you marry Rick? Nope, me and Rick, not that kind of relationship, trust me. But, you know, you know, so now, you know, my friendship with Rick and my friendship with Joey and James and the other meetup people and, gosh, have I been blessed. And so even the tensions between Protestant and Catholic and Orthodox, on one hand, yeah, there's, there's sometimes animosity and hard feelings and those things, but on the other hand, I'm high in openness, so viva la difference. I can't speak French. I wish I knew French because I'm, after that conversation with the woman from Quebec, it was like, oh, gosh, I so want to know what happened in Quebec. I so want to travel to Quebec. And then I was, I was like, I want to travel to Quebec. And then I was, you know, I was talking with Catherine's husband this week and he's like, oh, come up to, come up by us in Northern Ontario. And it's like, oh, I want to go there too. And then I think, you know, I've got a church, I've got a family, I've got limited vacation, you know, I've got limited lifetime. I can't do this, but then what do I have in Christ? Not only will I meet Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and celebrate the banquet of the lamb with them, not only will I meet David and Moses and Augustine and Origen and, you know, maybe even Plato and Socrates and Aristotle, who knows? And not only will I meet all of these people, but my friendships that I've just begun with all of you, these won't be limited and cut short by death. You see, I, you know, I get to, you know, Sunday, I have Sundays and Fridays with Rick and we have a good time. And, but there's more in Rick and more in me than we can touch in this life. And then there's not only Rick, there's Joey and there's Mike and there's James and there's my family. And then there's the people at Living Stones. And then there's you here in the discord, there's Job and John and Donk. And, and, you know, Catherine and her husband and Jordan Peterson. I mean, there's just so many more people I want to spend time with. And there's not enough time in this world and this dispensation. And so what Christ offers me is not only communion with him and growing further and greater with him, but also doing this with each other and with all of you on and on and on. And so I hear an atheist say, eternity would be boring. And I think, I don't know, because chances are if just the little sample of humanity I've had the opportunity to meet in my short little life now, multiply that how many times unburdened by all of the stuff that sort of impairs us now I, this floods my imagination and my love for Christ grows and my love for you all grows. And, and yeah, you know, I'll, do I want to get up to British Columbia and sit down with Sherry and meet her goats and, you know, meet her family and yeah. If we do a meetup, you know, maybe I'll get to spend a little bit of time there. And do I want to meet Job's baby? Yeah. And, and there's not enough time in this world for all of that. But what does Christ offer us? New heavens and new earth. Now, again, atheists are going to be skeptical about it. Okay. But I think I'm desiring the best possible thing. And, and the vision of that thing, which has afforded me by the church and by the communion of the saints that encourages me to actually believe it brings me real joy now and generosity and desire for more of that here and now all the way onto and into eternity. Why would I believe the death is the end? Why would I want to spend my life believing that? I'd far rather believe what I believe now. I mean, I'm even going to sit down and get to debate Luke about universalism. I say, yeah, you know, Luke, you know, well, you know, or, you know, are some of these other people coming or not? Is it going to take them time to get there? Why, why not? Why not embrace Christ and all that he offers resurrection from the dead? I, I don't, why do I believe? Why would I not believe? Nobody's, nobody has shown me anything better to believe and to point my life towards. And what I see in an estuary, like the bridges of meaning discord and the friends that I'm making and the conversations that I'm having, it just, it just intensifies all that belief and makes me want more. And knowing that, you know, I'm in my fifties now, my birthday is tomorrow. My time in this, you know, my father died at 77 and I think about that. And it's like, my sister died when she was 53. Tomorrow isn't promised to me. Going on a vacation, could have a car accident and you know, that would be tragic. And some of you would shed a tear and console my children. That could happen, that's what this world is. But I believe in the resurrection. I believe in the life of the age to come. I believe in the goodness of God and that the plans that he has for us, not only in this world, but for the next are that we would prosper and that we would have his joy and share his joy. And a big part of this joy is the communion we have with each other. And so that's why I'm a Christian and I'm not giving it up. And yeah, we'll debate all of our stuff between Orthodox and Protestants and Catholics, but that's just some of the things we do now. We're gonna do so much more later. You know, if you think Jonathan Peugeot is a good carver now, wait until the resurrection. He'll carve the kinds of things you can't imagine now and we'll glorify God together. Gosh, why would you wanna be anything else? All right, three more questions. Okay, end of questions. Why 23? One of your past guests have brought up Eric Vogelin. Yeah, he's a lesser known 20th century philosopher, but I see lots of parallels with him and Jordan Peterson. Interesting. Started his career studying the Nazis and totalitarians, which developed into his magnum opus, Order and History, which delineates how Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Jewish, Greek and Christian myth formed the symbolic structure of our modern conceptualization of justice and society. Gosh, I'm a light touch. How dare you? You know how many books I own that I haven't finished? Oh gosh, you colonized me. I'm such a light touch. I just wanna know more. Would highly recommend checking out the table of contents of his book. Entire book can be found in freearchive.org. Oh my goodness, not a question. What you've done to me. But something I've anxiously been wanting to inject into the conversation for some time. Well, you got the camel's nose in, didn't you? Eric Vogelin. Well, here we go. We'll see what time permits. Again, that's the perpetual frustration in my life. It's like, you know, so you sit down and you meet Richard's family and it's like, I could spend days getting to know these people. Wouldn't it be great if we lived next door and, you know, watch Richard develop? He's already got a great start as a young man interested in all sorts of things. And when we've been there 10,000 years, bright shining as the sun, we've no less days to sing God's praise than when we first begun. This is what is offered in Christ. Won't you say yes? Won't you say yes? Now you say, I don't believe it. Fair enough. Why don't you ask for the faith to believe such a good thing? Yeah. Getting all evangelistic on you, aren't I? Okay. Hello, Paul. The Bridges of Meaning Writers Club has been hosting a Divine Comedy Book Club every Monday, 6.30 Eastern time. There's a commercial. Interested in the Divine Comedy? Want some conversation with partners that can walk you through it? Bridges of Meaning Writers Club, Divine Comedy, every Monday, 6.30 Eastern. And we are currently progressing through Purgatorio. That's a good thing to do in Purgatorio. After having finished Inferno, I'm glad you finished with Hell. I would like to know if you had any thoughts on the Divine Comedy for the first time. I would like to know if you had any thoughts on the Divine Comedy from your own experience with it. I took, so Calvin College when I was there had an interim period, which was a January period, which was basically a three week class. You could come in and take anything you wanted. And my sophomore year, I believe, I took, my freshman or sophomore year, I took an interim class on the Divine Comedy with Howard Rinstra. And he was a good history prof. Unfortunately, died of cancer. And unfortunately, I took it too young in my life. I didn't, if I would take a class like that now, gosh, I would gain so much more from it. But it's sort of this thing, in order to understand a book, you have to read the book, but you probably don't really understand the book until you've read the book. So I have just, you know, I was a security guard then, I would sleep through class. I mean, I would go to class, but I would wind up sleeping in class. I've always been a little narcoleptic, where, you know, I slept through, I'd sleep through church, I'd sleep through lectures, I'd sleep through, you can find my college and seminary notes, I'm taking notes, and then the line goes, I fall asleep mid-sentence. I once impressed my sons, I was, you know, we're out East for my father's funeral, and I was talking to them. I now, I'm not allowed to talk to my wife when I go to bed, because I've done this to roommates all my life, used to piss off my college roommate. I would go to bed and you start having a conversation, I'd have a conversation with them and I'd fall asleep mid-sentence. And they'd of course be awake another half hour, cursing me because I'm over there sleeping soundly, so I'm a very bad roommate in that way. So anyway, I took a college class on the Divine Comedy, and it was really cool, but I don't remember anywhere near as much as I should. And that's yet another thing on my list that I look at and say, gosh, I'd love to spend hours exploring the Divine Comedy. What an important piece of literature, what a masterpiece. What a crucial element to the whole development of modernity and the transition that happens in the high middle ages. Say, well, why don't you come to the book club, Paul? Yeah, why don't I? 3.30 on a Monday, I'm usually making videos that are appearing on my channel. Well, maybe Paul, if you made less videos, you could do more of these things. Yeah, but I make videos because that's how I think out loud. So there you go, advertisement, Divine Comedy Club, every Monday, 6.30 Eastern, sounds awesome. So glad you guys are doing it. John James, dear Pastor Paul, I've been reading a lot of the bridges of meaning discussions, uh-oh, and feel like many people are chasing their tail over small differences. Really? I'm shocked. You mean there's chasing tail on small differences in a discourse community? I'm absolutely shocked. Have you watched my channel? I chase my tail over small things. This is what it means to be human. And now that's also part of, so the only video of mine that Jordan Peterson ever tweeted out was the video I did early on on why my young adult children are watching The Office. We chase our tail because we're working on stuff. And now if that tail-tasting is of interest to you, it's because you're working on other stuff. But, and some people just get endlessly fascinated, obsessed over minutiae. Other people don't. Academia is a lot of tail-tasting, tail-chasing. Rick's like, you better cut, you're losing your ability to talk. I'll get to the question. I was wondering if you think that people study their way out of love with Jesus sometimes. Bart Ehrman, cautionary tale. Love of Jesus is why we are all here, right? Yeah, but we also love Jesus with our minds. And as a path, I was just thinking about this the other day. So I brought one of the homeless guys back to the mental hospital again, and he's been in the mental hospital now more than he's been out lately, and there's some real reasons for that. And I've had a relationship with him for about 10 years. And right before I drove him to the mental hospital, I had a really good conversation with him. And I don't know that we could have had that conversation if I didn't have 10 years of history with him. And let me tell you about tail-tasting. Tail-chasing. Where Rick is like, what are you drinking over there? He says, let's get tacos. Tail-chasing and the mentally ill. I know people with OCD. You know, with some of these homeless people, some of the things they have told me, they have told me again and again and again and again and again and again and again. If you think a two or a three-year-old is monotonous, try an adult, obsessive-compulsive person. I have known this guy for 10 years, and most of that 10 years has been a lot of destructive tail-tasting. Can I say that? Tail-chasing. But I don't know that it's all been in vain. Yes, our goal is to love Jesus. Sometimes people need to chase their tails for a long time before the penny drops. And one of the lovely things about dividing people into smaller and smaller communities where they can have smaller and smaller conversations is that this affords different individuals time to get their reps in. And well, we're about to have the Olympics. Track is just running around in a big circle. But if you do enough laps, you can get strong and you can know something well. And part of the reason we have distributed so much knowledge and humanity is because there are a lot of tail-chasers in the world who know all kinds of wonky things about all things. And there's all of this obsessive attention to details that most of us are completely unaware of. Let's look at the collapse of this condo in Florida. It's a good thing there are engineers who pay attention to tiny little things. Details matter. Now, most of us don't have time in life for details, but the entire development of Christian theology is the summation of a whole lot of tail-chasing that sometimes finally gets productive. So I'm not gonna discourage people to go into minutiae. Hopefully at some point it turns productive. A lot of loving Jesus is caring for people who are chasing their tails. And with some people, you don't, when people say, stop chasing your tail, that expression is usually just exasperation and vexation on the part of the person who sent it, who said it, because you know, you don't stop tail-chasers by telling them to stop it. That's the Bob Newhart, you know, sketch. Stop it. And it's not gonna stop them. They're working something out. Let them work it out. Now, if you want to be helpful, you're probably going to, as Christ did, descend into their particular miserable tail-chasing and probably do a lot of this with them. Jesus got frustrated. Oh, little faith, how long do I have to tolerate you? He says to his disciples. Well, I can't read that, Rick. Meaning, meanings? Meanings, I can't read it. Anyway, I'm gonna land the plane anyway. So yeah, Jesus descends into our tail-chasing. And in many ways, sin, you know, a friend of mine, Tim Blackman, quoting someone else, because he's a voracious reader, you know, sin is just a goddamn waste of time. That's exactly what sin is. So other people wasting their time in the bridges of meaning discord, yeah. So if you want to be Christ-like to them, you might descend into that room. And if you can figure out how to help people as they're tail-chasing, actually get productive, and so they actually start making progress, you bless them. And that's the work of ministry. It's pastoral care. It's the work of the church. So I'm not bothered by the idea that there are people wasting their time in here. I think it's a good opportunity for some Christian to join them and find a way to creatively bring a word that sheds light so that running around the track and the endurance and muscle that it developed could be put to productive use. All right, that's it for today. What time is it? All right, that's about right. Okay, so Rick, you can end. Again, no special guests next week. I don't know if they got one for the middle week. Paul Antleitner is coming for another week. So yeah, Jonathan Peugeot was the guest in case you haven't figured that out. So really looking forward to him. All right. Thank you.