https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Wy8YJWuxAFQ

 How's your day been? Well my day's been pretty good. Working on my sermon, doing a lot of email, a lot of administrative stuff, just running a church, running my life, being a pastor. Yeah, I think I may have mentioned my grandfather. I grew up with my grandfather's house in addition to my parents, but my opa was a pastor as well, so I remember we would all tell him, I would wake up as a kid at like 1030 at night to him arriving back from like a board meeting or from just being at the office till like however long and what and I never understood it, but I guess the work never ends when you learn as an adult. Watching current pastors do it, it's like oh this job kind of doesn't really stop, but you do it all the time. Yeah, there's always more you can do. Well, whether it's on the people front or on the study front or there's no, I mean it's just it's a kind of a job without frontiers in that way. Yeah, and everybody wants to talk to you about everything in their own life. Yeah, which is, I mean you have to like that if you want to like being a pastor, you have to be interested in people and so that's, I didn't necessarily grow up thinking I would do this work, but once I started doing it, I found I enjoyed it. That's awesome. Yeah, sorry I was a little late. So yeah, I thought my fault I mismanaged my calendar and thought it was an hour earlier and then I went back to my desk at work and a bunch of guys were watching the Kavanaugh hearing which is happening today. I don't know if you caught any of that. So they're watching it and kind of talking about it and stuff and so I start as a Canadian living in New York and start talking to them about whatever, just like my thoughts on the whole thing, like this whole Senate hearing and it seems like all Senate hearings have become something of a performance and presumably they always were performances and everybody was always performing, but now you can see it live on TV for six straight hours or whatever. It becomes so transparent that they are performing like the senators and the people looking to be confirmed and it's obviously not just in this case, but in all sort of like political cases there. I mean that is why I suppose politicians have recommendations they do, but so I kind of mentioned like this line of these lines of questioning that they're using are kind of hilarious and anyways we started talking about it and then I had to go catch the train and I was like, oh it's just enough time that the train was delayed to get home, but anyway I'm holding this time enough for work. But it was interesting because the thing that I wanted to chat about is kind of related to the conversation I just had with folks at work about the Kavanaugh thing and listening to your recent, I'm in the middle of your last video you posted of kind of going in deep into the NT Wright thing. The reason I didn't finish it is because I was listening to it and I was like, oh I should see if the NT Wright things have been posted on YouTube and they have so I started listening to the first one and then I said, oh we should finish all of the video. Anyway, I haven't finished it yet, but I will by the end of the day. So anyway, so I've been listening to that and obviously I actually, one of the things that I admire you for is your ability to listen to the Peterson-Harris debates multiple times. I can't get through them, like I'm amazed that you can do it. I've been, I had the first Vancouver one on and I used to be able to get through the whole thing, like if any debate, even if it got into the mud and it wasn't going anywhere, like the Monk debates happened in Toronto, I used to go when I was living there and all that and I really liked it. But something about this debate specifically, I think it's because of the, so you in this video talking about natural theism or natural theism, that's a frame that you're putting around the debate. That's a frame that has been put around the debate by many people as you mentioned and since the 1700s or whatever, this has kind of been a way of understanding the idea of progressive ideology versus not necessarily traditionalists, not necessarily traditionalists, but traditional Orthodox Christianity, which is I would say distinct from traditionalists because traditionalists just kind of want to hold on to what they have as opposed to wanting to reform a tortor of a dachshund, which is a bit of a different progressive tact, there's a whole other thing. But the point is that frame exists to sort of allow you to understand what's happening and why they keep getting stuck in the mud and why they keep not getting anywhere and why Sam Harris wants to destroy everything, but Peterson is trying to build. And once you acknowledge that frame, or once you helped me acknowledge that frame, it was like, oh man, this is so hard to listen to because it doesn't get anywhere. And Harris just keeps reiterating his hermeneutic. So you actually can't make progress in the conversation because what Harris believes he's doing is reasoning as like a solemn individual who has got a reading on his side and the God of reason is speaking through him and looking at all of these facts abstractly and then going on from there, whereas Peterson is trying to with more humility, epistemic humility, trying to build something. But Harris can't leave the fundamentalist window that he's in. So it's like listening to someone talk to someone from exactly like from the fundamentalist churches that a lot of people grow up in. It's exactly like that because it's mirror image and we all understand. So I can't listen to it. It's just the same thing over and over again with slightly different cues because Peterson is generous. And I'm amazed how generous Peterson is, although at some points he does get a little shouty, but like his generosity is genuinely amazing. But it's why I also couldn't listen to Peterson talk to William Lane Craig in that Toronto thing at Wycliffe. I was like, oh man, Peterson is talking to two fundamentalists, William Lane Craig and then what's his name's wife about their materialist and then a Christian fundamentalist perspective. And it's so hard because they're just, it's like Peterson's playing tennis against people who are playing basketball. It's not a conversation. It's not a debate. It's not something that anyone can win. In fact, all it will do is preach the choir. So because all people are doing, if they don't realize their own hermeneutic, if they don't realize their own perspective, all they're doing is just standing there and putting their sticks in the mud and trying to reiterate their own hermeneutic because they don't actually know that that's what they're doing. And when I was talking to folks at work, I was working in technology in New York, so everyone's a part of the Democrats. And talking to them about like, they're all angry and they're all upset and they're all, everything is burning down and the last of America as a result of this happening. And all the successful people with jobs who have home to go to and have no worries about food on the table, but everything is a disaster. Yep. I get the picture. They have the opposite problem. They have the problem of having too much food and too much home and too much money and too many options. And they all went to Columbia or whatever and they're all Northeastern and they're all, you know, but anyway, so talking a little bit about it, you know, at some point my buddy said, one of the guys there who's most into it, he was like, Luke, just go home. We don't want to hear your calm Canadian perspective anymore. We want the drama. And I was like, okay, well, I said it facetiously, but I realized that maybe it wasn't being too helpful in a conversation where I think everybody kind of just needed to vent. And I was like, well, I mean, listen to what you're doing. Like, you know, if uh, one of the ranking Senate judiciary committee member or from the Democrats goes out there and plays to their face, she's like Booker or, or any of their members who do just as the Republican could do, they're going to play to the base. Is that actually going to move the needle anywhere? No, because they're going to make people in like you and New York and like any urban dweller pretty much really happy. And everybody else who already wasn't going to vote for them or support this initiative, um, they're not going to listen to it at all. The Molle Harris is going to make everyone in San Francisco love her more, but no one else around the country really going to pay attention or they do, they're going to get really mad at it. Um, so once you get into your frame, it's really hard to move, right? So all you're doing is bringing your frame to bear on every possible question that exists. So given that, given all of that, but that's what's happening in Sam Harris debate. That's what's happening in these, uh, in temporary political and partisan debates. And I tweeted you yesterday about like Peterson's video critiquing his friends, uh, democratic propaganda video. I don't use propaganda. That's not, I'm not saying it's bad. I'm saying that's what it is, right? It's propaganda. Um, all of that's right. Whether or not friends with a guy who's working for the democratic party. So, ah, I didn't put that together. So thank you. Cause that's, I was trying to figure out why this random commentary on this democratic campaign video. Now I see the connection. Okay, go on. I'm sorry. The comment, right? Horowitz was one of the guys. I recognize the name when he read it and I was confused. Why are you doing this? It's a friend's Yeah. So that's why they'd listen, right? That's why they care about what he thinks. And that's why he did it. Uh, but anyway, so we're like, oh, well now he's engaging in these very specific, broader political conversations about what rhetoric is acceptable and what's not acceptable. It's much different from his initial political foray, which was a bit of a very specific law. It wasn't just, you know, sort of grand plan. So given all of this, and the first time we talked, we talked about like embodied Christianity. Once you've gotten to a point where you believe something, um, how, how do you do it? And it's really hard in our society to actually embody Christianity for many reasons. And that was actually one of the first reason I I booked this call was I was like, I listened to you talk to that guy off state in Syracuse or something like that. You started going to an Orthodox church. Oh yeah. Um, Adam. Oh, and yeah, people asked me to show the carving. So there's Adam's carving that he sent me. So that's really cool. You got a little lobster and a little snake eating himself there. So cool. And, uh, and then thank you. Beautiful. So that's really nice. Put it up here on my, yeah. Okay. Good call. Now everyone can see it all the time. So yeah, so I'm, uh, listening to you talk to this guy and I was like, wow, he did what we talked about the first time we talked about, which is he walked down the street in our parlance, which is to go online and find out where an Orthodox church is and then called the guy. And the sentence that took out to me was this guy gave him a hug, like the Orthodox cleric or whatever they call it. Priestess or something. Went up and he gave him a hug. And I was like, wow, what a, what a thing. And he talked about like sweeping the floors. He talked about going all the time for midweek services and like sort of, it's a commitment of, um, it's a way of life as people like to call non-Western religion, a way of life. The Eastern religion in that sense is a way of life. You participate all the time and that would help you in some sense, join, even if it was a small community and help you join it, it would be restrictive to some like we talked about because then there are all these rules and they would eliminate some people. But in some sense for many people, it would also be very helpful. But as you don't just want to attract people for whom it's helpful, you'd like every need of that and all that stuff. Um, but yeah, so that story was about someone who had a frame moving into a different frame, right? And that's actually really, really hard as you can tell the more and more you listen to all these people talk and more and more you watch these videos. And I'm sure I'm not the first person to point this out, but listening to all of it, this is sort of the accumulation of it to me right now. Um, in that Harris conversation with Peterson or in Peterson's conversation more broadly is like, okay, if all of that's granted and Peterson seems to understand that what is the actual, what is belief, right? Cause you, um, like it actually sounds incredibly postmodern at this point because he, you're admitting that your intuitions define your belief. And in fact, uh, Wright admits this in his lectures, not admits he, he pointed out that these French philosophers say they have sociological reasons to not want it to be true. So they, they, they praise it, right? They're running downhill towards the rejection of Christianity, Protestant, Catholic, alike. Um, so it's really like a, your epistemology is actually your stated epistemology is a representation of something that you were already probably going to do based on the intuitions and the thrownness of you into the world in which you live. And you bear all of these, um, preconceived notions, I think into the world. And that's kind of all you're doing constantly. Even once you've realized that, even once you've realized that that's who you are, it's almost impossible for two people to talk to one another because they do like the postmodernist say, just constantly function in their own claimed God of reason, right? They constantly are running that same script over and over and over again. So it's not really like Peterson talks about like the free speech thing is that we're going to resolve all these issues, but it's made me profoundly skeptical of that. Just listening to him talk to all these different people because it doesn't resolve any issues, right? All it does is, um, reproduce the hermeneutics, even if you know what it is, it's worse if you don't, but even if you know what it is, it's really hard for you to reframe and come back and like, understand, for example, like I remember this guy that I was listening to once, an American philosopher that my wife is coming home. Hello. Hi, how are you? He says, hi, how are you? Great. So even granted all that, uh, it was, it's anyway, so I can't listen to it because of all of those things. And like, I'm curious, um, given that you, you must understand that about your Christian faith and you've talked about that a little bit, like you're kind of, as a Christian, you're humble to that. In some sense, you're humble to the givenness or the revelatory epistemology that is Christianity in some sense, right? Um, how do we talk to people? Like that's kind of the question that given all of those things I wanted to ask, like obviously you're doing all this stuff, which is great. I love listening to it. And obviously many atheists are also listening to many people. We just really few are listening to you, um, in some sense to steel man, the position they disagree with in some sense to learn and do all those things. Um, but how can we make more Adams? Like, how can we, as Christians, as people who want to attend churches, people who want to faithfully represent Christ? Um, cause the conversation that exists right now doesn't work where like you have these big box churches in places that function to suck up all of the Christians who are in their traditional churches and bring them to this big box church and, you know, minister to them. And it's not all bad. It's just like, that's the kind of the function that they have. I was reading a gospel coalition article this week with an interview of a big box church pastor in Toronto. And he, he was very proud of the fact that the big box church pastor, who I knew that 30% of his, of his 5,000 person church, um, were previously non-believers. And that's sort of the author of the piece is pastor of another church, a more traditional church in Toronto says like, well, do the math. It means 70% of his church came from churches like everyone else's who were already in Toronto, right? So what happens is, um, with Christianity functioning today, it seems, and correct me here, it's a piece, um, new wave, uh, American sort of, uh, Gen X, um, even Gen X evangelical churches or post evangelical churches come suck up a bunch of the life out of like the traditional churches into this like big monolithic institutions, um, that are then completely not flexible because they exist because they marketed to the specific demographic of people who would otherwise like going there anyway. Um, and sure, immediate reset, 30% of people who were previously church and stuff like that. And that's great, but that doesn't seem like a long-term strategy to constantly just go through this cycle of like sucking up all the people who were children at other churches and felt that they needed to rebel and go to these other institutions. And like the institution doesn't seem to function in a way that's sustainable over time, but also the faith needs to pass down in a way that is able to build things. Last thing I'll say before I ask you to talk, um, you gave a sermon a couple of weeks ago about, uh, the crazy rich Asians movie and about the conflict between sort of, uh, American and non-American, uh, culture and when they cry, expressive individualism versus traditional multi-generational, um, you know, marriage norms for that particular wealthy Chinese family in the movie. Exactly. I would actually, I kept pointing out to people after I saw that movie, but I loved it. Um, it's that's actually, I don't think a really Chinese thing. It's like a British aristocracy. It's not, it's not a Chinese thing. It's a part Chinese. It's also part colonialism, right? So like they're in Singapore. Yeah, exactly. It's complicated because of all of those things and they're all educated in England and they all speak with British accents. It actually represents the British aristocracy more so than it represents in some sense of tradition Chinese culture, which I thought was interesting about not just movies, but about the way you talked about it. Um, because it's actually in part what came before American culture in addition, like it's the predecessor to that in addition to being something alien, um, and I thought like, okay, well they had these conflicts of like, and I love my favorite character in that movie was the mom Michelle Yeoh's character who says, tell the little girl that NYU professor, like, you don't know how to build things that last. We do. And she's right. She's completely right. Like Americans, they don't think know how to build things that last, especially in our contemporary world, like being a Canadian, the urban America. And obviously it's not that big a difference between Canada and America. It's like, oh wow. Yeah. This is impressive. Individualism thing is like extremely corrosive to all institutions that exist ever. Like there's no institution that will supersede this and build for the future because everyone like is impulsively going to reject bigger, they're given institutions and unless they feel like they want to be there or they themselves built them or they themselves attend them because they want to, and they elect to attend it. Um, it's, they're all going to collapse. So how do we build institutions and how do we have conversations given the training that we're in and the limitations of our frame to actually have a conversation with people that are meaningful? How do we? Well, we try. That's the first thing. Well, I love how you frame the, the church, the church context, because that's obviously one that's, that's of great interest to me. Well, and, and I think, you know, I think Adam's story is, is delightful in the sense of Adam, you know, one of the ironies I was on a plane yesterday and I sat next to a, a man who was born in Nazareth and his father was a carpenter and he lives in a suburb around Sacramento and he works some kind of sales job. And so he's on that. So I was flying Southwest from Sacramento to Burbank and, you know, to show up for a church meeting. And so I sat next to him and we got into a conversation and we talked about these issues. He's of, um, Middle Eastern descent. He's a, uh, Greek Orthodox Christian. Uh, he, you know, he talked about his children and their values as compared to the values that he grew up in. And, and listening to him, I just, you know, self consciously listened to the layers, the layer that American culture put on him, but the foundation that he had as a, his family was originally from Syria and troubles in Syria. They moved then to, to Nazareth and his uncle was a farmer troubles in Nazareth. They moved to the United States. The United States, what a wonderful country this is. It's so stable, you know, he's, um, so, so on and on and on and on. And just sitting there thinking about, we actually talked about the fact that when you grew up, now I grew up in the Christian Reformed Church. I didn't really grow up much within the bubble because of my father's ministry. And I, I was a little in the bubble and then a little in the black community, which had its own bubbles. But so you have these, you have these bubbles of, of communities that are church and then an immigrant group like the Christian Reformed Church, church and school. And, and then you tend to marry in this you have, and that then offers possibility for communication for, for, you know, for community that endures and values that endure to many from the outside, those values look arbitrary. But when you talk about reason, there's rationality within the bubble because what rationality really is, is about consistency. And so you work that through, but we're, we're living in a time when we are connected with so many different people who have been products of so many different bubbles that the ability to have meaningful conversations with one another is, is so, it's so difficult that I think you're, I mean, I think your analysis of the Peterson, Sam Harris, you know, conversations is excellent. And that Sam, Sam really has, Sam really has little or no interest in, you know, you're right, he's a fundamentalist. And we know this because we see Christian versions of these. And what that means is he's got a tremendous, ironically, he keeps saying dogma is the problem, but he's got a tremendously rigid dogma that of course he can't see his own. And, and, you know, according to some people who put comments in my video, I have this tremendously rigid dogma. And if I would only see the brilliance of secularism or the brilliance of Carl Jung or the brilliance of this group or the brilliance of that group, then I would be okay. And of course, okay is equal to whatever it is that whatever poll their little community and the Jonathan Haidt sense keeps circling around. So, so then, so then what of the church? Well, part of what's, you know, part of the answer in America has been, has been diversity in that there are, there is an astounding diversity of churches in North America. It's just, just an absolute astounding diversity of churches. And within those churches, there are astounding diversities of belief that may or may not match with the creedal alignment of that specific church. You know, they come there for the music or they like the way the preacher looks or they go with their wife because their wife grew up in that church. I mean, it's, it's, it's just incredibly enormous. Well, then, then the question, then the question gets, well, so what? Why go to that? Is there just another club? And then you have all of these Christian claims that, that come down into the middle of it, you know, and, and the one thing, Mark Knoll wrote a piece for BioLogos a few years ago to try to explain what happened. Mark Knoll is a, is a historian, works at Notre Dame, goes actually to the Christian-informed church in South Bend, graduate of Calvin College, wrote a very interesting piece on BioLogos that talks about the, the, the experience of the frontier in America where the, the, the immigrants leaving the eastern colonies, clutching the coastline, move into the west, leaving their European churches behind them. Well, then suddenly they need to look for something to, they need to look for a flagpole that they can circle around and that flagpole becomes the Bible itself. And so that, so, so now, again, suddenly the, the Bible then functions in a different way than it did even for very conservative groups on the east coast because the Bible replaces confessions or creeds or church hierarchies that you have with Roman Catholic Church with bishops and so on. So in a sense, you have a paper pope with the Bible and that then, of course, feeds back and forth and changes. And, and, you know, this sounds hopelessly complicated, which part of the reason, again, people, people tell jokes about my Calvinism, which I thoroughly enjoy, but part of the reason in the midst of, I can see the, you know, when I listen to Adam's story and when you look at everything that, let's say, the Orthodox Church brings in terms of embodying through art, embodying tradition, embodying through hierarchy, just an ongoing discipline of a community over, over centuries and centuries. There's a real power to that. Yet with every, with all that kind of power, there are also limitations and part of the reason I endure in my Calvinism is I look at this astounding diversity and I look at it and I say, there can't be a human being that can sort this out. And so finally, I think what Calvinists do, and, you know, if you think about John Calvin's experience as a French refugee in Geneva, although his ideas about election were not new, they were the, they were pretty much the same views held by the Lutherans and the Catholics, but somehow they get elevated in the Calvinist tradition and Calvinists, you know, they huddled in Switzerland, they huddled in the Netherlands and they got, they took root in England in this context of incredible polarization and conflict and just, you know, bloody, bloody political religious conflict that happened in that as England swung back and forth. Calvinists are finally people that punt in a sense and say, I can't sort this out. What is a Christian? Well, God says. Well, who's included in the tribe? Well, God says. Well, you know, in a sense, that's the ultimate punt because we say, you're asking me, I don't know. How could I know given what a human being is? So there, you know, you're asking me to judge amongst these tribes? Forget it. I can't do it. And those who pretend to? Well, that's their choice. I'm going to finally say, this is the poll I circle around because it helps make sense of my world. So I don't know if that's answering your question at all, but it's how I answer it. Well, I also had a conversation with a guy in my small group who I brought this up, like what are my concerns in the culture? And I was like, well, I feel like there's some sort of lack of humility about what we can and can't understand about our own methods of interpretation and stuff like that. And he kind of said, well, you know, all of that hermeneutic exercise. I just want to read the Bible and see what I get out of it. Right. And I think my immediate, obviously, major response to that is like, there's no such thing as hermeneutic society just reading it, right? There's no such thing as a community that did that even on the frontier, even like, so always bringing their hermeneutic to it. Like, it just doesn't exist. That doesn't happen. Right. So we can put it away, but like, in our own context, but in some sense, we can't, we bring it with us into our own institutions and how we build them. We are necessarily people who build. So like, when we look out at the culture, that might be the perspective when it's at that level of analysis. And when we look out at the whole, you know, cat's, multi-faith church, like, that can be our perspective. But when we actually have to like, as communities do it, it kind of can't be our perspective because we have to like do something. We have to be somebody. And that seems like an unanswered question. And I agree with you that it's probably helpful for each individual institution to go do it themselves. And we don't want to have necessarily like somebody going and killing the who got certain all that stuff. But like, I feel like that's been the totality of the conversation so far from a management perspective. But, and then everyone has their little individual conversations. But at some point, that kind of breaks down because I can't go to anyone else's church and talk to my fellow Christian because we all come with this conflicting baggage. And like we all are fundamentally different. And I don't know if that's good because now everybody, the methods of migration are so different from the way that they were before when this was like that. That is an evolution of Christianity to meet a very specific colonial need where people were not purely people are colonizing everything not necessarily predominantly right. And now it seems as though we need a different management tech given the post-colonial world to be able to communicate with the global church in a way that's effective and to actually like be someone even though you can punt most of it. You can't punt everything anymore because of the way that the institution exists. Right. Now what happens, so Luther, so if we go back in church history, you look at Luther who poses 95 theses on the Wittenberg door in Latin because he is a young, smart, articulate, professor of theology. And he wants to have this conversation about indulgences and he wants to have this conversation about all the corruption he sees in the church. So he posts it but it's his Jordan Peterson moment and Luther just swooshes through. I sometimes when I look at Peterson I think about Martin Luther because they both seem to have the temperamental trait that the more Luther just wanted to have an academic conversation and when the students, it just kept rolling and the more you push Luther, the pissier he got at the whole thing. And so then you see this polarization happen in the conversation. But Luther goes into this and says, you know what, what we really need is the Bible and reason and if we have the Bible and reason together we can, you know, we can nail all this down. Now Carlstad is a friend of Luther and he's right there and Carlstad is right there with Luther and you know he's going and going and going but the further this thing goes the more Luther and Carlstad move away from each other. And this is what happens so that the Roman Catholic position, we've got a structural hierarchy that an institutional hierarchy that keeps everyone together. Luther now wants to have an abstract, you know, ideas are going to keep us together but very quickly this thing fractionates and that just keeps going in Europe. So then you get this next layer of confessionality where people begin to say, okay, well what do I believe? So Guido de Bre writes the Belgian confession and tries to, you know, tries to explain to Emperor Philip, please don't kill us because we're, we're Christians too but these are some things we disagree with. The Heideberg catechism, they take, you know, they take what's mostly Catholic belief and they, they, they change a few things and that then becomes a confession. And so these confessions then, you've got the Bible underneath and the confessions of a layer above and in a sense the confessions are a way for people to say, all right, we've got a world of diversity out there and there's a world of reading the Bible differently but we together, having talked about this, can come to some agreement on these matters and that then becomes the framework for a community. And so then you have these confessional churches that develop and, and in many ways it's a continuation of Jordan Peterson's kind of Logos move with Sam Harris that says, well, in a confessional church we talk and, and we say, you know, this is what we think the Bible is and, you know, the Belgian confession says, well, here are the books because, and then the apocrypha, well, those are good to read too but we don't hold them as canonical, canonical. So, so the confession then begins to hold the community together and, and I think as you described it when you say we can't talk to each other, I don't think that's true. I think we are always looking for ways to talk to each other and, and so when, you know, I felt sorry, it's bad for Jordan Peterson because again, he keeps, he just keeps reaching out to Sam Harris and, and Brent Weinstein tries to help, and Doug Murray tries to help but Sam Harris is, is like that, you know, like that, you know, evangelical atheist who is extremely dogmatic and doesn't dare give an inch but, you know, one of the, the video that I have in my head that I might do after we're done talking now, you know, Adam over at Truth Club, he's been, he keeps pushing Jonathan Haidt into the conversation and Jonathan Haidt is a sociologist and, and because what often is missed by listening to Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris, Jordan Peterson with his stride in individualism and Sam Harris with his, Sam Harris is in a sense like Martin Luther without the Bible and, and he thinks just the facts of the world and reason and then we'll all be the same and I listen to him and I think, hey buddy, the, the Bible is a far more limited set than all the facts of the world and even then with all of the tradition behind, you still have the fracturing of the church. So Sam, your, your idea is just, just, it, it'll never go anywhere. It's a nice little career for you to go on stage and sell books and do all this but, you know, the, the, the humanist movement I saw recently, I saw Ryan Bell who had got a little bit of publicity for his Year Without God and then surprise, is Year Without God, he left God behind and now he's a humanist chaplain at USC and I was thinking, I thought that was Bart Campolo's gig but maybe I'm wrong there but, but the point is, so you have these Christians that are going out and, but we're all going to get together on our humanist thing but the problem is that template is still way too large and so what, what you begin to see is this, is, is what we, what we see in the world of, of little churches, little denominations, some can get a little bit more, some can get a little bit more, older roots help and, and it isn't the case that we can't talk to each other, it's just hard and, and it's also the case that finally, so you had four paid for intentional, you know, real attempts to try to get at what's between, you know, how Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris can try to find each other and even though Brent Weinstein is like, well, I think we made a lot of progress, I'm not, I'm not terribly impressed at the progress at all, I think for me they're fun things to bounce off of, but I think they're fun things to bounce off of because along the way they touch on a lot of issues which then become talking points for me in making videos, but you're, you're right, how can people find each other and this goes all the way down to a marriage where, I mean, one of the things that you, what, that you find is, okay, two people fall in love and, and what happens psychologically is, you know, they, they get completely enmeshed and so then they're completely enmeshed and love is, you know, love is blind, you don't see the flaws of the other person, then I'll be with you forever, blah, blah, blah, and they stay together and then, well, they, they, they start to see each other more and more clearly and begin to realize we two people have a hard time agreeing just between two people who are sharing a house, having sex, joint bank accounts, reading the same books, watching the same TV, and you begin to realize, holy cow, it's amazing, people don't kill each other all the time, because when, okay, okay, I agree with you, go ahead, so it's not necessarily, um, we can't talk, it's that the talking is so frequently, you're right, I was wrong, it's not we can't talk, it's that the talking is so frequently, maybe not even unproductive, it's so frequently counterproductive, and I think we grow up in a world where, like, specifically in our context with expressive individualism and post-modernity and all that, we think that we're gonna, it's that post-millennial utopianism bleeding into the society, where we think we're getting to a point where there's no more conflict, you can just realize that utopia, and I think part of this whole thing is like, for me at least, has been a learning, including the Tom Wright stuff, of, oh no, no, no, we think sometimes as Christians, we can get into thinking that, like, oh, the world, pre-all of this conflict, and, you know, before the Enlightenment, as long as it's Christian utopia, we can go back there, and all we need to do is, like, I'll get rid of all of this unbelief, it's like, no, no, this is, you need to understand the world, you need to put the framework around the world, there will be constant conflict, and there will be constant counterproductive conversations, and there will be constant, like, sitting in the mud and fractionating and developing your own reductive identities and making mistakes and all that kind of thing, so it's not, it's not like talking creates this serenity, it's not like diversity creates this serenity, it actually creates conflict, and conflict is the norm, because we're constantly trying to adapt to the environment that we're in, and the environment's constantly shifting and changing, and we have to learn how to do that effectively, and I guess that's sort of the difficult thing to grapple with as an American or Canadian, like, that's not what the culture tells you, the culture tells you this will all be okay once we grow up, and once we, like, figure this out, right, Sam, so that's the biggest thing about Sam that I've learned through this process, because I've been following him for a long time, I was always interested in it, and since he wrote Letter to a Christian Nation, and I think Sam's big thing is that he's emphasizing a world, like, he saw the powers of 9-11, and it's a political mission for him to move past a certain, quote-unquote, religious fundamentalism, so sure, if he philosophically believes it, and there's some philosophical underpinnings there, but fundamentally for him, it's not a philosophical project, it's a political project, and he wants to realize the utopia, and he talked about it in a recent, I don't know if you've listened to him, he talked to Yuval Harari recently on his podcast, I don't know if you've heard that, yeah, I saw that he talked to him, but that would be an interesting conversation. So it's live, so it's less good than his one-to-one conversations, I would say, but he specifically lays out on the line in that video, or on that podcast, like, I thought that the world was going to have this progressive mindset, that the world was always moving toward this utopia, and that we were all going to become one world nation, and one world group of people, and everything was going to be harmonized, everyone's going to become humanists, and then I watched towers fall, and I realized that this wasn't going to happen, but my critique of that is, you didn't realize that it wasn't going to happen, you realized that what you needed to do in order to realize the eschatology, and it's identified the eschatology, was fight the surge of religion, and then it would happen, so it's not that it's not going to happen, you didn't realize that at all, you realized that you needed to fight this scourge to remove the cancer, to stop the tumor, and that's the project, so if you understand that as a framework, you'll always, even in the debate, you'll constantly bring it back to specific political motivations that he has, the world that he wants to realize here on earth, that are being interrupted by Christian Islamism, and all these people who he has all these quote unquote discreet. So it's really hard to talk to him, because again, it's kind of basketball and stuff, right, so it's like, we can have conversations, we should try, and you know, Peterson's pre-siege ethic does work in some sense, but it's not I think that's been a big learning, even in this conversation, is like, oh, the frame isn't that's broken, and we all just need to put down all of our arms, and no longer talk or no longer engage with these things, and it's just going to be okay, the frame is, we need to constantly try, you may never win the struggle, but you may not, you're not allowed to give up, you have to constantly struggle toward it, and you know that you're on the end of life, you won't realize that, like, Americans need to be Canada in that place, where there are no more, there's no more conflict, right, as well as multicultural society, so no bullshit, but Americans. And you have socialized medicine, so I have conversation with all kind of people that said, you know, I want to give up this job and try something new, but I can't give up my health care, so you guys even have that. Oh yeah, it's the best place in the world. One of the things that I think about often is, well, let's just look at the Christian story, so okay, so you've got this, one of the things that when I was in college, so I grew up in the church and all that stuff, then you go to college, and at that point you say, you know, okay, mom and dad aren't here, nobody's checking, you know, even at Calvin College, nobody checks if I'm going to church or not. Many of the people in the dorms, they don't bother going to church. And so one of the things I consciously thought is, I want a good American that I am, I'm going to decide for myself if this Christianity thing is true, right, so you know, 18-year-old me is on this quest, and so then I'm thinking about why I was raised with hypercatechism and all this stuff, so I start reading the Bible for myself, but really kind of for myself for the first time, and I'm reading the Bible, and I thought, well, I'm going to start reading Jesus in the Gospels, because you know, might as well start right there at the center, and I'm reading that, and I'm thinking, how did we ever get this Christianity stuff that I was taught in Christian school and know in church from this over here, because he's talking about fasting, and there's lepers, and there's miracles, and there's water to wine, you know, where on earth does that thing connect? And then the more I read, and I began to realize, and here's a really funny thing, so you know, the Old Testament is just this book about all kinds of misery, I mean, these poor sons and daughters of Jacob just cannot cut a break, it's always a disaster, and then finally they get into, you know, you get into the New Testament in Jesus' time, and okay, they're not worshiping the Baals, they're done with that, they are strictly monotheistic, they will die before they let a Roman emperor put an idol up in their temple, and they are being really scrupulous about the law, they are following the covenant, they are doing everything right, and in comes Jesus, and nobody gets him. I mean, so there's a group of people that follow first in the Galilee, and they're like, yeah, we like the miracle show, and you really like it when you feed us, and Jesus says, ah, you know, you guys, forget it, you're just in it for the show, you're just in it for the food, I'm not doing it anymore, unless you pay my flesh and drink my blood, and of course these are Jews, and they're like, what the heck, and then his disciples, well, they hang in there with him for who knows what reason, maybe because they've already invested so much in him, and there's something about him that really fascinates, and they have all these ambitions about, you know, Jesus like, going to Jerusalem, and his disciples who aren't that bright say, that's a bad idea, and Jesus says, get behind me, Satan, it's like, well, okay, so they go with him to Jerusalem, and they say, we'll die before we let them take, and of course they waffle, and he gets crucified alone with the only people watching him being the women and the children because they weren't a political threat, and John the Baptist, who's the guy that IDs him early in the story, by Matthew 11, it becomes very clear, he doesn't have a clue about Jesus either, so, okay, so if you take us on the basis of that story, how good are we at figuring out God? Now we might say, well, we've got the Holy Spirit, and we've got the Bible, yeah, we've got some significant advantages over other people, but we're still people, and so all of this stuff that binds us, all the stuff that binds Sam Harris, all the stuff that binds Jordan Peterson, all the stuff that binds every one of us in the world who grows up in a particular family, in a particular place, with a temperament, with all of these layers. Again, I mean, and that's what's so funny to me about certainties of various kinds. Now, like you said before, you can't live without one, so on one hand, you should say, I'm gonna have to have certainties, because this is where Jordan Peterson's very helpful, because the world demands decisions of you, and I think, so I was having on Twitter today, I was talking about this anti-rivalry stuff, and I'd never heard that before, and Andrew Sweeney wrote that, I thought, there's some really nice ideas in there about ego, and I thought about it, and I thought, yeah, but you know, anti-rivalry, that worked pretty good for Gandhi and India, because the British were pretty Christian, and it worked for Martin Luther King Jr. in the Americas, because America was a pretty, that's a pretty deep Christian ethos, so this non-violence stuff, within the context of a representative democracy, really helped move the needle, but Jewish non-violence resistance to Hitler, to work for him. You're dealing with Adolf Hitler, and someone sent me a thing about Churchill being, well, Churchill and Hitler, there's still a gulf between them, so again, so then you say, well, how on earth can we know anything about God? And then I say, be a natural theology from this thing I just worked up, well, I would say by the Holy Spirit, and well, maybe I got that answer from my Calvinist upbringing, but it seems like the best answer to me, because we don't have one, and I come from a tradition that was as obsessively controlling about trying to make sure their children had faith, and in very many ways, very successful at it, we put them into church every week, I went to church twice every week, Heidelberg catechism, Christian day school, get married within your own group, stick to your own, I mean, just sociologically, that's a formula for community success, but it's still not enough. All that with a doctrine that says, who decides? God. And then we, then there we are. Yeah, it's so interesting, and just to wrap up, the simultaneous humility that's required, you need that humility, but you also need to be confident enough to be certain about things at the same time, which is like, that line is so clearly marked by so many, including myself, and everybody does it perfectly, and I think that's like, that's what's so frustrating for us, because we need this quote unquote progressive mindset, I think that word is nonsense at this point, but I think the core of it that we're constantly trying to perfect things is a good noble way of looking at things, but also realizing, and humility alongside that, that we're not going to get there, it's incredibly frustrating for us as customers, at least for me, that like, to swallow that is such an uphill battle, near impossible, I think, for us to do, obviously always, because we're constantly defaulting to that position, it's like, we could figure it out finally, we no longer have to use packages, I think one of the things that you can never fall on that position, very frustrating, it's hard to work that out, like, even talking about it is complicated, especially given like you say, the diversity of people around, because you're constantly reminded of what your services are, and what your uncertainties are, I'm not sure if I'm all of us, and if you're not, I'm not sure, but yeah, for people who think about it, for people who are constantly pondering it, for good and for evil, it's, yeah, yeah, I'm always remember, Chris Mardishian said, he was quoting a rabbi, and he said in this documentary I launched, he said, as rabbi Halal once put it, you might never win this struggle, but you're never allowed to give it up, and I feel like that's something that I'm learning, is like actually a useful way to wait, to conceive of these debates, to conceive of the issue of these Christians, and to conceive of our conversations, and our own internal dialogue, not perfected. No, I think that's right, you never, and the irony is then, we keep, one of the movies I love is the Gene Wilder, Willy Wonka movie, that's a little morality play, and all of these children, including Charlie, which I think is an amazing, it was a great move, all these children, you know, sell out short, and I think there's a little, there's a little, it's kind of like, it's a little Pilgrim's Progress movie in a sense, because a little morality play, because well, they drank from the chocolate river, and they wanted the eggs from the goose, and you know, on and on and on and on, because they say, well, it's about the journey, well, yeah, but journeys only have meaning if there's a destination, so you do have to have journey, and so you need certainty in things, and you might, at the same time, you have to say, but it's a lot of both and, and you, you know, Tim Keller often, you know, would say something that, that would always strike me, you know, you have to be, especially as a Calvinist, you have to be incredibly happy to do that in the right way, and, and in a lot of ways, you have to be incredibly secure to be flexible in the right way, and, and that's, you know, it's, it's been very interesting doing my channel, because I get a lot of email from people, and some email is, most of the email I get is positive, because people are kind, and they want to say nice things, and people who are negative will watch for a minute and say, I don't want to watch this guy click, and off to something else on YouTube, but every now and then there'll be a, there'll be a negative person that really wants to set me straight, and I always find that fun, because it's, those are very interesting emails, and it's, it's just fascinating, because well, here are all the, here are all the ways you are falling short. Okay, you know, that, that's okay, and then, I don't want to talk to you. My favorite ones are, I used to have a guy, I used to have a guy who would do this, they walk in the room, they say their piece, and then they say, don't write me back. Okay, you needed to get that off your chest. Well, there you go, I'm glad I could, glad I could listen for you. Especially for you, because you, at least when you first started posting, you didn't advertise your email, you had to like, go Google for it, you had to look for your email address. I don't know if you do now, put it down in the comments, but, uh, I think anybody who asks, I can't. Right, but, you know, at the time you said, like, well, you can Google for it, but I'm not going to put it here, and then, um, so I had to Google for it originally, so the point is, if you wanted to send you a grumpy message, you'd have to be dedicated to it. Only listen to people who actually put the work in it. Yeah, that's right. If you, if you really have a deep need to say something critical to me, well, there you go. It's kind of, one of my favorite comments that I ever got was, you know, in a video about, is Jordan Peterson a Christian? No, and you're probably not either. I loved it. It's, you know, and maybe I'm weird for liking that, and it doesn't bother me, um, but it's, and it's not dismissive, it's just how, it's just how we are as people. We, we're a mess, and we can't talk to each other, but yet we're all so glorious, and, you know, I grew up in Paterson, New Jersey, and my favorite thing as a kid was when we got a good snowstorm, which only every couple of years you'd get a really good one, and Paterson would kind of shut down because there's, you know, the city was not built for cars and things like that, but everyone would be out in the street shoveling out each other's cars, and just in that snowstorms would do this amazing thing to the neighborhood, and everything would just be covered, all the dirtiness would be covered. The next day it'd be a sloppy mess, but, and this is the, you know, this is the glory of human beings, how, how on one hand we can hardly talk to each other, and on the other hand we can do glorious things together, so. Well, good luck to all of you. I'll use prayer. That's right, that's right. Well, I thought this was a great conversation, but, you know, would it be okay if I posted it? Yes, definitely. Okay, yeah, last time we talked quite a bit more about, you know, personal things and perspectives, and so I didn't post that one, because not everybody wants to be as transparent as me on YouTube, which, you know, sometimes I sit here and I wonder, is this smart what I'm doing? You know, is this, is this a good idea? Yes, I'm getting, as encouragement, please continue to do it, and watch everyone. I find them very edifying, and I really enjoy them. Please continue. Oh, good, oh, good. Well, well, thanks for the conversation, and yeah, and yeah, say thank you to your wife for, for, for sharing you with us, and have a good evening, and who knows, maybe, maybe some of your employees at work, maybe some of your co-workers at work will watch this too, who knows. Maybe, okay, have a good afternoon. Take care, Luke. Bye-bye.