https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DbVvEBkMXuU

 So I'm recording. Well, I've looked over a couple of the emails, the conversations that we've had via email. Why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Yeah, so Well, I'm a teacher. I've been teaching the classical Christian school world for the last nine years here in Austin, Texas Regent School in Austin and And Before that I was in home building for a couple of years and before that two years at Trinity Academy in Raleigh, North Carolina And So presently we're a team of about four former teachers at Regents We're starting a new school called Waterloo. Yeah, cool new high school. Wow Wow It's exciting. It's a it is a it is a complicated endeavor But fun Yeah, my parents were in the 70s on the ground floor of starting at an elementary Christian school in Patterson in an old in a old mill and And I when I was in junior high, you know I as a junior high kid help out cleaning out that mill and doing stuff and So starting a school is a big task Yes, it is. It is indeed was that Patterson, New Jersey. That's Patterson, New Jersey. Yeah Yeah, I thought I saw that you you grew up there. So that's me. How do you know Patterson? Well, so when we were when I was in seminary at Princeton, my wife would do some work in she was an environmental Geologist so she there's there's plenty of opportunity to do cleanup work there There really is and and Geologically, it's a fascinating place with the Passaic Falls Yeah, and the raceways of that old mill section and now Patterson's a Patterson is an interesting interesting place. So we love New Jersey Nobody knows about the all the horse country and the beautiful countryside Think of they think of urban trash, but it's it's a wonderful city. Yeah, the Garden State. That's the Garden State people like This Eating feeding hungry New Yorkers That's right, and then taking their garbage and putting him into landfills in New Jersey, too That's right. Yep So so you teach so you teach classics and describe that a little bit I mean I have taught rhetoric I've taught Spanish modern history most recently senior thesis in in rhetoric and Yeah, the way I like to describe a classic education if in in just a handful of sentences is If you were if you were trying to really get to know motorcycles, you would want to know all the parts that you'd know you want to name the parts how they how they fit together and then you would ultimately want to fit them together in such a way so you could ride that bike and You know grammar is you know knowing the parts of how we use our language The parts of our thought processes our creativity You know logic is how to put it together and then rhetoric is putting together thoughts and arguments and presenting it in a way that's winsome so so that's that's the the the thing that we're trying to teach students is how to be responsible and how to how to Winsomely communicate things that will be of value to other people right to fellow to fellow humans Now is is this a Christian school or religious school or just a secular school that focuses on classic education? It is Christian school. So there's been a an interesting Renaissance in Christian education really since the early 80s that has Taken its inspiration by Dorothy Sayers And CS Lewis and folks like that who you know are looking back to the classic works of the Canon And Trying to see wisdom from the past Not just trashing men medieval education, but seeing that as a resource right in seeing theology as a resource And so it's certainly been a protest against against modern progressivism But you know more on the positive side really just seeing this is gosh we here we are we're full creatures with emotions and and reasoning and And we live in God's rich creation. So how do we how do we find? You know a more a more maybe a more humane Model for education that fits the kind of creatures. We are. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah all They actually the spiritual education that we have in our schools Yeah, oh they actually the school that my parents helped founded was in Patterson was called Dawn Treader and Obviously from Lewis's, you know Yeah, that was back in the 70s. So but I don't know if their emphasis was so much on classics So so how did you how did you come across Jordan Peterson? And and how did you get interested in him? So I'm trying to remember in the context of teaching senior thesis So I had about 30 to 40 students each year and we you know, we combed through current event topics I believe it was in the context of searching through thesis topics that I you know I'd heard about the c16 bill and this is back in what 2016. Yep shared that with my dad He started watching Jordan Peterson videos and you know We would I kind of dropped off for a while and then he said he actually sent me the link to you And your interview with with Jordan Peterson, I think it concerned Easter So watch that and the audio was a little bit tough to yeah but it was it was it was incredibly inspiring and I I think what stood out to me was He did not reduce he didn't reduce the Christian message of Easter to Something that can be entirely explained on a on a secular plane in Scientific terms. He's he's very careful to make a nuanced distinction between what we can understand and see empirically Which is his domain. He's a scientist. He's a psychologist but he he seemed incredibly open to the reality of the resurrection and Even so I started watching his videos I watched the biblical series first few videos of that at least and The way he started handling the chaos theme in Genesis just absolutely inspired me so I've been watching and Then most recently I've been really inspired by his ideas for doing an end around on Humanities education in the university So that the topic I wanted to bring up with you Yeah, so, what do you think is is it possible for this? rough man from northern Alberta to to turn over The university system in North America or even just Canada Well, it's good rhetoric I You know, I watched I don't I I've been watching this Unfold for for a while. I graduated in college and from college in 1998 and immediately after that I I read Alan Bloom's closing of the American mind and I read the rejoinder my Martha Nussbaum University of Chicago law professor Called cultivating humanity and it was her response to Alan Bloom saying no, you're wrong universities are fine all this this proliferation and Blank studies is is actually good. We're actually expanding the role of the university We're not we're not closing the American mind. It's that was an interesting, you know late 90s debate but to be honest Paul and today when I see Educated college students who cannot distinguish between male and female And they do this I'm sorry Fairly basic intelligence I know your olds can do that boy girl This is this is This is a matter of elementary education that I I would I would hope We're able to you know speak speak basic sense on but so in any case, you know I sound a little dismissive there. I realized there are there are all sorts of complications in life and but It makes me wonder honestly if this is a studied position And if and if the the great texts from the from the canon are just being systematically debunked I'm actually really personally just I'm just concerned that young people today Are not getting a chance to just get challenged and to just hear the full range of possible views I'm not I'm not even asking for a privileged place for Christian views. I would love an Abraham Kuyper Principled pluralism where you've got just an equal You know equal playing time for the various positions if you want to have an absurd position Metaphysically morally theologically that's fine But let's let's create institutions and sustain institutions that allow the dialogue to happen. I just don't see that happening today Well, you know So one of the things that I've seen in coming out of the universities and the colleges today is is exactly that I see Students going in and they come out. They don't know who Plato is. I mean, yeah I'm just like what what did you go to college for again? Well, we learned about you know, we learned about you know, the queer community in 1930s Germany Okay I'm not quite sure how that's gonna connect to a lot of other things in your world or four years from now when the cultural conversations continue to change if you're going to actually have a Presenting framework with which to engage new things that come down because part of obviously the the reason of classics is that we keep coming back to Similar framework issues and so if you learn the framework now You can actually have a grid with which to engage new things that come it's the whole idea behind classics, but that's right and and as a and you would have thought that those who were Stewarding the university that is intending to steward the next generation would have this fundamental understanding of why We have the shape it has and so then my question is always What how did we lose this where did that drop? When did it drop? I mean, yeah to be honest, you know, I was in college in the mid 90s and Was it predominantly liberal? Yes, I I don't know. Yes, probably but I Think I heard a statistic from Jonathan Heights You know the the uptick in radical leftist Academic certainly in political leanings. It's it's like multiplied in the last two decades It is it has truly become a different place when I was at the University of Kansas Western civilization was a requirement every single liberal arts student had to take this was a remnant of the old Robert Maynard Hutchins Initiative that had every single land-grant school in the country I think had a Western Civ two-year requirement Wow Kansas was one of the last public universities to require that and since the you know You can guess what the fate of that is now And Yeah to your point Paul, I mean Honestly if we're equipping students with basically just the tenets of an ideology in the humanities Is it any wonder why parents are like I'm not going to pay for that and I'm not you know I don't recommend that you take on a lot of debt honestly to get a degree. That's just going to Entrench your your your ignorance and your lack of critical thinking ability that's just not worth it and the numbers are They're starting to appear it's Here this is not it's not sustainable You can go into forty thousand dollars debt for a four-year liberal arts education Or you can watch these Netflix shows and you'll kind of get the same thing out of them You know, you'll kind of get woke and and yeah those those Native Americans They got a raw deal I'm I'm gonna I'm gonna go change that well you go right ahead Yeah In the meantime And you know and I would love and I to be frank I would love I would love for there to be a serious conversation about The pluses and the minuses of Western civilization. Don't don't hear me wrong, you know Westward expansion and manifest destiny plenty of evil But it's to me the thing that's scary is is as I as I Drift in and out of this YouTube world It's it's like it's like we're producing a generation of young people that really just can't even have the conversation They can't even Do the heavy lifting because they're taking refuge into safe spaces. Yeah Taking refuge into safe spaces. Yeah, and I'm I'm worried about that. Yeah Well, and I think emotionally I mean kind of as a pastor You know, I've got this interdisciplinary job But where so, okay, so you take a set you take refuge in a safe space Well, first of all, the world is not safe and and you will not maintain because religions have for a long time Tried to build walls and create safe spaces being Christian Reformed Church in many ways we had our own schools We've we've we've played that game in a far more serious way than You just getting mouthy with your neighbor because he has a harley and voted for trump You know this this is people have played this game in a serious way over the centuries and We have a fairly good idea what happens when your little this paper bag that the safe space That's kind of like a paper bag that you've constructed when it's out in the rain and it falls apart Well now there's an opportunity maybe to grow or to just collapse and You know flap on the dock like a fish out of water which which I see a lot of so You know and that's a great point and You know i'm now in my mid 40s and i'm i'm looking at The events of my life. I have five boys You know you get you get to this stage of life and uh, whether it's work or Family and challenges of raising kids Uh, the the god's honest truth is life is kind of hard Life is life will present you with your Your uh plate full of chaos and challenge And if you have never been challenged in any at any point in your education To encounter uncomfortable ideas and to say, huh? I don't i'm not sure I know what to do with that I'm gonna have to spend some time on that um I mean not only we institutionalizing that we have we've unintentionally through our technology we've We've supplied ample opportunity to distract yourself from that project and I just um, i'm worried that A lot of factors are conspiring that You know to say nothing of just a mood of sort of malaise and nihilism and post-modern kind of angst and who cares, um You've got you've got a pretty toxic mix there unless unless you've given some some pretty robust theological reasons for caring And maybe it's not even all that sophisticated. Maybe it's just this basic moral sense that you ought to try but um, you know, i'm worried i'm worried that we've come to a place in our cultural moment where I'm sure that a lot of that's happening in a lot of schools. I hope so But the drift is is worrisome. Well, and I think that's that's one Way to understand the peterson phenomenon. Yeah because like you say our culture offers a number of effective escapist mechanisms To not deal with the hard things in life watch netflix all the time. Good just you know Um, binge maybe watch yeah. Yeah retreat into porn or computer games or you know the the the older The older answers, you know drugs and alcohol um Or some of the emotional ones anger or cynicism and And so what kind of I think we've seen is that peterson kind of sent out a beacon Yeah, and and people Who got to a point of saying you know, I i've i've All the netflix shows kind of are the same after a while and and so and and that's and what's been interesting to me in terms of at least the people that found my channel most of those individuals it wasn't that they were Removed from media they went all the way through media and it's like well I can only listen to so much music I've already burned through everything interesting in netflix and all the new stuff is just the old stuff repackaged So i'm going out to youtube land which is really the wild west and boom here are actually some people who are and they're talking about like plato and aristotle and augustin and equinas and And then suddenly people are like, whoa Tell me more about this augustin My western civ teacher would have would have uh, you know, but would have been so envious Yes. Yeah. Well, I mean that's that is intriguing paul to be I mean to be honest that That you would be bored by netflix and find uh Aristotle augustin on youtube. I mean kicker guard is is dancing in his grave right now I mean, this is great The life of aesthetic diversion just got just got disrupted by youtube It's true because that's that's who so who watches me well, you know, i'm a tiny little channel in this Big sea of youtube who finds me obviously the algorithm via jordan peterson But it's it's engineers and it's coders and it's you know, I talked to I talked to nick the other day who's basically You know stuck in his home because his his cancer treatment scorched his immune system and so What I you know boom Well, this is you know, this is finding this book in the dusty library and Tell me more of plato and socrates and western civilization and yeah kirkagard is should should be the mascot for this Um, that's right. It's true. It's beautiful and it's to me. It's refreshing because um I mean technically I could have these conversations with my neighbor next door but i'm not going to for various reasons and you know, the internet has given us a Um an amazing tool. It's it's a it's a discussion room. It's a seminar and it's free Yeah, and so when when peterson started talking about his his overall rationale for why we should Let's just let's just take what we have available and and see what we can do With humanity's education I got really intrigued by that. Um, it's a pretty it's a pretty persuasive case Do you know where is he with the project? Do you have you? You're anything new or is it? I I you know, he says that People are working on it. Well, that kind of sounds like trump's space force Um, you know people are working on it. Okay, show me something when you unveil it the the challenge doesn't seem to be Having people create content that is happening and and people who are Motivated and enthusiastic about it. I am amazed at the number of people That find me who are underemployed or unemployed And spending lots of time and hours working wikipedia and public domain sources to read Hume or aristotle or whatever i'm thinking This is fascinating. So so i'm not terribly concerned, you know by What what the information age has done is actually afforded people for little or no money access to amazing things That's cool. It is And and if you could combine His vision of you know at the timeline where you have this fairly elaborate um internet web hosting architecture that has interactive video and and text links pdfs You could combine that with Um some sort of a tutor local tutoring system, right? You get small groups who meet um, maybe it's even zoom meetings, uh, I don't know, um, And then obviously some sort of a curriculum list that you're working through I mean, that's a low overhead deal. You could have your seminar meeting at a starbucks for crying out loud Yeah, you don't need bricks and mortar. You certainly don't need Um the absurdity of the sports teams that have distracted universities from their actual mission I mean it's just So, you know things are not looking good for bricks and mortar institutions But the internet, um, you know, I used to dismiss it. I was a neil postman guy for a long time. I still am um and so technology, you know, you hold it with a certain critical distance, but I gotta tell you man youtube has has for all of the riff-raff it has I've been impressed with what you can find. Yeah, I I feel the same way I think that the challenge is going to be, you know kind of the last mile Yes in terms of one of the things that the universities have effectively offered is a a degree of accountability Yes, that will and and this is all always true of us You know, we're having fun over here, but almost always the really important learning is in that last mile It's getting that paper done. That's right And and it's and it's having your those cherished ideals that have really been born out of Your neediness and your your selfishness finally brought into some light It's you know, c.s lewis and in in the great divorce when you know, do you want me to take that serpent off your back? Oh, yes, you know, it's that last moment and that's something that universities by virtue of face-to-face Communicate could accomplish. Yeah, you know i've run over the last number of years kind of a quick and dirty theological education program that has kind of worked out into zoom meetings now and the and so the the program was originally going to have kind of a You you work with a local mentor in your church to do hands-on ministry You do assignments that you'll also because your figure your pastor has had a formal theological education You can critique that and then i'll do supplemental lectures basically because most pastors don't have the time or interest to To do the kinds of things that I do and that's you know, that's what i've done on youtube But and what I found is that people really like that component the youtube the me doing the lectures and the interaction in the zoom meetings but assignments and It's only the most highly motivated students that will actually do all the components Yeah, and and that's so when peterson talks about accreditation It's like well that's because you really have to pay someone The time to read through all those crappy papers. Yes And to mark them up That's that as a really and to you know, hopefully Walk them through a way that they could improve Their writing they're thinking Yeah, and that is that that's not easy and you really probably can't do a lot of that online. Nope. Nope. Nope So the the local tutor yet As much as as much as it is exciting to think about Having this be web accessible. I think that network of local tutors is is absolutely crucial. Yeah Yeah, but then you have to certify them you have to hold them accountable And and write and and the reason I have so much skepticism about peterson in this is depending Of course who his partners are who haven't really been so much disclosed is I don't find in peterson someone with an institutional orientation And and what institutions provide is that that that determined persistent Regular you can set your clock on it. Here is the deadline These are the steps unto the deadline and students need that. Yes, they do Because it's like boom boom boom boom boom and peterson's out there with his vision and all of this, but there's a reason that schools get institutional very quickly because that those habits of institutions Are really conducive to the kind of accountability that so often we all need And that's a paradox, right? Because he you know, he's um He you're right, I think he any case he actually inclines towards the more liberal temperament He's he's oriented towards ideas and he wants to start new things and talk about ideas But he's also uh quick to to assert we need we need those conservative types. We need those institution maintainers and um It's just uh, I find it, you know another instance of so many unnecessary and frustrating polarizations where you have You know creative ideas and and compassion um, as though that were somehow opposed to uh the hard work of keeping a Keeping a thing running and you know, it's like I would love to see I would love to see that balanced Vision actually bears some fruit here Well, and again part of my skepticism with peterson and is and this is that I haven't seen him exhibit these traits in himself Yeah You know, i'm gonna i'm gonna redo the biblical lectures in november of 2018 Nope, that's gonna be november of 2019. Yeah, i'm doing the the tour great. I can understand that but and and Conversation that i've had with people who know peterson personally will often say I i'll ask one of the first things to ask him Does he have a plan? and they say No, just not well, maybe kind of sort of no No temperamentally That's not who he is Yeah, and that's why I often contrast him would say billy graham who? Graham did the road show. Yes also behind him built this institution and that's what gave him because institutions magnify and give durability and persistence, you know individuals versus institutions individuals seldom win Mmm, so especially over the long haul. Yeah, that's right. That's right. No, that's that's a great word That's it. We really do need both and uh we you know, I myself inclined towards the Towards the ideal towards the generating new ideas That's i've always been that way But you're absolutely right, um if I didn't have if I didn't have team members who have feet firmly planted on the ground You know, I would I wouldn't be able to do anything. Yeah, you're starting a new school I dare bet you have a couple of people there that are just Organized they're meticulous. It's like these are the boxes. We must check off, but I want to do that. Okay, you will You nailed it We're better together, right? That's right. That's right. No, it's like it's like me and my wife I mean to be honest, uh, she's she's so awesome and she she anchors me in so many ways But it's a beautiful picture of the body man. I think it's wonderful We need we need each other and I I think that's the opportunity that as christians that we have to to show the world today We're so polarized. We're just shouting at each other and uh, I don't know I mean most people probably aren't but we are online That's the stuff that makes the uh, the youtube posts but um You know, it's it's it's been worse in this country before. Yeah No, there are huge I mean even just the emergence of jordan peterson and youtube and There are real reasons for hope Yeah, when you compare, you know, I lived in the third world Oh my goodness, you can't keep the lights on in most of the world, right? Right, you know the the water comes on a few hours a day So you put a big bucket underneath and you don't have a tub you take all the water the city will give you and you know, and it's and it's well, how on earth are you ever going to Arrive at something and so I think you know peterson's chaos order Framework is so helpful in that and and with echo, you know with with educational institutions you need that structure Yeah, but don't you know i've seen schools like my wife works for a public school and you just watch that school Yeah It's so you know if it's not breathing in uh, fresh fresh sea winds It gets it gets pretty stuffy in there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah Well, I really appreciate you taking the time, uh, just to hash through that that's that's really helpful. Um Well, I I hope it was helpful. Those are just kind of my thoughts and I i'd be happily proven wrong to see peterson Rise up and do something You know find find partners to do something that that helps massive people get a decent education The only thing is like my oldest two sons went to calvin college Which nobody in california knew who it was and I said look You go to your undergraduate to learn how to think to learn how to write to learn how to speak Yeah, and and you don't need an ivy league school for that You need actually what calvin college is able to deliver for them You need motivated teachers who are going to take a personal interest in you Yes, and help you Develop and so my oldest son he's you know, you got a political science degree works in politics and you know What what does he see himself able to differentiate against some of these others who have degrees from harvard and yale? He writes well. Well, how did that happen? Well, you got it. You did the hard work Nobody cares after a year or two really where you got that degree from Once you start proving things out in the world Well, that's what you need for the next step That is that is so spot on Man, you dutch folks. I'll tell you we're gonna be around when the rest of us are Just wallowing in complete post-modern malays Yeah, we're you know, and you look yeah, well, you know, we have the germans we have the french we have the c and we have the english People learn how to endure When you have to build walls to keep the ocean out you you learn a few things about hard work, that's right. That's right Hey paul, I really appreciate it. It's been a lot of fun. Let's do this again sometime. Absolutely Alrighty, man. Take care. Yeah. Take care. God bless. Thanks. Bye. Bye