https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=91Y_DB6s18k

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm going to do some more videos on the Jordan Peterson-Bishop Barron conversation. There's a lot in this conversation that I think only becomes apparent when you sort of slow it down and hear what they're saying and think through some of the connections between them. And I found that to be especially true in this segment of the conversation. That's here where Peterson goes, pretty much following on the last video he did on this conversation. You know, I've talked to about 150 live audiences now about this sort of thing, independent of all my classroom lectures. And I'll tell you, I tell people, I suggest to people that the ancient idea that life is suffering and that it's tainted by malevolence, that there's no more true ideas than that in some base sense. And that that's something that everyone has to contend with. And if you don't contend with it properly, then you become embittered and you work to make things worse. And everyone understands that. Everyone knows that's true. And then I suggest to them that the proper way out of that isn't the pursuit of material satisfaction or impulse of happiness or rights from the individual perspective, but the individual adoption of responsibility. And I'll tell you, every single time I talk about that, you can hear a pin drop in the auditorium. And I think one of the things that the church has failed to communicate properly is that goal in life to buttress yourself against its catastrophe. And I mean, Abel is a good example of that in the Abel and Cain story, because he devotes himself properly to God and things work out for him. Well, more or less, it doesn't end very well. It doesn't. But I mean, good is sometimes defeated by evil. I mean, obviously, he lives a proper and admirable life. And it needs to be communicated to young people. Right. Well, see, I would say the biblical. Okay, well, we'll get back to Bishop Baron's answer in a minute. But this is classic Jordan Peterson. Life is suffering. The proper way out is the adoption of responsibility. The church has failed to communicate this properly. And I want to dig into this because it's important. And I think actually they do dig into this, even though Bishop Baron is about to say, go into a section on right praise, which we will look at. And it's not necessarily clear where, why he's going into that until you pull back and you think about this idea of a noble goal. Now, Esther O'Reilly, obviously, has many times characterized Peterson as a noble pagan. And the longer I sit with that observation, the better it sits with me. Nobility is something that Peterson talks about regularly. Now, if you think about nobility, if you think about, let's say, Eric's conversation that he did with me where we, Eric talked about that which is admirable. And I think I got that word right, that which is admirable. And we tend to go move towards that which we have a sense is admirable or attractive or desirable. And this gets into some of the medic, why can't I think of his name, the Roman Catholic. We are attracted to that which is admirable, to that which is noble. And Peterson criticizes the church here a bit, and he does so with all due respect, I think. And Bishop Barron understands that, and I understand that, and I don't take it personally, because I think he has a point that the church has not, for many people in the culture, the church is not known as setting a high ideal. And I think this is in such a large, we have large communities now that isn't completely gone. Churches and surveys, pastors and surveys regularly fare a little better than politicians in terms of nobility, but not much. A little better than lawyers, but not much. Less than nurses, nurses usually score higher than doctors. The point here that Peterson makes is that, and this is one of the points that he makes regularly, what happens in life is if you set a goal, that goal begins to not only, if you set a goal, that goal not only begins to orient your behavior, begin to focus and sharpen and direct your behavior, it also focuses and sharpens and directs what you see. And so you hear Peterson again and again and say, set a goal, set a goal, because that goal functions powerfully in terms of the world we actually begin to see. This gets into his ideas about cognitive science, and that goal then begins to reshape the world for the person, and they then, everything, they see the world differently. The world in many ways, as it appears to them, capital B being, as it appears to them is reshaped by that goal. That's an important idea. Now where Bishop Barron will go with this is important, but before we get there, I want to, I want to, let's see what I'm doing with these, I've made these slides yesterday. I just finished today, I just finished the book Fatal Discord, and I heartily recommend this. This has been one of the best presentations of the Protestant Reformation by a, it's by a journalist, okay, it's not by a theologian, it's not by a church historian. When a church historian and a theologian write about, or a philosopher write about the Protestant Reformation, again, the goal begins to shape the nature of the book. What is powerful about this book is he takes a very broad perspective and he approaches it as a journalist. Now there are things in the book that professional historians and theologians could certainly criticize and want to tweak, but in terms of giving a journalistic perspective of the importance of the Reformation and the scope of the Reformation, this has been one, this has probably been the best book that I've read. Now the Protestant Reformation was in fact all about the church. Now the fact that I even have to say that says a lot about the impact of Martin Luther and the radical way in which Martin Luther changed, Martin Luther changed, but also the time changed and Martin Luther expresses that change. Does the man make the moment, does the moment make the man? I had a conversation with Ron Dart about Erasmus and Luther and I argued in that conversation that that Peterson is more of a Luther in terms of his temperament, in terms of what he's done. Erasmus was a vitally important person and I think this book gives Erasmus the attention he deserves, but what happened in the Protestant Reformation was very much a challenge to church as institution and that has deep roots and I want to make a video on that, I just did a class on that for my Sierra Leadership Network, but that has deep roots in terms of how we understand almost everything today. You go into, you leave the middle ages with a threat of afterlife torture was the public, was publicly plausible, near obsession for many and so what the church offered was a way to handle afterlife jeopardy and remember in that day and age life was short, brutish and hard and people died all the time and so the focus, the goal, okay, that shaped ideas, the focus on the afterlife very much shaped everything and that's important to remember this and what the Roman Catholic Church offered was an institutional system to address this very plausible threat that many people, not everyone, that many people recognized and so the church held tremendous power in the public imaginary for the people in Europe. Now the Church of Sacramento spiritual machinery was employed to deliver escape from hell, speed through purgatory and delivery into the bliss of heaven and this goal shaped the public imagination to powerful degrees. Now part of the big reason for the Protestant Reformation was the incredible corruption within the church and part of what the Protestant Reformation actually succeeded in doing was actually forcing the church to address the corruption that was endemic within the church. Now how does that relate to this? Peterson in this video with Bishop Barron spend most of their time talking about what the church should be for today and Peterson quite rightly here says that in his mind the goal of the church is to present a noble goal for people that they can strive to and the point that he's making in that in his experience and now again I've said before Peterson sort of forest gumps his way through the church. He clearly has very little experience in church, very little understanding of what's been happening in the church over the last few hundred years. That lack of understanding is understandable because he's not been there, this has not been his focus. He does serve here however to give a low resolution outside quick take on what he sees as the deficiency of the church. Now part of this is certainly valid because he spent his growing up years in the church and left it. So in other words the church did not, was not salient to him, did not capture his imagination as a young boy and in fact right at that moment perhaps when he was in need of a model or a goal that didn't present itself plausibly within the church. He didn't as a young boy who eventually or as a young teenager who eventually left the church. The church in that sense failed to capture his imagination, him and frankly an entire generation and so his critique here that the church has failed to not only set a noble goal ahead of people but set an admirable goal, an attractive goal, a goal that engaged his youthful imagination and Peterson's just a year older than I am and so very much about that time what really probably did grab his attention more was Luke Skywalker and Star Wars and the movies and all of those things and we're going to talk about that as we go into this but Peterson's point here that the church has failed to present to society an admirable noble goal that could excite his young imagination and give him a sense that this church is a vital institution worth investing in. Now I was speaking with a gentleman a generation older than myself who talked about how he grew up in the Christian Reformed Church in the Dutch Reformed tradition. He talked about how in his teenage and young adult years, now granted they grew up within a pretty rigid insular isolated container that the Christian Reformed Church was especially prior to World War II but he talked about how every week they were interested in going to church because they were curious about what the preacher was going to say and he had the sense that the somehow the service, the preaching, all of this engaged for him issues that were vital for his sense of well-being, his salient structure and in many ways for many people this has been lost and now the whole conversation within Christianity and church work about relevance is a complicated one but I think it's apt here and so what should the church be for today and Peterson says well perhaps what the church needs to do is hold forth a noble goal and against now we're talking about nobility virtue and again Esther O'Reilly's idea of Peterson as a noble pagan, a noble goal that would give young people something to aim at and I do hear this and you'll hear these you'll hear people bear witness to this in my conversations that they met somebody in church that captured their imagination whose virtue and nobility inspired young men and young women to stay within the church and work within the church as a fruitful way of pursuing nobility and you can hear this in Jonathan Peugeot and how he talks about the church fathers and Nathan Jacobs too. I'm talking to John Verbeke today, I'll be talking to Nathan Jacobs again next week but for Jonathan Peugeot you can see how church fathers for him when he converted to orthodoxy became they became the kind of noble saints that one would aspire to. If you listen to Peter Kreeft you'll hear Peter Kreeft again and again talk about you know it should be the goal to become saints and part of what at least before the Protestant Reformation in terms of sainthood there was there was certainly some of that now so Peterson believes what the church should do it should give them something to aim at because you need that goal to reorient your sight and reshape the world that you see. That aiming would recalibrate what you see and it would give their lives a sense of meaning okay that's very much an antidote to nihilism. Now Jordan Peterson is actually doing this and I noted I scanned the comments in his conversation with Bishop Barron and just as I saw two years ago year and a half ago when Peterson caught my imagination was that you'll see in the comment section again and again people bearing witness to the fact that they are going to church because they listen to Jordan Peterson their lives are better because they listen to Peterson and and they're doing better in life generally speaking and many have seen Peterson as that noble you know as that noble man to emulate. Now Barron when I first probably the first two three times I listened to this I was a little disappointed at where at his response to this how he followed up on the goal idea because I thought he sort of missed it I thought he sort of jumped in to to make a church point but listening to this now I don't think so he goes right into into right praise and so let's listen to where Barron goes with this and then we're going to talk about that. Right well see I would say the biblical key is always right praise and that's I go right back to Genesis one is is when we give praise to God drawing all creation together then our soul becomes ordered properly and then around us a kingdom of right order is built up. Now this idea is very similar to Peterson's modern scientific observation about attention and the way attention creates our world okay and I know for some of you that's going to sound sort of woo but Peterson has the the guerrilla video if you read maps of meaning again you'll see how he brings a lot of this stuff in that which are if you listen to Sam Harris Sam Harris will say something like this Sam Harris imagines that we are passive observers of a world of objects okay now cognitive science today has thrown out that idea that is not at all how we relate to the world and you can see this by listening to someone like Scott Adams who will be saying he has his two movies so some people look at Trump and say he's an evil racist desperate bent on destroying America others will look at Trump and say he is a liberator who is standing up to the the despots of the left who are trying to establish a new progressive liberationist tyranny in America a new blue tyrannical church something to model the medieval church that Martin Luther that Martin Luther in a sense destroyed and and so well who is Trump so you've got these in a sense these two movies and and we would look at that and say well that's well that's just interpretation but as Peterson notes and as cognitive science notes today no this goes way deeper that the world we live in is actually a combination of that which is out there and that which we bring to it okay and and that that that combination of being capital B as Peterson says this this this being that we experience is both and in terms of what we bring to the world and what the world brings to us and you can see this again one of my favorite clips of Peterson at the beginning of the Roger Scrutin video where he talks about the fact that in a sense what we see are memories and you think well why is that well if you if you actually understand how the eye works we are in a sense this this manifest image that we have before us I'm sitting here and I'm looking at the computer and I'm seeing my entire office that's not it's not my eyes aren't actually operating like this little webcam that is recording me here which is just kind of taking in a mindless array within a resolution of data that is sucking it in my eyes are actually darting here and there and they're paying attention to things and so the salience is actually constructing this view before me and and we know that that people see just look at five observers to a car accident and and everyone will say well you get all of these different testimonies yeah you do well why is that were they were they not all seeing the same accident no they all saw but they were all quite literally looking at different things and so our minds our eyes and our brains do not record as this webcam is recording it's it's far more complicated than that because we're actually taking in way more data than just this little webcam and we're having to store it and interpret it and we're having to figure out what is salient and we're doing this all because we need to survive and again if a if a chimpanzee walked in my office chaos would rain and you know my everything in my mind would be drawn to that if someone in right outside my office fired a gun and a bullet came through my office door same thing and i would before my my conscious self has a chance to see it all right now when bishop barron talks about right praise and jordan peterson talks about a a goal they're really talking about the same thing bishop barron has just said what what happens what right praise is supposed to do is orient the self properly again this is this is very much the same thing that jordan peterson has been saying about a goal now maybe we should listen to a little bit more uh in the catholic mass we have that wonderful prayer to gloria we say glory to god in the highest and on earth peace to people of goodwill and it's it's like a formula that if i give god the highest then there will be peace around me um and and again this is this is the same thing that jordan peterson has just said but he's saying it in religious language and this religious language is problematic for a tremendous number of people now someone might say well i can see jordan peterson and he appears to be noble i got the two movie thing with jordan peterson i've i i regularly if i mentioned to jordan peterson to people sort of outside the jordan peterson bubble i will get comments i and and more and more i'll get comments like you're you're giving you're you're just offering a car you're just offering a cover for racism and i'm thinking do you know my life why on earth would i want to offer a cover for racism i've seen racism as a as a desperate problem and a bitter enemy all my life why would i want to give it cover actually just last night on news hour um one of the reporters for the first time i've heard on news hour said well it seems like the republicans and and the the the squad of four have two different definitions of racism i'm like ah we're upping the resolution here a little bit what is racism we're going to have to have a conversation about that definition but anyway so so bishop barron says that you know this orienting thing this right praise is supposed to orient our whole lives the difficulty of this is that what has been lost in the imaginary is god this gets into nicha god is dead god can't be seen and in fact what has happened at least since the end of the cold war and 9 11 and the rise of the new atheist which is very much a function of 9 11 if you look at the time frame god as imagined in the roman catholic church is immoral and and so the death of god leads us right into now there's a big debate as to how whether peterson gets nicha right but the point that peterson makes here is an important one that that god is absent and what i have noticed pastorally is that for most people even if they have an idea of god god is corrupt the roman catholic pedophile priest scandal bears into this the the political engagement of the religious right gets into this because people who are people who are on the opposite side politically then lose all respect if they hate trump they'll lose all respect for jerry fallwell jr who is seen as trump's puppet and churches that seem to align with that there's all of these reasons that are pulling god down and then pulling god down from the sky and and what i find most common with people in terms of i keep my eye on the time here what i what i find most common with people is that they truly believe they are more moral than god and so they stand in judgment over god's church and over god himself which means that basically at the top of their moral hierarchy it's them i i read a fascinating uh i'm gonna make a video about that i've got a whole bunch of videos in my head and part of the reason i've slowed down conversations is because the conversations were sort of crowding out my ability to make these videos and i need to have a balance i want to have a balance of conversations and these videos because while i love the conversations and i always come away with them thinking wow it's a great conversation i'm so glad i had it they are very taxing on me and these monologue videos tend to tend to sort of restore me so i need a balance to to i need a balance anyway back to this point the church has been torn down and and so god is dead priests are seen as pedophiles pastors are seen as tribal money grubbers who who who you can't they can't speak honestly because you know they're because they'll lose their job or they'll lose their status what have you and churches in fact have become places where people can't speak people can't speak honestly because they'll lose status so nobility is something that has gone away and so when jordan peterson says the church has failed to present a noble goal that would reorient bishop erin comes and says well write praise so god is at the top and glory to god and the highest and this is supposed to instruct us yes but that's not how it's functioning for people it's been corrupted and you know one of the things i hope to talk to john vervecky about is you know if you listen to john vervecky and a number of other people that have had conversations with some of which i've posted for many of those people it can't be restored the question is going to be what is actually functioning in its place because something is always functioning in its place and so now this this transition as i said why he goes to write praise this point i think is it was a little too subtle for me to catch the first time but after listening to this a number of times i caught it he'll quote tillich and tillich making the point that worship and this is an old pastor thing worship is worth ship we praise that which we we see as most admirable most esteemable most noble most glorious worship expresses that which the heart is fixed upon this will get into our deal of idolatry that which one worship shows the implicit goal of one's heart and if you listen to for example i should i should grab the book hang on so when i was in my tim keller phase um so when i first started listening to tim keller in 2006 i heard a lot of christianity versus religion pastors go through these phases they have these hobby horses and so i'm in the jordan peterson phase right now and one phase will lead to another but but for a while then after after his his religion versus christianity phase he had his idolatry phase and a lot of tim keller's books reflect the phase that he was in and the preaching that he was in and he wrote this book counterfeit gods and this gets into idolatry if if you make if you make the family the center of your life that idol is going to hurt you and you will actually hurt your family and actually tim keller is working from augustin's idea of ordered loves and and this is actually what bishop barren is saying you have to have your you have to have your hierarchy in order and you have to have god at the top and if god is at the top here's the thing about god if you love your family too much you can corrupt it and it can corrupt you but god that which is incorruptible that which is above all of these oh this gets complicated philosophically that gets that which is above all of this stuff can't be corrupted and therefore god is the is the safest thing to give your primary love that doesn't mean you don't love your family or you don't love your spouse or you don't love your children it's just that you have them in the proper order and if you have them in your proper order your love of these things won't turn around to kill you and again you can find all kinds of tim keller sermons on that and and his book counterfeit gods which was on at the empty promises of money sex and power and the only hope that matters and again what a lot of preachers do is they take a lot of their ideas from their sermons and they put them into books like this so and and that's the point that barren is making that which one worships shows the implicit goal of one's heart if you decide you want to be a wealthy person that will orient that will become your goal it will orient your life if you decide you want to be a if you want to be someone who doesn't lie well then becoming not a liar will orient your heart let's see if i put a i did put let's see where he's right well see i would say the biblical key is always right praise and that's i go right back to genesis one is is when we give praise to god drawing all creation together then our soul becomes ordered properly and then around us a kingdom of right order is built up in the catholic mass we have that wonderful prayer to gloria we say glory to god in the highest and on earth peace to people of goodwill and it's it's like a formula that if i give god in the highest then there will be peace around me um that's like a condensation of the sermon on the mount yeah exactly that sermon seems to see that sermon seems to me and i also believe it to be psychologically true is that it's necessary for you to aim at the highest value that you can conceive of you know and that has to have something to do with the amelioration of suffering and the constraint of malevolence it'll express itself that way naturally yeah as a negative and then once you concentrate on that and focus on that and decide that that's your your primary aim then things do start to order themselves around you because well everything that you see and do directs itself towards that aim but that's the yes this i'd say strangely uniquely christian thing is that we say okay the the god that we're worshiping okay and right there that's exactly where most people will stumble the god that you're worshiping okay uh once you use that word god for a lot of secular people the problematic thing comes if he would say well the thing that you're worshiping the thing that you are turning into a god i find people are less allergic to that kind of formulation the god revealed in the old testament but then finally revealed in jesus and and again so much of this for so many people is so problematic and now i'm with bishop baron i i i for me what he just said is not problematic but for many many people it is and and so one of the things that i've gone back and forth with adam friended on many times is why is jordan peterson having the effect that he has and adam will keep saying he doesn't require people to believe in the supernatural and and that's right here at this moment that that peterson seems to be affording a sort of natural theology where you can understand this without having to talk about revelation because for many people revelation is problematic as i'm looking over my computer screen right now i'm looking at the crucifix of jesus right so my praise is directed to a god who's entered radically into suffering not just physical suffering but the whole brokenness of the world of stupidity and and and now bishop baron is addressing what peterson had just said about suffering cruelty and injustice and hatred that's where god is gone so the god that i worship is the god who himself is dedicated to uh the amelioration of suffering or healing the suffering of the world now now again this whole framework which for religious people is non-problematic for many other people it's highly problematic for a lot of these reasons that i've talked about in in many of in many of the videos and so the church says you ought to praise god well well people naturally praise and evangelize that which they that which they find brings them good things they'll sell amway they'll sell uh essential oils they'll tell you to shop at cosco they'll tell you to vote for a certain politician people naturally promote that which they see as noble and good and worthwhile this is a function of human beings and it's a function of how we teach in this culture of expressive individual individualism it's allergic to ought however in this way now we'll say it ought as a recommendation but ought as something that you will be punished if you don't do it this tends to in our culture rearrange this whole admirable this whole economy of admirability and and so this is exactly what churches have been sort of working on and so it's ironic when when peterson begins by well the churches should set apart set ahead of them a noble goal and and a little bit later actually not i won't treat it in this video because they actually talk about most of what they talk about in this video between peterson and bishop barron is in fact the church and most of what they're trying to figure out i think is very close to what i'm trying to figure out why has jordan peterson been so successful when the church has been struggling in many ways now i always have to qualify that because jordan peterson though he might seem huge in terms of having two million subscribers on youtube and two million followers on twitter that is a drop in the bucket compared to the church okay millions and millions of people go to church every sunday and around the world billions of people are interested in church and so when we talk about the relative the the performance the the relative performance between jordan peterson and the church that has to be qualified within a particular subset of people who have been highly church resistant in our culture for at least 20 years the culture of expressive individualism is allergic to ought in this way people say show me and this again gets into peterson's idea of a noble goal pervasive skepticism about the christian program or the church's claims very much get into this say i didn't have a and and you can look at this in terms of church growth and i use this slide for for for something for something else and you can see where the the rise of the nuns since again the end of the cold war and and really the beginning of the struggle with fundamentalist islam the cath the roman catholic priest scandal the the end of recruiting god to fight godless communism and now religious fundamentalism seems to be the enemy of goodness for many people in america especially as seen via i i find this very much to be those who live very much within a a media bubble and social media hasn't really changed that and so you see this huge rise of of the no religion and that's something that i really want to talk to to nathan jacobs more about but one of the things that you've seen however is that the that which is noble the the different the different approaches to this so jordan peterson when he was at liberty university one of the things that he said there a number of times was how impressed he was visiting the college that the students were cynical and how moved he was by the i would say the praise the right praise that was happening now what liberty university is going to do with its student body is very much going to be contemporary praise and worship and what it does is it brings all of the musical and theatrical technology this is something evangelicals tend to major on takes takes all of that theatrical technology and brings it to the fore to give people an experiential participatory sense of the presence of god and if you're around any group of people often pentecostal often big box non-denominational big sound church they employ different technologies to in a sense break the break the kind of humdrum way of life and have you feel god and feel god's praise and feel god's glory now the liturgical churches have been using older technologies to do that in many ways the liturgy of the orthodox and the roman catholics and the other liturgical traditions they're using other technologies they're using lectio divina they're using a lot of these older technologies to give people an experience of god an experience of the numinal a sense of awe a first-person experience of of god's nobility and god's wonder that's what worship does and the idea is that again like bishop barron if you sort of put god at the top that everything will will fall in line now given the diverse and conflicted environment we're in not everybody is impressed by what they're seeing now again if i talk to people who continue for example to be very happy with their experience as a as a practicing jew or a practicing islamist they will talk about similar things that oh that the church is so beautiful oh but the language is so beautiful oh but the prayer times are so important and and one of the things part part of what's happened since way before the reformation but pietism arose in the reformation and you can see in the counter-reformation sort of what sort of how the roman catholic church tried to stem the tide of protestantism whereas luther now was using the bible and part of the part of why the roman catholic church resisted the translation of the bible in the vernacular was was that the bible was being used as a psycho technology that people themselves would have an immediate would have an immediate experience of the noble of the transcendent and that was being done through the bible and and in terms of participatory you look at the radical reformation and and those who were you know people give biblical literalism a hard time but the power of biblical liberalism is in fact participatory because you try to do exactly what jesus says you try to live exactly how jesus lived and then you discover now remember what happens when you have a goal and everything orients towards this goal when you try to live exactly that way and you find it works what do you mean that it works i mean you begin hitting some of your sub-goals as a part of participating in the bible in a very literal way well it works this is a powerful stuff in terms of orienting your hierarchy and and churches have been there have been movements within the churches for centuries doing these things now now they get into this interesting part of this video where they start talking about israel worshiping the wrong things let's see if i i do have a clip here um but see i think that's the mess to me the master theme of the whole bible israel always wrong without exception when its praise goes wrong it starts praising the wrong things so the running happens in exodus when yeah moses leads the azure lights through the desert right they they're in the same position we're in in the modern world where where we've escaped a tyranny of sorts let's say or we believe we have and entered into this domain of untrammeled freedom and there's nothing but false idols calling to us from every direction and false idols now again there's a hierarchy here and if your goal is noble your the sub-goals and if your love is if you love the right thing your sub loves all of this is going to arrange itself properly in a hierarchy that's the idea and if you start just worshiping any old thing that comes your way if you okay i have you know oh wow pot i discovered pot and when i when i when i when i smoke pot all of my problems seem to go away well okay but if all you do is smoke pot um your problems don't really go away they just feel like they go away same thing with alcohol well when i drink i don't feel my problems yeah but when you're sober the problems come back now one of the things that has come back into my life is daniel and daniel is the guy used to sleep against my door and he can't sleep against my door right now because there's a restraining order he's not allowed to go onto the church grounds because of an incident that happened but he's back in the neighborhood and i'm going to try and see if i can help him again i most often fail but but one of the things that for daniel was always the case that he he was terrified of waking up sober because and now of all the stuff all of this stuff has happened since daniel went to jail and now daniel's out of jail so you know and working through all of this stuff helping oh what i've learned about cognitive science and all of this stuff you know in in a sense you know alcohol is this this thing that changes the world for daniel okay the world is different because of alcohol for him and and so the i remember one day he says you know oh i woke up sober and and so his goal is to just keep enough alcohol in his body to never be sober and in terms of that this in terms of this being as peterson would say capital b being that we live in he wants to keep enough alcohol so that that which he projects stays ahead of that which is out there now unfortunately i just saw him this morning and his his feet are swollen and he's starting to lose his toenails they're coming off his feet he often doesn't wear shoes because his feet hurt so much but that means he walks around on hot sacramento sidewalks in the summer and he often breaks beer bottles where he's sleeping because he throws them at people and then there's broken glass around and then he steps on the glass but as long as he can stay sober he can in a sense keep the keep the things he's bringing to the world out here and you know keep the world at bay that's that that's the diversity idea as far as i'm concerned because unity is certainly as profound a moral necessity as diversity there should be diversity within unity and i fight it all the time you know in the church too because we bought into that ideology and i actually looked at now again in subsequent videos they have i make subsequent videos because i always have these intentions but i get distracted because i'm adhd and i go off and make other videos but the the point here is that the church they will critique the church a lot in this whole conversation and that's really in many ways the themes of this conversation and it's the oldest problem in philosophy the one of the many but all we do today is we completely valorize the many we never see it shadow side we denigrate the one and never see its positive side the one is extraordinarily important well that's part yes it's god yeah i think so well that's right it's part of the death of god because in a sense what you do when you have god at the top of your hierarchy is that again as peterson says in the first biblical series where he talks about what the christians did was they didn't divinize the emperor and they didn't divinize come close to it in the roman catholic tradition divinizing the pope and and to the degree that you divinize a human being your system breaks down because people are people they're broken they're flawed they do wrong we get things wrong and in a sense and this is what goes into the protestant reformation if you divinize your church hierarchy well what happens when they get things wrong because time is an incredibly difficult thing and part of what happens in the protestant reformation is they sort of divinize the bible and they put that at the top of the hierarchy and so part of what you're seeing as the new atheism and as the rise of the nuns and atheism in general and the falling away and why i often say that atheism is a function of protestantism if you divinize the bible and then you decide to rise up and judge the bible well now you have the death of god and so israel worships the wrong thing there's a religious frame that has been shattered by pluralism and this is again is something that the protestant reformation did and and this is this is part of the reason why you know people look at a particular institution they say no we all become judges we all become evaluators we all become to become a consumer is to become a critic and and i will i will shop for the church that is worthy of me the church that gives me enough attention who is to say your god is better than my god and that's kind of the pluralism the one in the many issue the tail end manifestation of worship might not arise for a hundred years in a day when average life expense expectancy was 30 well what do i mean by that well israel worships the golden calf well the golden calf making a golden calf and saying here is the god that took you out of egypt that was not a dumb thing and now in many in many in many christian teaching and in many atheist teaching they'll say oh those ancient people were so dumb by worshiping a statue actually it's not dumb at all because we do the same things that they did but it very much matters that which is at the top of the hierarchy but it might not matter in your lifetime and that's something that it's very difficult for an egalitarian individualist society to consider and and this is and this is well actually this is the kind of thing again that that tim keller talks about in his book counterfeit gods the that which you put on the top of your hierarchy will probably be manifest in multiple generations in hundreds of years rather than decades because life life works that slowly now one of the things that that happens in israel is that if you read the old testament you'll discover that there's the bible has a critique of the other nations around it you know a popular take on on the mosaic covenant by people today is that well it seems beyond archaic now it's immoral um again this is the big swing away from god after the cold war after the suspicion of fundamentalisms either as as god's word or once and for all thing and you'll hear this debated in the jordan peterson the board jordan peterson brett weinstein sam harris conversations it's interesting because when you get to i almost said charles murray didn't mean charles murray um douglas murray is that douglas murray is in europe seeing the post religious and beginning to say well there might be stuff in the bible we don't like but niches project of making up our own values we very quickly john calvin said our minds are idol makers so what did he mean by that well we always we can't live without value hierarchies and in fact to to watch someone like my homeless alcoholic drug using friend daniel and you know whatever i talk about dan you please understand i love daniel a lot and i want the best for him and i try every day to set up a situation where he can get sober and and because he's had decades in his life of sobriety he was a mental health worker and so he understands his his mental health situation and all of that so i very much want to move him towards a far more sustainable life but the thing is that that we are idol makers and if you want to see this watch watch the presidential candidates have to establish a priority on stage when they don't have to choose those watching the democratic debates and and the reporters try to get them to basically say give us one priority and it seems like well no one there understands what a priority is no one there wants to deal with a hierarchy well it's all important yeah but without a hierarchy it's hard to know what to do now or or when to have a rule and when to have an exception so this is this is sort of what's happened so so the bot the popular take on the mosaic covenant is it well it's beyond archaic it's immoral either it's god's you know god's word once and for all so we can't believe it and and so when you hear sam harris attacking fundamentalism brett weinstein quite rightly comes in and says yeah but christians have changed their behaviors even if they're not changing their language on the bible they're changing their behaviors and their interpretive their interpretive frameworks for that behavior that's changing all the time actually even amongst people who will say the the there there's nobody more literal than them and there's nobody that holds the bible in higher regard than them so on and so forth or it's watered bound by interpretation to mean that whatever the interpreter wants it to believe and so peterson basically says you know these are false idols calling from every direction and and so then you have a life that is you have a life that is disordered and and so well now now i'm into this and now i'm into that and now i'm in love with this woman and now i'm in love with that man but then but next year it'll be someone else and whatever works for me but when we say whatever works for me it's whatever works for me now and even when this course of a short lifetime rodrear posted a an article a couple of years ago by a philosopher who who basically had who had an article about pilgrims versus tourists and that was actually a lovely piece because you know a pilgrim is someone who has a goal and that goal orients their steps and and all of their decisions are towards that goal and that goal tourists are sort of all over the place and there's a there's a there's a separation an alienation a a disassociation with identity with a tourist the tourist sort of floats above whereas the pilgrim inhabits and what happens with these false idols is that today i'm into jordan peterson and tomorrow i'm into tim keller and and on and on and on and if there's if there's no me that is able to actually integrate tim keller and jordan peterson and john verbeke and c.s lewis and and oh frederick beekner and stan vanderkley my father and henry ostroman my you know grandfather and on and on and on and on if if there's nothing that actually integrates them then i'm no longer a pilgrim i'm just a tourist the idol is a goal that you take on but it's too small to properly orient your life it's too shallow to function in the enthralling way it needs to your goal has to fascinate you and and it has to be noble and it has to attract you and you want to have to aspire to it and part of the reason god's way up here and above us is that we need to aspire our whole life long if i decide i want to be the best i want to be the most successful youtuber who has made a name for his cell phone stand mission accomplished i don't know any other youtuber that's talking about a cell phone stand like this that has this and it's my dyslexia it really makes it hard to know what side things are on when i'm looking at me um you know this cell phone stand oh there it is there it is that's a too small a goal for a human being human beings are fallen royalty where and and so in a sense if your if your goal is above everything that's below it's it's something that can actually orient one's life to have a noble life so so idols are goals that are too small it's a good thing but it's not an ultimate thing your family having a good family is an important goal but it can't be everything your life is about or actually you will cripple your family so what their tactic is and what's interesting is their tactic is is cultural exegesis and yeah and they're all over the culture that's been a pre-substitution of mine doing this work is i tend not to begin with you know direct instruction or moral finger wagging but i tend to begin with something going on in the culture and and you've talked about this you know the the hero myth is in practically every movie you watch but the christian themes are every place one of the most remarkable to me being uh i just thought about tv the other night was the clint eastwood's gran torino if you want to see the best exemplification i think in fiction of what the church fathers meant by the meaning of jesus cross in other words a move of self-sacrificing love that exposes evil and liberates those who are under the tyranny of evil that's how they read the cross in a very clever way expressed in more mythic language you know but the ideas are very powerful and they're beautifully exemplified in that movie the move that eastwood's character makes at the end and of course as he dies he's in the figure of the crucified jesus lest we miss the point right it's such an it's so interesting too because he's hi i actually made a video um where i used a picture of of christ delivering uh the sermon on the mount i think and i put it with eastwood's face i superimposed it on top of his and it was for exactly that reason it was that the reason that that's exemplified in gran torino yeah because i mean eastwood in that movie is he's a very harsh character very very judgment he's like he's like the christ that comes back in revelations right he's very very very judgmental and he gave he cuts no one a break except that he actually does like he does separate the wheat from the chaff and he's even interestingly in that movie you know he's he ends up being more akin to the foreigners who he hypothetically hates like the uh um who's the good samaritan it's the same idea as the good samaritan right becomes more family to these people that he hypothetically hates than to his own children because he would them is ungrateful and unworthy and right whereas these new immigrants are striving to be good people yeah it's very interesting movie okay it is and it was a good example of uh the principle one of my professors years ago said the once integrated christian vision let's say a reformation enlightenment sort of blew up and the pieces flew every place and they're kind of twisted and they're they're charred and everything and they've landed here and there and so as you go through the cultural landscape you see them all over the place well there's a there's a bit of you know eschatology or there's christology or there's the trinity and so on but they're usually in distorted form so that's a good example of there's the christus victor theory to give his proper name the crisis the victor over sin and death he's conquered the dark powers uh and liberated us in the process there it is but it's in somewhat distorted form of course but um that's been the game i played a lot is to try to find these these happens everywhere it's it's so common that it's it's yeah it isn't merely common it's universal because yeah you and this is of course one of the reasons that i became so deeply interested in archetypes is that if the story doesn't have an archetypal foundation then it's not a story i mean something makes something a story it's not just a random collection of statements or or images and so it has an archetypal structure and and you know i think what's happened in the modern world at least partly is this fractionation that you've described but also something that a student once made me think deeply through she came up and asked me after a class well if these archetypal stories are the fundamental the fundamental element let's say of psychological reality then why not just tell the archetypal story over and over again and i thought well first of all to some degree that is what cultures did for a long time they repeated the archetypal story but in our modern culture what literature seems to do is to take the archetypal cult story and to bring it closer to the individual it's like it's it's brought closer to earth i i wouldn't say it's closer to the individual yeah but it's it's it's embedded in our time or embedded in a time which in fact brings it closer to the individual because it's easier for each of us to appropriate almost like the renaissance paintings brought the the divine figures closer to earth and and when martin luther wrote his luther bible i mean he used the language of the of the political and economic actors and translated the biblical text into those languages and and in fact the the translation of the bible into the vernacular does this very same thing now tvs and theater have become the cultural altars and they are serving up the archetypal stories and delivering them to the masses and in fact part of the reason that people will watch clint eastwood and grand torino and he'll be a noble character and so part of the jesus archetype will be manifest in this story with clint eastwood and and this is why even though someone says well i don't believe in god but you watch gran torino and you say yeah noble like like bishop erin said christianity is all over this stuff and and sam harris's ideas that he's using to critique the bible itself those ideas came from christianity his his whole moral framework is is a christian moral framework in many ways in many respects and to say that isn't true well go look go to another place in the world and compare it to theirs take a look at ancient rome or ancient greek is that are there elements of greco roman nobility within it yeah they were all part of this stream coming in there but but it's all this stuff was part of the stream you're not going to tease it out and and so what happens with these stories is as i love that i love that story peterson has told it multiple times and i think about that point that he makes there often that part of the reason you can't tell an archetypal story is that it needs to be incarnate the the archetype is the is the formal cause it's the it's the conversation where guy like to say gestalt it's the gestalt it's i mean verbecky talks about it it's the thing that gives the the chair the chairness and and that's what's what's coming in and that's why we see jesus when you know in all these different ways when we see someone giving to the poor or we see someone we watch the amess who again are fundamentalists by by anyone's definition the amish who who forgive the school shooter who killed a bunch of their daughters and the amish people set up a scholarship fund for the shooter's children and we see that we say noble i i want to be noble but how can you become noble well you become noble by having a noble ideal by having a noble goal in a sense what's happening is movies are presenting to us many images up there and and inside of us our our consciousness congresses having debates about nobility because it's very very complicated and even past heroes hagiography is to write a write a history of something that that in a sense is willing to distort the image to turn somebody else into a more noble figure and so part of why i've enjoyed fatal discord is it it doesn't it doesn't hide luther's anti-semitism or the the things that he said and the in the peasant uprising and all of those in all of those issues but but what happens this is very iris titillian we look at all of these examples and we and we we take a goal out of it and we say there it is but then we test that goal against other goals and this is what we're constantly doing with each other so these archetypal stories are delivered to the masses and and it's where people give their tides and offerings to netflix and and regal cinema just down here in delta shores and where the zeitgeist is shaped for the next generation and of course people are doing this intentionally with all of these propagandist stories that try to instill the correct morals into the younger generation the church has failed to demand its members to pursue a noble goal peterson says hollywood writers and directors and producers are priests of today the church is reduced to religious nagging quivering pastors as quivering masses of availability stubborn obstinacy amongst you know people who are i'm not going to give up my worldview because sam harris says it isn't intellectually coherent i'm going to double down um evangelical me tooism that well if they have smoke machines we have smoke machines if if if they have cartoons we have cartoons the church needs to embody the story that it has to embody christ i mean churches have said this for years we we are to become christ to the world you know i've talked to about 150 live audiences now about this sort of thing independent of all my classroom lectures and i'll tell you i i tell people i suggest to people that the really the ancient idea that life is suffering and and it's something that idea that life is suffering and and that it's something that in much of our commercial environment we try to disregard and so when he says life is suffering there's sort of a freshness about it because we walk around with this entitlement that i shouldn't have to suffer tainted by malevolence that there's no and that people are basically good and that people won't do cruel and terrible things to each other we all that know that to be to be true because people do it most of all sometimes in the families people will be cruel to their spouses and to their family members than they would ever dare be cruel to anyone else more true ideas than that in some base sense and that that's something that everyone has to contend with and if you don't contend with it properly then you become embittered and and you work to make things worse and and and you become cynical and nihilistic and and you work to make things worse because you just want to see the world burn everyone understands that everyone knows that's true and then i suggest to them that the proper way out of that isn't the pursuit of material satisfaction or impulsive happiness or rights from it isn't even the pursuit of rights to get my rights that's not the pursuit of it the individual perspective but the adoption of responsibility and i'll tell you every single time i talk about that you can hear a pin drop in the auditorium yeah i believe that now i'll have to say that churches do talk a lot of responsibility i think one of the things that the church has failed to communicate properly is that you need a noble goal in life to buttress yourself against its catastrophe you need a noble goal in life to buttress yourself against its catastrophe and the church has failed to embody this a new orientation yields a better life reorientation yields better results you are in line with the patterns vengeful nihilistic cynical um and and and also possessed by a kind of inertia that made them immobile entering the most vital part of their youth and you know they told me look i decided i was going to develop a vision for my life i was going to imagine what things could be and then i was going to try to tell the truth and i was going to try to act responsible responsibly and not in a praying in public manner but in a manner that began with cleaning up not a praying in public manners right out of the sermon on the mouth my room say a fairly humble act and and then and then comes the kicker and this is one of the things that's kept me going through this 150 city tour they all say and my life is way better it's like i'm healthy i my job is going well i've had three promotions i'm making twice as much money my i've i've spoken to my father i haven't talked to him for 10 years i'm putting my family together it's like things good things are just happening left right and center and i mean there are amazing stories you're in touch the deepest rhythms of reality it's an ethical move it's a metaphysical move as you mentioned the sermon on the mouth of the lord i mean that's how i look at it is it's not just giving you know moving ethical recommendations it's trying to get us aligned to the fundamental non-violence of things i mean the fundamental move of god as he gives rise to the world and so of course your life comes together again right praise gets you online and knits you back together that theme to me is really strong in the spiritual tradition of the knitting back together of the of the splintered self that's why like you know things do you i mean as a psychotherapist you deal all the time with this but like in the scriptures so you mentioned satan you know satan is the is the accuser and there's a lot to that but the other great word for the the dark power is the diabolo right the scatterer the one that divides and separates and so the demon's always speaking in the plural in the new testament and jesus bringing them back to themselves back to the center but that's that's all of us sinners i mean we we're all over the place our mind and will and passions and sexuality and body they're all going different directions and then it's very orienting for people it's very using and anxiety provoking to be going in all those directions at yes i'm right and that's what do you want of us jesus of nathas have you come to destroy us you know and the answer is yes i have come to destroy this this disparate reality and knit you back together so see go back to nichi for second because i i want to ask you about that well we'll save that for we'll save that for another another time there's skepticism about the church's spiritual program what does that mean because the church talks in a way that says another power can come upon you now we're skeptical about that but but other people who have experienced something like that say that isn't skeptical that's exactly the right language and sometimes when you go to a concert you can feel a power come upon you when you go to a movie you can feel a power come upon you and and the language of the greeks of of spirits coming upon us when we fall in love cupid has has taken up residence with us this is a fairly secular narrative and the skeptical about the church's view of life because its connection to the bible we're skeptical about spiritual powers but but but we're not as skeptical as as again as you might imagine now there's an article that that is very important to to read in terms of many of these many of these points uh slate star codex scott alexander writes some of the best it's one of the best blogs on the web had a had a terrific piece uh july 8 gay rights or civil rights r i t e s first he went to antigua in april because they have this easter pageant and he noted how the whole society has this pageant together now guatemala is hardly a um a state to be held up as the ideal not everybody people are trying to leave guatemala and going through mexico to get into the u.s at the southern border um guatemala's had tremendous problems for a very long time but but talked about how the the easter pageant ties them together as as a community and talked about how in american civil religion you know we established this quasi religious reality of george washington and abraham lincoln at the top of the pantheon and you'll have almost these angelic creatures on top of in statues and and you say well we don't believe in statues well go to washington dc if a person time traveled from the ancient world into washington dc they would look at the lincoln memorial and say there's the temple of zeus and they look at the jefferson memorial and say there's a temple and they look at the mlk junior statue and say well there's an idol that's that's the idol we've made the image large and and scott scott alexander makes the point that as a society we must have these embodied images and we participate in them in a parade and we represent them in the statues and then he went went on to a pride parade how he went to san francisco and and here are the rainbow flags right there in the in the airport in the subway and here you have a grown man with a t-shirt on that says i love boys and and a woman love is universal and and a dude whose butt we i don't know who wants to see it but you look at a gay pride parade he's saying well this is gay rights r i t e s are civil rights this is the hierarchy that we that we embody and participate in and manifest in but here's where i i take off from scott alexander's piece the question is these hierarchies have consequences and and they have consequences maybe not in this generation but generations down the line and the the coherence and cohesion of a hierarchy well gets tested by time and you know hierarchies that that don't actually adhere well they fall apart and and they are scattered as they go individualism community and well-being i'm running out of time um conversation with adam the the the nazi loser argument that that nazi germany had to lose the war because its its hierarchy was and the russians had to lose the war because it was unstable and if you very much if you watch the movie i highly recommend the hvo miniseries chernobyl because that that is one of the best representations i've seen of how this plays out of how the lie in a society where they can't tell the truth about radioactivity or or watch benjamin voice's conversation with an endocrinologist and and what that means in terms of of what we're doing to young people in this country so what if my civilization fails if i get to be one of the elites that skim off the cream and and this is the challenge of individualism how do i know well-being it feels well for me i'm a consumer that's that that's part of the hierarchy and and and i should i should be able to consume that which i want and and it's a sense countless conversations i've had with daniel probably countless more i'll have where i'd say daniel i want you i want you to get into a home why do i want to pay rent well what do what do you want i want to live in this hazy world where i keep enough alcohol in my system where i don't have to think about everything and i can just live in that blur that works for me yeah but you know what it doesn't work for the neighbors and it doesn't work for the neighborhood and it doesn't even work for you to live in the terror of waking up sober what if this is just one episode of a multi-story multi-chapter life existence being and because you're in the story you can't read ahead that's in a sense what christianity asserts christianity asserts that well okay so we're orienting everything from my little life now and you might think well i'm a little bit more magnanimous i'm going to be concerned about climate change because i want to leave a better world for future generations what a noble idea that's a wonderful thing but what if you're curating your life based on zero to 80 and death is done when this is actually the beginning of a much longer thing even steve jobs if you read the um the the biography of steve jobs i can't remember the uh the author right now he also wrote one of one on einstein you know steve jobs towards the end of his life had been very spiritual in a way been very new age-ish in a way very much into aesthetics and design but at the end of his life had had sort of adopted a a a stance as an agnostic as an atheist there's no afterlife and then towards the end of his life as he realizes he's going to die of a disease that was curable if he hadn't tried to cure it by drinking fruit juice he ponders and he wonders and he talks to his biographer what if there's more after this and and you know people wonder why churches are full of older people a part of it is because of sort of the path of it but also once you get into your older years and once you face death this is something that medieval people faced all the time but once you face death you start to think well if i'm a story my my story-ness that the the story-ness that i am this doesn't go away when i die well maybe this body goes away but the story doesn't go away and then when you look at the christian resurrection basically in christian resurrection you it's it's not that you get a new body like certain science fiction shows you can find on netflix you are reconstituted but notice jesus resurrection he still has the scars so there's continuity between this story and the next story and and that's why in many ways the resurrection is is such a central aspect of christianity because what the resurrection asserts is that it's you know watch the matrix there's aspects shards as as as as bishop barron said shards of the resurrection you can find in the matrix after after neo in a sense rises and rises from the dead you know he can stop agent smith's bullets he can fly jesus at the end of the story flies up to heaven that's the way it works in the story what if in fact as as our heart so often whisper to us what if this story doesn't die with me yeah my children will remember yeah maybe i'll write a memoir yeah maybe maybe but what if my story gets re-embodied well that's going to change how i decide to spend myself in this life you know i'll tell you dealing with daniel takes time and is frustrating and is costly but part of the reason i have a relationship with daniel is because he decided to live for five years literally sleeping against my office door so that i had to walk over him and every time i walked over daniel i thought of lazarus and the rich man was lazarus an alcoholic i don't know but every day i had to walk over daniel just to get into my office and when i'd be here at night i'd hear him cursing his own existence and when he was in a manic phase he was trying to do things on the church property property i'm an asset not a liability he would tell me and i'd roll my eyes but how we treat each other as c.s lewis points but how we treat each other as c.s lewis points out often is based on what we imagine each of us is that's the end of the video and i've got to go but yeah there'll be i'm hoping to do some more videos on this conversation and talk more about the church because that's what really what what baron and peterson are doing is they're talking about the church and they're finding common ground between them and one of the common grounds is in fact the goal peterson says you have to have a goal that orients your life and changes how you see the world and baron says yes you have to have a goal but baron's goal is very problematic for many people i don't think it's finally or fundamentally problematic and that's perhaps where you know john vervecki this afternoon and i will differ a bit thanks for watching