https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4CcYDhLjJqs

 Hi, this is Paul. Some of you might have seen that the big conversation this year has Rod Rear and Louise Perry. I was very excited to see this. I was a little concerned when I saw it pop up because I didn't know if Justin Brierley was going to be a part of it. Some of you may know Justin Brierley is leaving Premier Christian Radio in the UK. He's got a book that will be coming out in the not too distant future. I've read at least the first part of that book myself was very excited about it. He's got a lot of Jordan Peterson stuff in it. But he is going to be starting a new podcast. It'll be very interesting to see. I should probably see if Justin would like to come on the channel. I'd like to probably just give him the randos treatment and really hear his story. Then, here are some of what he's learned and what he's sort of planning on doing. I'll probably send him a note and invite him to do that. When I started this video, I was super happy to see that Justin was still on it because Justin has become a master of facilitating these kinds of conversations. I've been a Drear fan for years. I met Louise Perry in the UK at a dinner after the Tom Holland event with Tom Holland. Glenn Scrivener had Louise Perry there. Her book has made quite the waves. If you want to read a really good treatment of the book, Richard Beck's Substack, Experimental Theology, he has a 25-part series. His postings are usually pretty short on Louise Perry's The Case Against the Sexual Revolution. I thought it was absolutely terrific. Beck is a terrific, sort of a post-progressive theologian. I've been really impressed by Louise Perry's work. She's got a YouTube channel and a podcast now. This conversation, watch the whole thing, the conversation was good. I wanted to treat just the end of it because it very much gets into the steep slope, gentle slope dynamics that we were talking about. Let's jump in now. When you talk about this sort of Benedict option, Christians need to, as it were, have strong communities where that particular spiritual life and prayer life and everything is manifest so that it can hold out against what you see as this sort of coming soft totalitarianism and so on. Now, something to be said about, we've talked about the Benedict option, Drear's book from a number of years ago here on the channel. Just recently I had a video that I entitled, How Powerful Cultures Outcompete and Lure People Away from Minority Projects. Took a look at Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter. Took a look at East Germany. Talked a little bit about evangelical cultures. They have to be really strong cultures and they have to have very good answers to the kinds of challenges that are driving the evolution of the majority culture. Is part of that encouraging Christians to be fruitful and multiply as well? Absolutely. It has been part of Christianity since the very beginning. Contraception was considered something taboo for Christians up until the 1930s. The Anglican Church was the first one to permit contraception. But I think that we need to establish communities of faith within which familism, the idea that the family is something good and children are something, they're a primary good. They're not a good that's justified by materialistic terms, but that supports the raising of the next generation. This is something that is so countercultural and can only be done I think within small communities. That's one of the things that I really learned in my own Christian journey. It's such a difficult question, this question of the broader culture, because in some ways Louise Perry is bearing witness to sort of the tip of the progressive spear that has gone all the way through and is sort of coming around the other end. Mary Harrington the same way. Tom Holland, not so much, but in a sense both Louise Perry and Mary Harrington had bought completely into the evolution of the majority vision and basically got to that point and said I don't want this. This isn't for me. This isn't coherent. This isn't meaningful. It's not really where we want to go. So the question here, and it's a difficult question because in a little while Perry will say something that I think doesn't really hold with respect to this question of how do Christians live and I think again obviously it comes down to bearing witness, but for individuals to actually do things they need to have a community around them and that community needs to be able to stand up to the broader communities. I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I was a Christian, I Four years later when I did get married that I had grown so much spiritually and emotionally by those four years of chastity. Now he had just previously told a story about suffering and in almost every case to grow means to suffer and to it means to suffer. It means to, I mean, this is a lot of Jordan Peterson stuff to bear that cross uphill. In ways that I would not have done had I not realized that if Jesus is going to be the Lord of my life, he has to be the Lord of all my life, including my sex life. But I have some bitterness that I had to do this almost entirely on my own because there was no help in my church or my churches. And so is that part of the the Benedict option in a sense is being full and frank about the challenges and what it means to live a chaste life as far as you're concerned? Yeah, absolutely. The church needs to have those, you know, awkward conversations. It does need to have the awkward conversations and not be apologetic for what it teaches. Now, my wife grew up in a fundamentalist protest. And I think also helpful in what it teaches, there are many churches that in fact will help and try to help, but helping isn't always an easy thing. And it's a patient walking with encouragement, struggling with. But the community, again, itself, part of why you need a community is that there needs to be the ideals there that the community can sort of agree on and continue to move forwards and towards together. Now, my wife grew up in a fundamentalist protestant church where she said sex was talked about very negatively if it was talked about at all. Now, that's wrong, too. Sex in traditional Christian teaching sex is a good thing, but it has to be channeled in a way that is life giving and holy. The church knows how to do this. It just needs to quit being so afraid of the Guardian and the New York Times and actually stand openly and unapologetically for what for the wisdom of the ages and the wisdom of scripture. Now, to say it needs to be not be afraid of the Guardian and the New York Times, that's it's basically using the gardening in the New York Times as examples. But what the Guardian and the New York Times reflect is this overall dominant culture. And it's a very tricky game. This is where you get into the gentle slope, steep slope. It's a very tricky game trying to modulate and coordinate. And churches are trying this in many ways with varying degrees of success, obviously. Very often, you know, most people will think, especially here in the UK, but I'm sure in parts of the US as well, well, the problem with the church is it's always seen to have been, you know, anti this, anti that, you know, prudish and reactionary and so on. And this is why Justin is so good at what he does. He nicely gives voice to the reality beyond the interview and brings it in and asks the guests challenging questions. And to hear Rod saying, well, we need to actually embrace the distinctives of the Christian sexual ethic. A lot of churches and Christians might run a mile from that and say that's not the way to engage the culture saying we stand against this, we should, thou shalt not and so on. And this is where, again, Louise Perry, this is what gives this conversation the dynamism now Rod certainly has gone through his journey and he's written about it many times. And what he just said here you can find in many of his writings. So he has passed through that. But where is she? Because she, unlike Rod, who has, so he's raised Methodist, he kind of goes out into the big world. And for many people, we touched on this briefly in today's live stream, that the Iraq War and the disillusion, we didn't actually touch on this, this was in Rod's blog. This from this from Rod's posting today starts with Ross Douthat, which I read in my Tucker Carlson. There's been a conservative version of this kind of suspicion. Richard Hofstadter's famous essay, The Paranoid Style of American Politics, was directed rightward. But for a long time after the 1960s, the most influential version of suspicionism was left wing. It was often the hippies. They didn't trust anyone over 30. It was Noam Chomsky. It was Oliver Stone. It was Michael Moore. The young Reaganite and the George W. Bush admirers certainly believed the media was liberal and that the Ivy League could not be trusted. But he or she believed in the CIA and NATO and in General Motors and Wall Street and Coca-Cola, the American Medical Association and the United States Marine Corps. So not so for the conservatives who have come of age since the Iraq War. The financial crisis, the Great Awakening, alienated from many more American institutions than their predecessors staring at a record of elite failure and social landscape. There seemed to be, there was little to conserve and they increasingly start out as Carlson ended up in a posture of reflexive distrust, where if any an important American institution takes a position, the place is to be probably on the other side. I think part of this is the attraction of orthodoxy, which is a, in a sense, like COVID was a novel virus, orthodoxy feels like a novel institution and it's very much a steep slope institution. It's demanding and I think that holds with it a degree of attractedness. And this is Drear. For we have a certain age, it is more than a bit astonishing that in our lifetimes, the left has become the party of trust the authorities and the right, while the non-GOP normie right has become the party of hostility to institutional authority. It certainly happened to me. In my case, it began with realizing what a damned lie the Iraq War was and how the US government in particular, the GOP administration went along with it. And not only the government, but the entire conservative establishment of, which I am a small part as a minority right wing journalist, with the exception of obstetrics dissenters like Pat Buchanan. Note well that David Fromm, who denounced Buchanan on the cover of National Review as one of the unpatriotic conservatives, is now busy making the very same denunciations of Americans like Senator Mike Lee, who questioned US policy towards Ukraine. And then it was discovered, and then it was discovering that the institutional Catholic Church, to which I was devoted, was run by deeply corrupt men, some sexually corrupt, most though unwilling to stand against them out of fear. The institutional corruption was so deep and so broad that I lost my ability to believe that my salvation depended on being in communion with them. I not only left behind the Catholic Church, but I left behind my ability to easily trust any religious authority, no matter what confession. Observing from within how my own professional journalism lied to protect their favorite demographic when it came to reporting on Islamic radicalism, homosexual networks among Catholic clergy, and on gay rights caused me to lose faith in journalism. There is still good journalism done, just as there's still work being done by clergy, Catholic and otherwise, and there are Republican politicians who are good men and women fighting the good fight. My point is simply that I lost faith in institutions. The Great Awakening and how thoroughly it captured educational institutions caused me to lose my wavering faith in academia. The woke capitalist gang that bullied the state of Indiana into submission over the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 2015 made me realize once and for all that big business on the whole was the enemy. The utter specious reasoning that brought us Obergefell made me realize that the purpose of the Supreme Court most of the time is to ratify what U.S. elites believe. Discovering on the fall of 2015 that the Congressional Republicans had no plans at all for legislation to shore up religious liberty in the wake of Obergefell told me exactly how much the faithful can rely on the party most of us vote for to look out for our interests. In 2019, the Afghan Papers report, which revealed the U.S. politicians, military leaders and diplomats knew full well that Afghanistan was unsavageable but kept spending American blood and treasure because they couldn't admit the truth, ruined what faith I still had in the U.S. military and national security establishment. I was a late comer to write. So again, basically he goes through the falling away of his trust. You get the point. Whether you are a person of the left or the right, if you trust the cathedral at this point, I don't know what to say to you except to hope that the scales fall from your eyes in some way. This is why I listen to and value Tucker Carlson even when I don't fully agree with him. I don't agree with him fully. Who else is at the level or was asking these questions? And I think Cale nicely in our live stream today talked about that level aspect. And he talks about RFK Jr. and so on and so forth. So back to the video. I don't know whether you feel like that's something actually in a counterintuitive way young people today's generation might embrace being given the challenge of a quite traditional Christian sexual ethic or whether actually it is going to, you know, if people weren't likely to darken the door of a church, they never will if that's what's being kind of put on offer, Louise. What do you think? The assumption from many British Christians and from the Church of England in general is that, yes, the church has to come to meet the progressive culture and that liberalizing church teachings is the way to get people through the door. I suppose maybe in some circumstances that might be working, but you know, I know a surprising number of young Catholic converts, people who have felt so dispirited by mainstream culture and actually are longing for a more, something clearer and more deliberately rigid. Something that doesn't just look like the culture around them in that sense. Yes, and it seems, in other words, more appetite for steep slope. To offer access to the wisdom of the past to a kind of confidence and sureness. Something that calls them out of themselves. Yes, so that, I mean, whether or not that's going to appeal to everyone, it probably not, but I think that... Everyone is a big group. Just going down through my sub stack, Jesus and John Wayne coming in Swahili and Luganda. I have difficulty imagining how that book would be comprehended in Africa. Those of you who are following what I'm doing in my sermons know, yeah, I believe the world is messy. I think it's always messy. Steve Skodjek, of course, was a trad Catholic who left the faith and just recently, April 25, had a... For me, it was a... Now Tripp says, I'm just always a missionary. I'm just always a sucker for a broken heart and for a lost sheep. They might be a little offended that I think they're lost sheep, but I just really appreciated he... You know, that they moved, they moved back. He's processing his... He's processing his lack of faith journey, how it is right now. He's processing writing. His wife's got a good job, which is a good thing because he's trying to figure out what he needs to do, what he needs to do next. He's just trying to figure his things out. And maybe it's because I'm a pastor because there's just a lot of walking with people as they're trying to figure things out. In fact, that's, I think, at the heart of the pastoral vocation. And I think that part of, maybe even part of the reason for my channel and the way it is and part of why, when I see videos like this, it's just so easy to have clean narratives. And I don't know where Louise Perry is at right now with respect to faith. These Brits, I'll tell you, when you ask them... I'm surprised Justin Briarley can make his way in that country. Such an anomaly because a whole bunch of these people, when Mary Harrington will cajolally write about Palm Sunday, about her being in church with her daughter, and it's like, okay, well, what does that mean? And Louise Perry, I don't know her status, even Tom Holland, who had this amazing speech that he gave in Romania. But yeah, Douglas Murray, I mean, the whole bunch of those sort of... We need a word. IDW doesn't really get it. We need a word for refugees from the left who come back to faith or at least Christ haunted, and they want to come back. And I'm just a sucker for these people, probably, but I'm not a fan of the idea of a religious person coming back to faith. Probably because I'm not there. I'm a border person who sort of understands them because I had to read C.S. Lewis's Miracles two or three times a year for a number of years, even as a pastor, just to keep my faith. And I know a whole bunch of you are going to have real answers. Well, Paul, you should go to Orthodoxy. Well, Paul, if you were under the true cover of the Roman Catholic Church. Well, Paul, if you really got into your own confessional roots and read Kuyper and Bob more often. Well, Paul, if you had the baptism of the Holy Spirit and started speaking in tongues, then, yeah, okay, I get a lot of your clean answers. But in my experience, it's not that people never arrive. It's that I've read the book of Timothy. And what you read in the book of Timothy is an apostle Paul who's wrestled and been in prison and been shipwrecked and all of these things and still clings in faith to Christ and still can bear witness to Christ's amazing grace in his life and yet understands and knows what suffering as a saint looks like and knows that the battle is long and it is hard. And none of these have easy answers. And I just finished my rough draft for Sunday. You have the church in Antioch in prayer and fasting sent Paul and Barnabas out on their missionary journey and they go to Cyprus and the heavens part and, you know, Paul denounces this sorcerer and he becomes blind for a while and the pro council of the island believes. Now, what exactly all that means a month later is hard to know. Does he join a church? Does a church start? I mean, you don't get those kinds of things answered, but we tend to read that little bit and fill in the rest with our imagination. Now, it's a historical fact that, in fact, the church did colonize the Roman Empire and that Jesus won. But of course, Jesus won through Constantine and that brought a whole bunch of other questions and issues and that seems to always be the way it works. That God, in fact, moves in mysterious ways, his wonders to perform, and sometimes in some ways as Christians are the most mysterious beasts at all. And the saints don't look like they came out of a factory. They all look different and sometimes contradictory and they themselves bear these diverse excellencies of that very favorite quote that I have from one of Tim Keller's books that that's, in fact, what Jesus looks like and it continues to be compelling and interesting just like these conversations continue to be compelling and interesting for me. And so, while yes, there's a lot of there's people who are now they want to go to Latin Mass and they want to go to Orthodox churches and they want icons and incense and they want Mass in Latin or they want liturgy and other languages and I say God bless them because I am not in any way questioning the power of God to work his Spirit. I just watch how he works and thinks, wow, it is mysterious indeed sometimes. Yeah, my videos are therapy and sometimes I just got to get stuff off my chest. What's making those people, you don't have to obviously name any names, but what is it coming from a dissatisfaction with their life as it stands and what is it that they're seeing in those quite traditional forms of Christianity that is obviously turning them towards it? A dissatisfaction with their lives, a dissatisfaction with the culture in general. I mean, I think that we have basically run an experiment of 60 odd years on the sexual revolution and I think that it was probably more enjoyable at the beginning from what I've read. I mean, clearly some of the most enthusiastic revolutionaries of the 60s and 70s had a ball or some of them did, but we've seen it play out now and many of these people will be the children. And this is part of what I said in the live stream today. We are working through, these are principalities and powers, these are spiritual movements, these are developments that work on far longer time spans than any of our little lives. And we only taste a little segment of the entire arc, but we're running these experiments and hopefully we're remembering these experiments as we go through because we're the products of centuries and centuries and centuries of previous experiments. Children of broken homes will be, have been exposed to online porn from the age of 10, 11, will have, I mean the paradoxical thing that we're seeing now among Gen Z is on the one hand hyper-pornified public life, astonishing exposure to sexual content that you will expect to see hundreds of thousands of adults having sex before you've even kissed another person. She said that and it just... Then again, humans being survived, the Roman Empire, the Mayan Empire, the Aztec Empire, the Greek Empire, but that what she just said there, when she said it, it just was like bang, oh my goodness, oh my goodness, I'm glad I was born when I was born and to whom I was born. Is now just the standard childhood template. And then on the other hand, to sexual content that you will expect to see hundreds of thousands of adults having sex before you've even kissed another person is now just the standard childhood template. And then on the other hand, we have people having less sex, delaying sex relationships into one's 20s or 30s, not getting married, this withdrawing of the sexes actually, and people having much more unhappily chaste lives, because not chaste for any positive purpose, but chaste just because they can't form meaningful relationships. There was a potential conversation with myself and Sam and a third party about how sex positive or how sex negative was the church fathers. These are difficult conversations and difficult questions. Wisdom is always that, you know, in culture, you need to, as it were, experiment and find who you're compatible with. And the idea of not having a sexual relationship before you marry, just, it would just seem mind bogglingly bizarre and primitive to many people today. So mind bogglingly bizarre and primitive to many people today. So, and again, a huge part of this, which I've never really been able to sort of put into words is, of course, the, this, this divine assumed we that, because when Justin Briley said that, that well, okay, I'm an old man. That was not the culture I grew up in. But people, people grow up in very different cultures, different places. I mean, is there anything you can do to kind of push back on that, on that narrative if you honestly think that actually people have got that the wrong way around? There's an episode of Sex and the City. I've watched all of Sex and the City for my sins, and it comes up in the book of, because it's such a cultural lodestone for all of this stuff. And there's a, there's a plot line where one of the characters, I don't know how many episodes of Sex and the City, but I've watched all of Sex and the City and there's a plot line where one of the characters, I don't know how many episodes of Sex and the City I've ever watched. I watched, I'm sure I might have, must have seen one or two at some point in some way at some time, or maybe parts of one, but I can't recall any episodes at all. Does, decides not to have sex with a boyfriend who she then becomes engaged to as a sort of experiment. She's obviously not a virgin, but you know, and then it comes to their, their, the night before their wedding and she discovers that he's impotent. And it ends up destroying the marriage. It doesn't last very long. And this is, you know, such a- And what's so striking when she told that story too was that I think of, okay, so I have seen The Bachelor and The Bachelorette and so often you get these very idealistic, you know, I want to be loved for not what you get from me, not my beauty or not my wealth or not my intelligence or not my personality, but for, for me myself so that if I lose all of these attributes, so here's, and yeah, I, you know, I, I think someone, I would hope that the, the, the bridegroom-to-be would have a little bit of truth in advertising with respect to something like that. And hopefully in the process of, of, of getting to know each other, even without sexual activity between them before marriage, that such a thing would and could be disclosed. This is the, this is the nightmare scenario presented to, presented to people for whom the idea of not having pre-marital sex is bizarrely odd fashioned. I mean, I fundamentally disagree with the idea that sex is a skill that one ought to practice on people. I don't think it's something that you do to another person. It's something you do with another person. I think the idea of, say, quite a common article that you'll see in women's mags is, is sex tips from sex workers. Because the idea being that just having had a lot of sex and having had a lot of partners puts you in the best possible position. I sometimes listen to these things and think, I have lived such a sheltered life. And on one hand, I've talked to real people about the most astounding things in their life, but I've just certain areas of media or I, I guess I've never read a lot of women's magazines, but sex tips from sex workers. Make sure you get paid and not beat up. I mean, I think it's a question to advise on technique. And if you do understand it as basically being a matter of technique, then that makes sense. This is the sexual disenchantment view that, that sex is basically like playing tennis, in which case I suppose sex workers are professional tennis players and we can, you know, but, but that clearly just doesn't, no one actually lives as a sexual disenchantment was true. No one actually believes that sexual disenchantment is really true. I think it's, I think it's a rhetorical device, which has become very widely used. And if you go to Richard Beck's substack on this, I think all of Richard Beck's substacks are, I hope I can remember to put a link to them in the notes. I think they're all free, so you don't have to pay for them. And he really, he really grabs on to this question of sexual enchantment and disenchantment via Louise Perry and really fleshes it out well. But people don't behave in that way. People still do clearly feel that sex is different from playing tennis. They care deeply if their partners are unfaithful. They, they feel joy and distress in relation to their sexual experiences that they don't find in any other part of life. I think that, I mean, in some senses, the sexual re-enchantment process is pushing on an open door because it's what people feel. The issue is just how to frame it in an ideological way that, that de-Christianized people could accept. All right, let's find that article. So this is part three of Richard Beck's treatment of her book. According to Louise Perry, the case against the sexual revolution, sex has become disenchanted, stripped of its special sacred character. Sex is no big deal, so don't get hung up about it. It's just sex after all. As Perry will argue, the disenchantment of sex has relational emotional price, a cost mostly paid by women. Perry making this argument. In much the same way, sex has been disenchanted in this post-1960s west, leaving us with a society that ostensibly believes sex means nothing. Disenchantment is a natural consequence of the liberal privilege of freedom over all other values because if you want to be utterly free, you have to take aim at any kind of social restriction that limits you, particularly the belief that sex is some unique intangible value, some specialness that is difficult to rationalize. But when we attempt to disenchant sex and so prevent, pretend that it is particular, this particular act is neither unique, nor uniquely wonderful, nor ultimately violating, then there is another kind of cost and that cost disproportionately falls on women. And it basically gets into, you know, me too with respect to this because this wasn't actually part three. I'll see if I can find it in part four. Links within some of these series are not as good as in some other blog because basically once it's disenchanted, then it's just merely a matter of negotiation and all of the specialness that is given with other cultural sanctions simply melt away. The Me Too movement is nothing because it is absolutely just a transactional, physical thing like anything else. Yeah, it's part four that I wanted. Again, a quote from Perry, noting that Perry goes on to describe how many women, even liberal feminists, actually don't believe this is the case. There's an odd, confusing, and even dissonant conversation going on about sex among women. On the one hand, sex means nothing. On the other hand, sex is really unique. To illustrate this, Perry points to the discussion during the 2017 Me Too movement. She writes, liberal feminists do seem to recognize the disproportionate impact of disenchanted transactional sex upon women, as demonstrated by the popularity of the Me Too movement. This outpouring of rage and sorrow is evidence in a sexual culture that wasn't working for women. The story that came out of Me Too included plenty of unambiguous criminal behavior, but there was a lot of women who described sexual encounters that were technically consensual, but nevertheless left them feeling terrible because they were being asked to treat as meaningless something they felt was meaningful. The boss who expects sexual favors as a condition of promotion or the date who expects a woman to put out when he pays for dinner are both more than willing to accept the principle of sexual disenchantment and thus view sex as meaningless product to be exchanged in the free market. Concerning the Me Too cases where bosses and superiors asked for sexual favors, there was an intuitive recognition that asking for sex from an employee was not at all the same thing as asking them to do overtime or make coffee. Everyone knows that having sex is not the same as making coffee, and when an ideology of sexual disenchantment demands that we pretend otherwise, the result can be a distressing form of social of cognitive dissonance. The liberal feminists don't have the conceptual framework necessary to resolve this distress. We eventually return to the only solution that liberal feminism has to offer, teach men not to rape. But then what else can liberal feminists advise? They have made the error buying into an ideology that has best served the likes of Hugh Hefner and Harvey Weinstein, his true heir. And from this, they derive the false belief that women are still suffering only because the sexual revolution project of the 1960s is unfinished. Rather, that because it is always inherently flawed, they prescribe more and more freedom and often continually surprised when their prescription doesn't cure the disease. Now back to Richard Beck. Let's follow the chain of Perry's argument. The goal of the sexual revolution was to disenchant sex. Why? Sexual enchantment reduces shame, stigma, and guilt. If sex is meaningless, if it's just sex, then we'll be relieved of any guilt or shame we experience in our sexual lives. This seems like a win. I'd express some nuanced agreement here. As a Christian, I think there is value to recalibrating the stakes of sex in relation to how we approach other classes of behavior. Rich people, for example, don't carry boatloads of shame into church the way pregnant girls do in our youth groups, nor do boys carry the weight of evangelical purity culture the way girls do. The damage Christians have done in shaming sex is incalculable and demands a pastoral and theological response. So I see the desire among Christians in wanting to destigmatize sex. With a heart full of love and the best of intentions, progressive Christians onboard the ideology of the sexual revolution disenchant sex. This disenchantment solves the problem of guilt and shame. Mission accomplished. But not so fast, R argues Louise Perry. The cost of meaningless sex creates a world where sex is now commodified and transactional. I give you X, you give me sex. It's just sex, after all. As the Me Too movement shows us, there are sexual waters women now swim in from the marketplace to dating. Every woman on the first date knows, after the lovely drinks and dinner and drinks, that she is very likely going to have to face a transactional expectation at the end of the evening. Her date will ask for sex. It's just sex, after all. Now, of course, I haven't dated for over 35 years, so, and that was, wasn't the case for me. But again, I was raised in a very different subculture. Now the response here is that the date shouldn't ask for sex. He's a creeper. But is he? He's seeking consent, is he not? He's asking. He's playing by the rules. Which brings us right back to Perry's point. As the Me Too movement has shown, these rules aren't working all that well for women. Women now spend their lives haggling over sex. It's unpleasant, awkward, guilt-inducing, and pressuring. And many, many women say yes, just to be done with it, to get rid of the guy. Because it's just sex, after all. Only it isn't. So you feel cheap and depressed afterwards. You consented, but it all felt a little coerced. Perry's point is that we've created this situation for women. By disenchanting sex, we've created a world where sex is now traded. And because of their sexual psychologies, men do the asking and women face the constant pressure of saying yes. And if it's just sex, after all, why should women, why should men feel any shame for constantly asking for something so meaningless and trivial? Can I have a glass of water? Plus, to ask is to seek consent. But more to the point, if it's just sex, why would a woman ever say no? Which brings home Perry's point. If sex is meaningless, it seems very clear that women should say yes. Because it's just sex. Saying no, you silly willy, is to treat sex as if it means something. And everyone knows it means nothing. So don't be a prude. In short, meaningless sex is a perfect strategy for pressuring more and more women into more yeses and pressure you we will. Which is the height of irony. The sexual revolution wanted to liberate women from the guilt of having sex. In doing so, it's guilting women into sex. If you watched the last series of The Bachelor, Zach decides that he's not going to participate in Sex Week. He's not going to have sex with any of his three lovely ladies that he's dating for their fantasy suite. And so the first person he tells, and apparently they don't go all the way, the second person that he tells, well, and you just have to watch these poor people trying to navigate through this incredible mess. And the third one, who's the one he eventually picked and who all of us sort of suspected she was the one he was going to eventually pick. He had to tell her before the date what exactly, I mean, it was just crazy. It was just torturous, insane, painful. Just horrible. I'm going to go to a final break and we'll be concluding the just a moment. We've been talking about Christianity, the sexual revolution and the future of the West here on The Big Conversation today. It's been so good to be joined by Louise Perry and Rod Dreher. We've just got a few more minutes just for some final thoughts really. So Rod, you know, we've talked about can we put this genie back in the bottle? If we do say that culture is going in an alarming direction, what's the solution? It doesn't feel like necessarily everyone becoming Christians is necessarily an obvious kind of thing that will happen, barring some great miracle. I've spoken recently about the fact that a close reading of history will show that even at the height of Christendom, you have church participation up and down. The Protestant Reformation in some ways, the Protestant Reformation in some ways tries to address Christendom by getting everyone in the church going, as Charles Taylor says, going from a two-speed to a one-speed religion. Of course, before the Protestant Reformation, saints were exemplary Christians. After the Protestant Reformation, we're all saints. And if you read the Apostle Paul, you can see this. I talk about it a lot in my Romans class, this dual nature. It's especially vivid in something like the book of Corinthians, where Paul addresses these long list of failings and shortcomings by the people of the church. And then he says, you know, you have new life in Christ. And part of this tension that we struggle with is, well, if I have new life in Christ, why aren't I holy and perfect and there? And so, you know, Romans seven, you can watch my videos on that. Is Louise and her concerns coming at it more even from just a secular point of view, do you think that that might suggest there's a changing of the tide in the way people are now thinking about sexuality and culture and so on? Yeah, well, I'm certainly quite encouraged to see Louise, Mary Harrington and other women of their generation actually coming out and saying the things they're saying, because I think it gives hope to a lot of people, especially younger people who believe that we are in some sense living a false narrative, but they're afraid because there's so much intimidation out there in the media by the gatekeepers in the media, entertainment media, and in the government and in academia that keep people from asking these questions that Louise and Mary Harrington and others are doing it as a hopeful sign. In the long term, though, I don't think that there's any way to pull back fully without some sort of religious revival, and I don't see that coming at any mass way. This is why I talk about the Benedict option about forming these small traditional rooted communities that can be like arcs to keep the church and the tradition of the West, the long tradition alive throughout this flood of liquid modernity, and that will be able in the future to settle down and re-evangelize the world. I don't think I'll live to see it, but I think that's the only hope for us. What do you think the way the future holds? You know, of course, this is where faith comes in, that well, we've I remember when Louise Perry, an article first came out, John Vendonk found it first, and he texted me right away and said, you have to get this woman on your channel. And I said, no, I don't hunt down celebrities and authors. I'll make special exceptions to ones that I really get interested in, but I don't do that, John. Or you got to talk to this woman when you get to the UK. And as it turned out, Glenn Scrivner got there before me and I was a chance to meet her. Didn't really get much of a chance to talk to her too much. And I kind of, I said, I think I said something to her like, you're going to be very popular because of this book and a lot of Christians are going to be looking to talk to you. And I think she expressed some skepticism to that, but it was, it was very obvious to me by the shape of the landscape, sort of, as I said in the live stream today. I'll just say the old song, this is my father's world. All nature ring and round me sings the music of the spheres. What are we back in Aristotle? This is my father's world. It is, I believe in Providence, but how we go forward and how we get there and how God works through these things. The church colonized the empire and the church has grown and grown since then. And you know, don't get me wrong, the church faces challenges, enormous setbacks, of course. So much of the Eastern church was swallowed by Islam, not destroyed, but swallowed. This is, this is, this is the road we walk. So, never count out as Chesterton said in his own way, a God who knows his way out of the grave. Or what, I mean, do you think it's going to get worse firstly before it gets better? Maybe Louise, if it does get better. I think that the, the fault line that is emerging already in culture and politics, and I think it's going to become more and more marked as time goes by is between people who want to embrace technology and people who are cautious about technology. I think that is, I mean, technology in the broadest possible term. I don't just mean computers. I mean things like the pill. Now there's a very interesting article on first things. The article is entitled insight at first sight. Imagine that you are accompanying a young woman walking in a campus coffee shop towards the end of your senior year, your eye catches a cute guy sitting across the room talking to his friends. You smile inwardly, then you get to studying. After a while you get up for another coffee. He gets in line behind you. He strikes up a conversation. Apparently you know some of the same people. You order, move over to wait. You're trying to check your text, but your ear picks up his voice like a radio signal, louder and clearer than you, than it should be. You wonder whether you should ask your friends about him. No, screams your rational self. Why would you start a relationship, especially now when you're graduating and have your dream job lined up halfway across the country? You don't get where you are by letting a nice pair of eyes distract you. This is crazy. Or is it? Basically the article says live a little bit on the wild side people. You might in fact have a match and you might get married and you might have children. I think there's something to be said for, I think there's something to be said for Louise Perry's point here. All sorts of medical technology, sex reassignment surgery is a really radical example of trying to remove this biological hard limits which have until so recently entirely determined human life. I think do entirely still determine human life because actually we still essentially have stone age brains. We have not on a fundamental level changed as a species. We have just had very, very rapid changes in our material circumstances which are likely to change still further. I mean, the pill was this radical transformation which I don't think we've ever really come to terms with anything that we've properly grappled with on a social level at all. The nature of... And this is part of my argument about thresholds and AIs that we don't know what we're dealing with until way after we've been dealing with it for a while. The technological change is that the change becomes more and more rapid as time goes by and I think it is extremely likely that we will have new technology shocks, we will have new transformations of society. I mean, COVID was one little taste of what might come from a world in which we are vulnerable to disease in ways that we have got used to not being vulnerable to. If we have say a world without antibiotic... If we enter a post antibiotic world, which is a very serious threat and actually a lot more serious than something like climate change in many ways. It's one of the things I really loved about Tucker Carlson's little YouTube talk that he gave in that yes, this relevance realization that we're all running, it's pretty bad. The world is moved. We are always surprised by history. We are always surprised by history. Now you'll find some Yahoo somewhere who made a prediction that can align with where things go, but for the most part, though we, this collective consciousness that we keep, or actually this community of collective consciousnesses that are always wrestling and fighting, never get it right. That will have complete transformative social effects. There will be no more sex parties and prostitution in a world where we have antibiotic resistant gonorrhea, which we already have. This is just one example of ways in which our material circumstances could change very suddenly. I think in those circumstances, it is plausible that we might return to some of the most durable ideologies available to us. Patriarchy. Some people say this. Philip Longman, who's a doctor, and a liberal in Washington, has said that the future belongs to those who show up for it. Like it or not, and I don't think he necessarily does, patriarchy came out of somewhere. It's a way of dealing with a world that's more dangerous and a world of great limits. I think that the liberalism that we all like, and even those of us who vote conservative, we like living in a liberal society, but reality may come back to the same way that we live. Whether it's antibiotic resistance, whether it's economic loss, we're talking now at the beginning of the winter. By the time this comes out, we will have gotten through the winter, but I've been told, I live in Eastern Europe, that governments could fall all around Europe because of the energy shortage, because of the Ukraine War. Now, I mean, this is the sort of thing that none of us would have seen coming, but I think we're all a lot more perilous than we realize, and our ability to control the limits is an illusion. Yeah, and this perceived abundance that came out of the post-war period, I think is almost certainly over, and a feminism and more broadly a politics that was the result of that sense of abundance is going to have to change as well. Do you think that might ultimately push people back towards God? Sometimes it is the hard things that ultimately... I don't think that any sociologist is settled on the cause of decristianization. I've always thought, as the mother of a toddler, that drop in infant mortality must have been part of it. People must have been desperate to believe in heaven when they could expect half of their children to die before they reached adulthood. I'm obviously not wishing for that by any means, but it's just an example, I think, of the way in which people find social means to cope with adversity. One quick thing before we go. I was told this past summer in Oxford by an Anglican ordinate that you atheism is dead in his generation. He's 27 years old. He worked in advertising in London before he went to seminary, and he said that he was the only Christian in his office. He said, but there were no atheist. Everybody else in the office was involved in one degree or another with the occult, and there were even two active Satanist, open Satanist in the office. This is as a Christian, that's horrifying to hear, but he said he actually found some hope in it in that there were people of his generation who were desperate for some kind of transcendence, desperate to connect with transcendence. He thinks, and certainly I do, that they've taken a wrong turn, but the fact that they're not satisfied with materialism and consumerism is to him a sign of potential rebirth. Interesting. Rod Rear is soft on Satanism. You heard it right there. Well, who knows what the future might hold, but for now it's been fascinating talking about culture, post-Christianity, and Christianity with you, Louise and Rod. Thank you so much for being my guests on The Big Conversation. I wonder who else they're going to have on The Big Conversation. Remember it was Jordan Peterson. Justin was able to get Jordan at just the right time, and that was a great, great conversation. It was sort of peak Jordan right after the... anyway, right after the status rocket. Anyway, so yeah, great. Watch the whole video. I just played the last part of it, but the whole conversation was great. I'll put links to some of the things that I read down below, and yeah, let me know what you think. Leave a comment.