https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DnoYoJRyvI0

 Hi, this is Paul. In this video I'm going to talk about some Christian Reformed stuff with respect to the Human Sexuality Report, and I want to talk about authority, accountability, and institutions that no longer have authority. As I often do this morning, I wrote a blog post about the video that I released today. Today is the 22nd of March about John Stewart and the tweener cohort, and it's on my sub stack. There are a bunch of links to it. And of course this video in particular where John is talking to the Harvard academic, and the Harvard academic is complaining about Joe Rogan because Joe Rogan and Spotify, they should take responsibility, they should be accountable, etc., etc. And John Stewart said, yeah, but you know, the New York Times back during the second Iraq War, basically they didn't take any accountability, they didn't take any responsibility. I mean, really, what are you talking about? You want Joe Rogan to shoulder it and Spotify to shoulder it, but really, in many ways, the emperor has no clothes. And part of that video was of course what I'm noticing in terms of the sense-making hunt, but within that hunt there is a big question of authority. There are a couple very interesting articles out both in the Washington Post and in the New York Times, Manifesto Against Sexual Positivity, a woman, this one written by Michelle Goldberg, who is a stranger to none of you who saw Jordan Peterson and the Monk Report, basically people recognizing that this consent culture hasn't given women what they're looking for. Christine Emba herself writes this Washington Post piece, and these are really important things to read, I think, for, it's pretty remarkable that they're out in major publications. There's a story in this that really grabbed my attention. Consider what Caitlin, 30-year-old, told me at a party. I've been going on dates with this guy who I really like. It's the winter of 2019, the pre-pandemic era, when single urbanites still crushed up against each other in crowded apartments, trading complaints and advice over mediocre beers. But he choked me during sex. Caitlin, also a pseudonym, wasn't sure whether to say anything or even if it would be considered a valid problem. After all, the moments like this had happened to lots of her friends, and in that moment she had said yes. Then she asked me, a complete stranger, to tell her how she was supposed to feel. It's the language here. Every single word is dripping with meaning. She asked me, a stranger, how she was supposed to feel. I shouldn't ask whether it's right or wrong. How she was supposed to feel. I mean, what do you think? Is that okay? The only thing possibly sadder than the story itself is that this woman has no authority in her life to help her know what to feel, what to think, what is true, what is not true. Wisdom. Wisdom. Esther O'Reilly drew my attention to someone on Twitter named Nate Collins, who drew attention to an article written by Tim Keller in the PCA magazine by Faith with respect to their fight over human sexuality. Now, their fight over human sexuality is, as you would expect, the relationship between the PCA and the CRC, a little bit to the right. Tim Keller talks about some overtures that failed and they had to be passed by two-thirds majority of the sessions. Those are sort of comparable to our classes in the CRC. And it's all about the question of side B Christianity. Well, what's side B Christianity? He tries to summarize it here. People attracted to the same sex, those celibate in obedience to the Bible, still can themselves, still call themselves gay Christians and see their attraction as part of their identity, which should be acknowledged like one's race and nationality. That's the fight that's going on in the PCA. Now, it might be that some of you don't know anything about the PCA. I really recommend this channel Ready to Harvest. The dude has a lot of information about the myriad of of Christian denominations out there, especially Protestant ones. And if you want sort of a short to the point survey, he can give it to you. The Presbyterian Church in America is a confessional Presbyterian denomination, primarily present in the United States. It is the largest U.S. Presbyterian denomination that enforces adherence to the confessions and the second largest Presbyterian denomination. Now, when he says it forces adherence to the confessions, it means you can be disciplined and even excommunicated from that church, unlike most churches out there where you really can hardly get kicked out for anything. And in fact, when I was on the What is it? Breaking the Rules podcast yesterday, I had a very interesting start of a conversation with someone who, in fact, had been excommunicated from the PCA. Overall in the U.S., behind the Presbyterian Church USA, which is a mostly theologically liberal mainline denomination, the PCA holds to all of the doctrines that are affirmed by evangelical churches using the term evangelical in the ways understood in the United States. They believe in one God in three persons. That is the Trinity. They affirm the deity of Christ, his virgin birth, literal bodily death and resurrection. They affirm a literal heaven and hell and future judgment day. The PCA affirms the Westminster Confession of Faith. Their website says, We are connected to the teachings of the history. OK, I'm going to jump ahead because he does a nice job of putting out chapters and we're going to get to they've had various questions over the years. And we're going to get over to the relevant section with respect to this question. The PCA was intended to take place in 2020 but was postponed due to COVID-19. The General Assembly has not yet met to respond to the report as of the publication of this video. The report is 62 pages but a few notable statements should clarify the position it represents. So, just a real quick comment. So, real just a real quick and then he goes on to divorce from America. Just a real quick survey of what's going on there. Now, the the let's find him. No, Nate Collins then talks about Tim Keller's piece and I'll put all the links to this below. I don't know of a single side be gay Christian who has never used who has ever used the phrase size side be Christianity. Now, again, what the PCA is fighting over is this question of identity. Will in some ways this identity have in their denomination status? Now, this is sort of an agent arena relationships. Things have status within a denomination basically depending on if they actually activate things within that denomination. Let's say you're someone who loves Rottweilers. The PCA probably doesn't care whether you consider yourself a Rottweiler fancier as your identity or not. It doesn't matter. But there's a whole bunch of other identities. And of course, identity is this huge issue in many of our conversations today. So, this individual bit just makes the point. Nobody talks side be Christianity, even though side a this this parlance has been around enough. Basically, side a would be someone who says they they're looking for a church that affirms same sex marriage, affirms the legitimacy, the. This basically affirms same sex sexuality. Side B would be someone who would be attracted to the same sex, but out of deference to the Bible and their religious convictions would remain celibate. OK, that's just side a side B. This makes me wonder if the if the use of the phrase side be Christianity by straight Christian leaders. OK, now see, we're playing identity is a form of othering of those of us who use LGBT terminology to cast us as different, but more importantly, wrong Christians as a gay man who believes in Jesus and is living a living by faith according to biblical sexual ethic that prohibits all forms of sexual intimacy between members of the same sex. So, in other words, he is practicing what side B would be talking about. Now, for many in the PCA, I would imagine this discussion is difficult because already, and Jordan Peterson says churches don't ask enough of their people. Well, the PCA is asking of its members, those of whom are same sex attracted that they remain celibate. You can decide for yourself whether or not that's a big ask. As a gay man who believes in Jesus and is living by faith according to a biblical sexual ethic that prohibits all forms of sexual intimacy that's between members of the same sex, I reject the idea that my Christianity is fundamentally different from that of my straight siblings. It's worth noting that neither this article by Keller nor the PCA report actually engages with anything written by someone standpoint epistemology who would claim to represent side B. OK, claim to represent. You'd have questions of authority there. Side B is a fairly broad tent. But this lack of engagement is intellectually dishonest and lazy. In other words, there should be someone who has authority in this side B community or realm who would be able to speak on this with authority. Keller's article also neglects to address the incipient homophobia and legalism that animates a significant portion of the PCA. OK. And again, you sort of one of the things, of course, because of all the conversation I've been doing, one of the things I pay a lot of attention to is. Animates the PCA. OK, well, what is that? Well, we looked at the it's a denomination, but we're we're acting as if it's it's certainly a reenac. But we're also making demands of its agency. Well, not receiving the necessary two third majority to amend the Book of Church Order overtures 23 and 37 did pass by a clear majority of the denomination of leadership, which I don't know what that means, depending on how this person is measuring leadership. But again, this is the way we talk. We can't talk in really any other way without getting more specific. The tolerance of homophobia and legalism towards gay people in the PCA is pastoral malpractice. This is where we get to this word pastoral and enables the systematic spiritual abuse. Another charged word of sexual minorities with this article, Keller joins the ranks of moderates whose efforts at peacekeeping are doing spiritual harm. Now, what's interesting is that in the Christian Reformed Church, a lot of these same words are being used just sort of slid one over. As though as a thought experiment, imagine that the right wing of the PCA is a drunk. I don't know what GRN means there. A drunk dad inebriated with legalism while the PCA moderates are the mom who keeps hiding the liquor bottles and pleading with the gay kids not to make daddy mad. My advice to the PCA moderates for the sake of our own safety and safety of your gay kids again, safety either confront your spouse and demand change or leave. One of the things that has been common has been demand of accountability to institutions. Now, when you have an institution that is a formal institution like the New York Times or the PCA, there are some who can speak with a degree of authority for that institution. Now, then we have these implicit principalities such as side B people or LGBTQ community. Now, in most cases, these are implicit communities that might be organizations. But the question is, do they have authority? And what would it mean, for example, for the New York Times to repent of its carrying the news of weapons of mass destruction during the Second Iraq War as fact? What would repenting from look like when, of course, the Iraq War cost the lives of I don't know how many over 100,000 Iraqis and and a few thousand Americans. So how does this stuff work? Because there is the assumption that once accountability is taken, authority is restored. But is that true? And in fact, what is the nature of this authority, especially for institutions that, you know, I don't know who Nate Collins is, but I think it's a fair question to ask what could restore the authority of the PCA? What amount of accountability or confession and what would responsibility look like? Now, this gets into the question of pastoral. This is Jeffrey Wima. He's one of the authors of the Human Sexuality Report in the Christian Reformed Church. And there is a video out of him giving a presentation about the Human Sexuality Report. I have on my blog and I'll put the link to it whole lists of resources. You've got some previous videos done by Jeff Wima. You've got some videos done by James Brownson. James Brownson, who was a professor at Western Theological Seminary in Holland, Michigan for the Reformed Church of America, who wrote a book that has been read quite widely in the Reformed Church of America and the CRC on this issue. He's on the affirming side. So you have videos from Jeff Wima and videos from Brownson. And really the videos sort of nicely go together because they sort of cover many of the same topics. And this this list was actually put together by by someone else, but I copied and pasted it from CRC Voices. So there's a lot of links that someone can go through. One of the complaints about the Human Sexuality Report in the CRC was that it was not pastoral, even though if you listen to Jeff Wima, the committee tried very hard to be pastoral. And one of the things that is true of the report, which is sort of an innovation in synodical study committees, is that it is full of a lot of anecdotes. Now, of course, once you open the anecdotal drawer, there will always be contestations as to which anecdotes made it and which were left out and the speaker of those anecdotes and the speaker of what it's left out. Now, I should probably should in anticipation of synod probably do some more videos on this subject just for my own denomination. There are some pastors that I've spoken with privately, some of whom have basically told me and it's been my experience as well. I haven't found the Human Sexuality Report terribly useful in the way that I think the report tried to be useful and was intended to be useful. In terms of giving illustrative stories about the morality of this and not that, this and not that. And what I mean by useful doesn't mean that positions weren't sort of staked out. And in many ways, the Human Sexuality Report very much attempts to hold the line in the Christian Reformed Church. All one body, so to the advocacy committee on the other side. And I think one of the one of the huge issues that they face is they can't point to a line beyond a fairly theoretical consenting adults intending at a degree of commitment and permanency of the relationships that they are seeking to have the denomination bless. So there's a lot going on here. But what on earth do we mean by pastoral? And it gets into this question of authority, accountability, and restitution. Donald Trump quite famously never wanted to apologize. Now, as a Christian, I certainly don't endorse that perspective. Yet Trump's posture came out of the fact that one of the dynamics that he noticed is that once you start apologizing, you can't stop. Because once you say, oh, this was my responsibility. Well, what else is your responsibility? And so what you wind up with is a liturgy of continual confession, asking for forgiveness. And as I've made the points I've made in previous videos in the past. At what time can you stop? What efforts or words or what things can actually make up for the sins of the past? This is a tremendously difficult issue, actually. And and of course, it gets theologically. It comes down to some pretty deep aspects of Christian theology about what is forgiveness. What is absolution? Can people, once they have hurt each other, get beyond it? And in most cases, someone hurt someone, maybe their feelings may be far deeper things. And in many cases, restitution cannot be made. So on what basis is there forgiveness? And I think culturally, we're really stuck in that spot. But I sort of want to turn this around and look at the question of. What does what does pastoral care look like in this environment? Now, part of the dance that is being attempted is that of church authority. But in terms of how many people, including many people in the church are living. They don't live as if the church has much authority at all. And so for the church to try to regain authority through confession and contrition and accepting responsibility or accountability, as if, again, we can sort of figure that out. How can the New York Times be held accountable? How can the New York Times be held accountable for getting the WMD question wrong on the Iraq War? And I use that because it's far enough in the past, but it illustrates the difficulty that all of this stuff has. I just don't have a lot of time to make a video right now, which I'm really frustrated by because this really is a tremendously important topic and maybe I'll have to come back to it. But one of the there's a really cool thing that I caught on Jonathan Peugeot when he's talking to Sam Glenn here. And I do owe Sam a conversation. He asked for one quite a while ago when he was working on something. But the end of this conversation, the whole conversation was good, but the end of it was particularly good on this topic. I guess. Yeah. The final, I guess, comes was wrapping up. It would be like the I'm curious about the relationship between them. Why don't we accept authority? I think there's a kind of I guess one of my intuitions was around the adolescent rebellion idea. But also, like, I think there's a connection between the more I've learned about Christianity and kind of reflected on my own life, like humility or being brought low and submission. And yeah, I just I wonder what you think about why we don't accept authority and what how we might how viewers or how we might come into a proper relationship. I mean, the best way is to understand. I think the best way for us to understand is that it's inevitable, right? That authority is inevitable that we actually we follow authority all the time. You know, every time you stop at a stop sign, every time you drive on the right side of the road, you're obeying authority. We obey authority all the time. And so I think that at least becoming aware of that can help us understand the inevitability of this. Like now that right away sort of turns the question on its head. And I really appreciate that because Peugeot notes that it's not the case that there aren't authorities out there. What's really happened is we have sort of switched authorities. And now there's a real delicate dance between authority where we sort of instinctively submit and comply and obey. Rather than sort of doing the math ourselves in terms of these behaviors will achieve the outcomes I desire. Like I said, a lot of people who think that they're being rebels and and they're deluded, they think they are and they they they maybe act that way on some vectors, but they are not like it's it's a it's a it's a little bit of an illusion, which is based on this padding that we talked about. Now, now I think that's true in terms of, you know, those articles about the sexual revolution, too, that liberation was supposed to give me something that's supposed to give me pleasure, supposed to give me freedom, supposed to give me a sense of agency in my life. And and this was done beneath an authority. Now, the authority was was tremendously implicit. But but there certainly were figures of authority. And so, well, to OK, let him choke me because this is going to provide for me what I want out of the relationship. They took authority. So I think that that's probably a good idea is to just realize that it's inevitable and then also understand the negotiation part or understand that authority isn't always just top down. It's just very rarely so, especially in normal authority relationships, because I need to have a lot. I need to follow your command for it to be authority, right? Yeah, I need to follow it, but I also need to. How can I say this? It's like I need to get something from authority. There's absolutely. And this is where authority is challenged. And and in many respects, people in the church are caught between authorities. There's the authority of Netflix or at least the authority that is working through Netflix and through all of the mediums and and then gets instantiated in the United States government and in the courts and and in our practices. And and then, well, this authority is supposed to yield for me what I desire. And again, those articles about rethinking basically pro sexuality is saying women are saying I I'm there losing their authority. If I don't get something from authority, the only way you will be able to, let's say, enforce your authority will be through brute force, total brute force. Now, and for most denominations. So, OK, so the PCA is a denomination that continues to practice openly practice discipline, the Christian informed church less so pretty much the only way you get disciplined in the Christian informed church these days or if you're an employee. And then it has authority. But then in many ways, you're just using the authority of the dollar. Forced is exhausting. It's tiring. Yeah, it takes your energy takes up energy. And so it's it's a it's a simple it's like it's a kind of a simple system and you can see it like you can see it like it's a modern classroom like modern classrooms are great because the teacher doesn't have real authority like doesn't have normal authority. And it's recognized that and in many teachers don't have authority because schools are afraid of lawsuits. Schools are afraid of parents. Schools are afraid of students going somewhere else. We introduced the marketplace to schools and that in some ways cut down their authority. Same thing happens with churches. It's almost impossible to actually practice discipline because they'll be gone before you even start your formal process. And in a way, the children, the teacher isn't an authority figure. Right. And that's in the culture. So the kids, they they they'll flip between being screamed at by like a hysterical person to doing whatever they want and not listening to what the teacher says. And that's very much the case in terms of church and pastoring. And it's like there isn't because they don't understand authority. They can't they don't even the teacher doesn't understand authority because the teacher is part of this weird weird world where they they also think that some their teachers but they think authority is bad. You know, it's like, you know, that's that's not going to work. So they end up like going between extremes. But normally that's again exactly what you see in churches and with pastors. What you would have is that the students know that if they obey authority, things are going to go better for them and for everybody else. And if it doesn't, but this knowledge is sort of underneath, because we have this sort of pro forma culture of, of rebellion, I can do it myself and I don't need to take authority. But not Peugeot is right. Authority is always there. They're they're following authorities. Then at some point, it's also might they might not continue to to obey. I guess just gonna it's gonna break down. People will go somewhere else. Yeah, it's interesting thinking about my experience at school because I agree. I think there were there were on one extreme teachers who abdicated authority entirely but also just tyrants who I don't know tyrants but like teachers who would go around say like tuck your shirt in, do your tie up like you know keep that. You know dress codes. I mean, schools right now dress codes. Can you can you enforce a dress code at school in a California public school? Probably not. But yet the school is responsible if because of something happening. School is responsible. If something happens to the child may be initiated because of what would be a violation of the dress code. And again, this is this is exactly what's happening in churches. Churches are we've got to hold these churches responsible, but they don't have the authority. Well, what do you mean they don't have the authority, they can't they can't actually govern what's going on within them. Well, why don't they well then you have this dynamic if you're flipping between tyranny and abdication back and forth. Aesthetic proper. And you know that teacher was obviously perceived as a bit of a bad like just annoyance or tyrant in our school you know always kind of known for that. But then I guess it relates to, I don't know, I think I want to say justice like whether the authority is justified like do I understand why should I tuck my shirt in? Yeah. And what like why and I think that's kind of what you're pointing out there with this with the way in which schools aren't kind of like connected to. So think of your best teachers like think of your best teachers usually most people like maybe I'm wrong but most people you ask them who their best teachers were. They usually identify something like a teacher was who was very strict, but very involved. I guess a teacher that was quite strict the way that they ran their classroom was actually quite demanding in terms of what they asked of the students, but were completely dedicated. Maybe the time would take the time to help you understand if you were wanting to understand, they would write comments in your papers, they would, they would, you know, like, they would they would care. And so it's like, you're strict but you care. So that's a that's a really amazing thing, you know, and so it's like, we tend to not be able to realize that that exists, we tend to think if someone's strict it's because they're tyrants and they don't care. And because if someone is just lets things go then it's because they care but they're not strict. It's like no actually those two things together are usually would make a pretty good teacher. And I think what he got at right there is in fact the heart of pastoral. And whereas to a degree maybe you can do that in a study report or a book, I don't think you really can, it has to be embodied and has to be personal, it's fundamentally relational. And so part of what's been happening in a denomination like the Christian Reformed Church, I mean it's phenomenal whereas on one hand, the church understands pastoral as being quivering masses of availability. On the other hand, there's all of this, this need to write on the Christian Reformed Church and nothing coming to Senate is this code of conduct. And it's kind of like a code of conduct is sort of saying, we've completely failed in any sort of church discipline, which is actually both broader, we need to have a code of conduct. Oh, because the Bible and the tradition of the church and our community standards for behavior aren't enough. No, we need something legal. Pastoral is always personal. And figuring out how to do that, how to do that well is difficult and costly, especially over the span of an organization that involves hundreds of thousands of people and a thousand churches. I'm out of time, but I wanted to at least get some of this down. Maybe I'll do more on it tomorrow because there's a lot more stuff I want to bring in. So leave a comment. Let me know what you think.