https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bU59ZdioEjQ

 Three, two, one. Hi, this is Paul, and I'm going to do another, host another conversation that pertains to the Christian Reformed Church in North America. This is the denomination that I'm a part of, and this conversation is in anticipation to what we call Synod, which is our broadest assembly where representatives come from the churches in the United States and Canada, and we'll meet in June in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and discuss issues of the church. Today we're going to be talking about Overture 12. Overtures are communications sent to Synod asking for actions or change in policy with respect to one element of the church or another. And as in the last video I did, this one will talk about church and politics. And well, that might actually be the best way to frame this, probably more church and the Christian's life of public discipleship. So I've asked, we've got one repeat in this, Doug, but I'm gonna ask each of them to introduce themselves, and then I'm going to ask Nick to begin, because Nick was partially responsible for the overture that we'll be discussing. I'll put the links to the agenda for Synod in the show notes, and this overture is on page 317 of the agenda for Synod 2018. So I'm just gonna go around, and Chuck, why don't you introduce yourself? Tell us a little bit about you. Sure, well, my name is Chuck Adams. I am involved in both religion and politics. I serve as the elected city attorney for the city of Sheboygan, Wisconsin. I'm also a member of the National Committee of the American Solidarity Party. So that's my political side, and the religious side is that I also am licensed to exhort in Clastis, Wisconsin, and I get to preach probably about 15 times a year. And for the very first time in my life, I am a delegate to Synod this year. I'll be a deacon delegate from Clastis, Wisconsin, and I'm very much looking forward to that. Wonderful, so how long have you been city attorney? I've been city attorney for three years, although I was the assistant for about 18 years, 19 years almost before that. Also had a small town practice in a little town called Wapon for about three years prior to that. Okay, wonderful, well, thank you, Chuck. How about you, Nick? How would you like to introduce yourself? I guess I'm the sole Canadian. I live in Vancouver, Canada. I came here as a child, I was 12 years old when my parents immigrated here from Holland. I've been a member of Christian Reformed Church my whole life. I guess I'm part of the Reformed Abraham Copper tradition, Abraham Copper was revered next to Jesus in my home. So, you know, that kind of marks me. For a good chunk of my life, I swung a hammer as a carpenter, but I also had opportunity to serve in elected office first at city level and later on provincially. So I was a member of the provincial legislature. I also, you know, preach occasionally, like Chuck, and I enjoy that very much. I studied political science and I taught political science at the university here. And yes, as Paul mentioned, I had quite a bit to do with Overture 12. I initiated that overture, but I must say that I circulated around and many people contributed to it. So it's the work of many, it's not just my work, but I kind of, and it was my council that brought it to classes and classes. Okay, what church do you attend? I attend the Latner Christian Reformed Church, which is a suburb of Vancouver, Canada. Okay, okay. Well, thank you, Nick, and certainly glad you're willing to join us today. And Doug, why don't you introduce yourself? I'm the same person as your last video, but I'll repeat a bit of it. I'm a native Northwest, Iowa, grew up there, farm boy, went to Dort College, which I think is the same as you, right, Chuck? Yes. Yeah. In fact, I knew Chuck's dad from a couple of Dort College retreats out in the Pacific Northwest and thought the world of him. But anyway, I've been a private practice attorney in Salem, Oregon, having moved here for law school and decided not to go back to the lovely weather of Iowa. And I've practiced privately for coming out to about 40 years now. Part of the practice is purely private, businesses, estate planning, real estate, that sort of thing. But I spent quite a number of years doing a lot of public interest work, cases involving perhaps people know organizations more like the ACLU. We were rarely on their side, but sometimes we were. And I did work with Christian Legal Society, Alliance Defending Freedom used to be Alliance Defense Fund, and a number of other of those kind of organizations, largely dealing with First Amendment work, free speech, religious freedom, religious establishment, that sort of thing. Like Nick, I'm, well, I wouldn't say a worshiper of Abraham Kuyper, but I'm a devotee of Abraham Kuyper. I don't know if I put him next to Jesus, but. Maybe doya words there, but no, anyway. Oh! I was a philosophy major at Doherty, who can be a philosophy major at Doherty without interacting quite a bit with Abraham Kuyper? So we have a lot in common there, and I think what I've come to think is that the way some Canadians at least view Kuyper is a little different than at least what I, I don't know if it's because I'm American, I'm not as much of a Christian as you, Abraham Kuyper, but I'm hoping we'll probably touch on that in this conversation. And I go to Sunny Slope Christian Reformed Church here in Salem. Okay, okay. Well, Nick, why don't we begin with you? And so you initiated this overture. Why, you know, people, when they initiate overtures, they see something, they feel something, and they feel a need to help the church. So tell us the story of this overture. How did it get birthed? I think, you know, my concern is for the fact that we're so divided, we're deeply divided, right? And also within our denomination. And as Christians, when it comes to political issues, it splits families. We can't talk to each other about it. We're all tribals, you know, we have our own tribe, and this ought not to be, particularly within the family of Jesus, those kind of deep divisions. And how is it even possible when we serve the same God, read the same Bible, and we draw such very, almost polar opposite conclusions as to what our task is, and who we should vote for, what laws we should support, and which we should not support. So that is a deep concern. And of course, particularly in the last few years, that has deepened, and those divisions have become more polarized, and in addition to that, it's been my experience that for many Christians, they tend to privatize their religion. And for many, they just as soon not bother with political questions. They may not even see that there is much of a connection. Between politics and religion. They may even hold a view that the two ought not to be mixed at all, and that it's wrong to even try to mix those two. So those are the two concerns that I have. And I've thought about it, and I, you know, this overture, overture 12, is an attempt to bridge the differences. It's an attempt to find healing, and to do so by looking at the Bible. So the overture is very simple. It urges the denomination to focus on those Bible teachings that are particularly germane to public life and public discipleship, and the call of government and the obligations of government. So it asks the denomination to look at those central teachings of scripture, and in its preaching, in its teaching, to draw attention to those teachings in order to find greater unity. In order that we might find each other, and, you know, bridge the differences, and come together, because after all is said and done, we worship the same God, we want to be followers of Jesus, and the Bible is our rule book. And so if there's any hope of us finding common ground, it must be around scripture, and our common confessions. And that is what the overture aims to do, or urges the denomination to do. Okay, okay. Now, it's interesting to me that there are two elements here. One is seeking unity, and the other is avoiding, you know, basically making faith, you know, keeping faith inward. Do you think that that move is often a response to the fact that Christians, the political spectrum is getting so polarized that part of what some Christians do is to turn inward because they want to avoid the kind of political polarization, especially when they would, quite frankly, I'm the only pastor in this group, which is kind of fun, even though you two preach. You know, Jesus says, my kingdom is not, and that the NIV gets it dramatically wrong. The NIV says, my kingdom is not of this world, when it should be, my kingdom is not from this world. But that tends to rub seculars a little bit raw because it's imagining my kingdom is coming down from heaven, and that goes into all other issues. But what about that move? I mean, so it's really interesting to me your answer here because you both say, we want unity, and we don't want the church to avoid these issues by turning spiritual, let's say. So it's interesting. Well, you're right about that. And it's a very astute observation. And the second answer I gave, which, you know, suggests that I have a certain position on that. And it is indeed true, as I indicated, you know, anybody that wants to listen to Cuyper and be influenced by Cuyper would want to read the scripture in terms of salvation being the restoration of the creation. And that the message of Christianity has less to do with going off to heaven in some kind of a non-Bodway existence, and more to do with living on earth in a new way and that of course is itself a division that has been evident within our own denomination and among Christian denominations. So when I say it saddens me when people think that religion has nothing to do with politics, then I'm giving expression to how I read the Bible. And maybe I should leave that off. Maybe I should simply say, we ought to focus on the central teachings of the Bible that relate to public life. And then let us find common ground. Let's listen to each other and to the Bible, right? So certainly I don't think that the overture itself is skewed in reading the Bible in a less pietistic way, but maybe some people would feel that way. Maybe people will look at that overture and say, oh yeah, here we go again. This is Cuyperian and I want nothing to do with that. To me, faith and salvation and belief and church are for the hereafter and it has nothing to do with the here and now. That might be the case. I don't know. I don't know how classes or sinners will look at this, but let's stick to the first one. Let's stick to the reality that we are badly divided and let us try to find common ground on scripture, our confessions and listening to each other. Well, Chuck or Doug, any thoughts that come up? I'm sure there's lots. There's lots. Go ahead, Chuck. Well, yeah, I appreciate what Nick says. That really resonates with the things that I learned at York College and I also grew up in a house where Abraham Cuyper was pretty high on a pedestal as was Doiwerd. And the focus really was on the idea that there is no square inch that Jesus doesn't say that's mine. And so what I perceive is coming out of this overture is an understanding, first of all, that there is some strife. There are issues that are arising in different areas of the church. People are having a difficult time sort of communicating with each other and we've sort of given over sort of our communication on political issues to what some people might call the world or we've separated out and have just decided that, well, political issues, what political party you are, what you believe on a lot of these issues has nothing to do with your faith. And very clearly, I think our faith has a lot to do with our common life together. It has a lot to do with politics. It goes far beyond just simply prayer and worship. In fact, prayer and worship are a part of that. So I really appreciate that and appreciate also the connection to the real problems that we are beginning to see. People of faith who can't even talk to each other anymore because they're divided by politics and that is a problem. Any introductory comments there, Doug? Well, you know the old adage, if you wanna keep a friend, there's two things you don't talk about. Religion and politics. And so when Nick talks about the need to not separate your faith, your religion from your life, including politics, he's gonna get nothing but amens from me. I think where we depart and this comes not so much from what Nick said, but from reading over to 12, is the assumption that there's a relatively straight and easy line that we can discern between what scripture says and what we think government should do. My guess is, I'm probably not being gracious here. Well, I don't know if it's not gracious, but my guess is my thinking about what government should and should not do as proper government could be different than Nick's. And one of the reasons I think we think that is, we live in different places, we have a different background probably, and we simply think differently about what government should and shouldn't do. Should this be a body of Christ divider? Absolutely not. Any more than it should be a body of Christ divider to milk cows with stanchions versus milk cows with a parlor. I mean, there's a lot of differences that Christians have, not just in politics, but in everything. How you plant a field of corn, how you do construction, which way is best, how you do particular surgery, or what kind of medicine, you get all these different and alternate practices are good. I can't think of any square inch in life where Christians aren't gonna think very differently about how to do things. The question is, do you let that become a body of Christ divider? And there I think Nick is correct in saying that we've let that happen. And I think he's correct in saying we've let that happen, especially in the world of politics. Now, my own thinking as to why we do that, at least in the CRC, is because in part, what we have a tendency to do, and this just isn't in the CRC or any particular church, what we have a tendency to do is, we all have a license to vote. And with that, we kind of all assume that a politics is something that we know well, because we have a license to vote. I mean, they wouldn't have given us a license unless we're really good at it, right? And so we have a tendency to all think, like if, so my son is an ENT, years nose, throat surgeon, I don't for a minute assume that I could do the ear surgery that he does. But everybody has a tendency, even though nobody would have a tendency to think they could do Zach's ear surgery, they will have a tendency to think that they're as much of a political expert as anyone else. And so you get a lot of people, I think politics are very, very complicated. What I mean by that is, you can study government, what it has been through the ages, what it is, what scripture says about it, and I don't think the answers are immediate or clear at all. So it's a very difficult subject matter. And if you think of something that really affects your life, wow, there aren't too many bigger things that affect your life in many ways. I mean, you can get your wife or your husband or kids or something like that, but government, it's affecting it every day, just every day. And so people have different ideas. Now, probably where I think differently too is, Overture 12 wants to, the denomination to sort of be in charge of the biblical principles for government, not just public life, because public life, I think, Overture 12 talks about public life. I think public life is a whole lot more than just government. I mean, there are other things to public life too. But if the denomination is going to decide principles of government, I'm just not sure that it's capable of doing that any more than I think it's capable of deciding principles to how next to build the next generation of nuclear power plants or how best to do an air cleaning or how many cows you should have on your dairy or what kind of construction techniques you should do. Do I think that the church should speak to politics? Yes, and everything else, but here's where you get down to it. As to what, I think the church can elucidate the call of scripture. And when I say church, I mean an institutional church, we have seminaries, we have places where we gain these expertise, you went to one of those, Paul. Presumably you gained expertise. I hope so. Yeah, and I will readily admit that sometimes when you write stuff, I go, oh man, he's been studying this stuff a lot longer than I have. I have a certain respect for you or another theologian's expertise on these things. But that comes to limit. My guess is that I will think perhaps less than Nick does that scripture gives you a very clear picture about what government is supposed to do. So Matt Tuninka, he has a book out on Kelvin's two kingdoms theory, great book. If you only wanna read a piece, just read his last chapter and you get kind of everything. Is that the appropriate way for us to look at it if we say scripture has a principle? Or then you can get guys like John Locke or Abraham Kuyper or Karl Marx or Hayek or I can name any number of people. What is actually the correct biblical way to look at scripture? Of course, Marx wasn't Christian, but a lot of people are and they have dramatically different ideas. And then you get this. I was looking at some of the stats just to kind of prepare for this a little bit. And I think one of the differences for Canadians versus the United States people is just in sheer difference of culture, which is somewhat shaped by population and land. Okay, so what do I mean by that? Well, if you take Canada's population, it's a little bit less than California's. I'm always a big one on approaching government as and do I think this is biblically mandated? No, I think scripture is literally almost silent about it, that we should decentralize governmental decisions as much as possible. And you might look at that as sort of a classical economics. I don't know how people would look at that, but I think government is always done best at the more local level. Well, if you do national politics at the Canadian level, you're really doing your state, Paul, state of California politics. I think Oregon politics should definitely be done differently than national politics. And I think people in the United States, and I think they get a little bit misperceived by people in smaller countries. I think it's really difficult to do a good job of governing and do it with as many people as we have and as diverse of an economy that we have. Now, what does this have to do with scripture? Oh, I don't know, not so much. I mean, in terms of deciding what government is for and its role and so yeah, okay, it's got quite a bit to do with that. But on the whole, I think there's a lot that God has said, you guys have to figure this out. I mean, we do have some patterns of government that God instituted, you got the Old Testament. In fact, you got theonomists. Reconstructionists who say we ought to mimic that. And I would say, well, of course, they're considered way on the right, right? I would say we have people way on the left who say, oh, here's this biblical phrase. It says, welcome the stranger. Okay, there's our immigration policy. I think both the theonomists and the welcome the stranger equals immigration policy are both equally wrong. I think it's really, really, really difficult to make a definitive decision about what particular kinds of government policies, laws, et cetera, you would have based on a direct line from scripture. So not withstanding that, I am the Kiperian. I believe that one's religion is the underlayment to everything that one thinks. And by the way, I think that's true, whether you're a Calvinist or whether you're a Buddhist or whether you're an atheist or anything else, I think that's the case. But the trick is, okay, exactly how do we get to then the denomination picking and choosing what principles say what about government? And that's where I think we're gonna have a little bit of an impasse. And I do think this, I think Christians, here's where I agree with Nick. I think Christians, we pick up our political patterns from the world way too much, way too much. But then it's almost inevitable because we're all expected to have political points of view, even though studying law, government, et cetera, isn't what we do occupationally. I think the more people study this stuff occupationally, the less they'll scream at each other. Okay. It's the ones that don't. All right, Nick, that was quite a bit that Doug gave us. I don't know if you have any thoughts on. I do. The Bible gives us general principles. There's spiritual principles. They do not give you statecraft instructions. In fact, it doesn't even talk about democracy, for instance. That's not what Overture 12 is after. And I agree with Doug that even if we find agreement among the people of goodwill about the general spiritual values and principles of the Bible, as they relate to how we treat each other, et cetera, et cetera, and what justice is about and so on and so forth, you will still find disagreement as to how you implement that in particular situations. Absolutely. No question about it. What bothers me is that for many, we don't even try to apply Christian principles. We operate as though when it comes to public life, reason and common sense and pragmatism is all you need and you don't need revelation at all. And of course, that's Thomas Jefferson, right? And it goes back to the Enlightenment. You keep God out of this. We can handle this on our own. So there are many Christians who will say, yeah, I think the Bible has something to say about politics, but it will touch abortion and same-sex issues and assisted suicide, but after that, we're on our own. For many years during national elections, provincial elections, I'll circulate an email and I'll say, you know, in view of this and that and the other thing, I've decided to vote liberal or conservative or an NDP. And I'll send that out to about 400 people, most of whom are Christians. And I'll get about 80 responses. And of the Christians, many will disagree with me, but they'll not find their disagreement in terms of biblical principles. They'll quote what they read in the papers. They'll talk the way everybody else talks in society about what are economic issues, you know, should override other and on and on. See, that is what bothers me. We don't think Christianly about our political expressions and how we behave politically. In fact, I think within the Christian community, we have lost, if we ever had it, a language that is unique, that allows us to touch base with our utmost beliefs, our biblical beliefs and allow our biblical beliefs to influence and mark and form and shape our political decisions. You know, many years ago, I used to be quite right-wing, much more so than I am today. And I was horrified when I discovered that a fellow Christian would vote left-wing until I started thinking, okay, I really respect this person. I respect this person in every other way. So I was curious, curious why. So I would ask that person, why are you voting left-wing? And that person was able to give me a reasoned set of reasons that came directly from the scriptures. And I was so impressed because that person was unique. And I thought, okay, if we're Carparians, all of us should be left-wing. You know, we talk about Carpar law. He would say, every human action, every law, every government initiative has a spiritual side to it. There's a dimension to that that is spiritual in nature. There's a spiritual direction that motivates this immigration policy or that tax reform, et cetera, et cetera. And as much, it is either in obedience to the Lord Jesus or it's an apostate spiritual direction. And whenever we see apostate spiritual directions, the church is duty bound to speak up and to speak God's word into that situation. And so I'm not looking for the church to lay out a political agenda. And the Overture 12 certainly doesn't hint at that at all. In fact, it says very definitively, let us talk about scriptural biblical principles that can inform our political activities. We're not gonna talk politics. We're a church, but we have to mind the scriptures because the task of the church is to equip the saints from ministry. I'm not asking that the church tell me how to vote. The pulpit should not be telling the pew how to vote. That would be very wrong. But the pulpit has every right to instruct its members as to what kind of considerations, what kind of values, what kind of ultimate purposes should inform my choice. And so, Doug, I can see your problems, but you're listing problems that are not in Overture 12 at all. Well, maybe that's the case, but I have said before and I'll say it again, I think Overture 12 may well represent some common ground that people on both sides of a concern and the concern that people have is that our denomination has become too vigorous about staking out particular political policies. And we had some exchange on that before this video about that. And I'm concerned about that because I think that drives the division. Notwithstanding, in a generalized way, I like your Overture 12. Probably my biggest reservation, and I think that's maybe overstating is, I'm not quite sure what some of these words mean, but then I'm kind of a lawyer and I don't like these vague general words. I like to get real precise. So when you say, for example, you Overture A, encourage the denomination, its officers, boards, agencies, publications, and local congregations to foster discussion and education. And I'm going, okay, I know how the Office of Social Justice is gonna translate fostering education. They're gonna tell me about particular political policies that they say reflect scriptural principles, when in fact, I just flat out disagree. And my concern about having an Overture like this, not that I don't think it couldn't represent common ground, is it puts into the hands of the denomination and its agencies. Now, they get to decide what appropriate governmental education is. And I've seen that song before and it hasn't turned out too well. But then that assumes a certain approach toward what governments should and should not do. Like shoot, I'd like to have the church, if it was gonna get into political principle, talk about how it's stealing from future generations when a governmental entity doesn't balance its budget. Well, you're not gonna see that one come out in education. I mean, is that a principle? Theft. Chuck, let's hear from you. Yeah, you know, honestly, even though this chat is ostensibly about Overture 12, to some extent, 13 and 14 play a role here, don't they? And to some extent, how we look at 12 is to some extent framed by how we look at 13 and 14 and what our opinion is on that. And I was really interested to hear the discussion on Overture 14. And I'll be honest, the piece that I missed in that discussion was, are we, is our support or our opposition to sort of the ban on, whether it's as 13 says, a ban on doing any advocacy or as 14 probably more carefully puts it on dealing directly with specific types of legislation, is it really based on principles from scripture and principles that we learn sort of from reformed world life view or is it really based on our practical concerns that some of the things that OSJ primarily has done. OSJ is. Yeah, OSJ is the Office of Social Justice and is one of the denominational agencies and I guess primarily in the United States that does some of the things that, as Doug has correctly pointed out, are being encouraged to be done in Overture 12. And what I was hearing in that conversation was, well, OSJ does a poor job because they're not experts on X, Y or Z. What I didn't hear is, does that then mean that as a basic principle, the church has absolutely no role to speak to political issues? And I think the answer to that is that that's incorrect. I think the church does have a role. The church is what us sort of reformed geeks might call, the church is a kind of mediating structure in a way in that the institution of the church is a place where Christians get together. The primary focus obviously is to worship. But as part of that worship, we're also being called by the church to engage with the world and we're being taught principles as to how do we engage with the world and I think the church does have a role in helping us to think through these things. Now, should that role be vote for assembly bill 507, go to Washington DC and this particular bill tell your congressman or tell your member of parliament to vote this particular issue? Maybe it doesn't, but I do think that there is a role for even the institution of the church to think through the issues that are current in our communities, to mention some of the ones that have been brought up. How do we deal with immigration? The world wants us to think of immigration either simply as let's keep people away because they don't have any use to us or let's be nice to everybody because everybody should love each other and I think the church teaches us that there's a whole lot more to that and there is scripture that it might not tell us how to vote on DACA, but it probably does tell us and gives us some guidance and how do we think through welcoming the stranger? How do we think through how we deal with someone who may be a refugee because of persecution? How do we think through, how do we welcome a person who may be coming to our community more for economic issues that they face in their country? Those are important issues that we do need to speak of and I do think scripture does speak to those kinds of issues and so over 12 then gives us the ability to now let's think through, how do we do that? What is the kind of language that we do and are we going to just simply say, no, the institution of the church, they're only in this area and they really don't have any role or are we gonna say that sphere sovereignty doesn't mean you only get to act in your own sphere and you get to act with total impunity in your sphere or is there a role for, I think somebody talked about the interlocking cogs of the spheres, is there a role for the church in that kind of thing? And over 12 does that in a way that I didn't see in 13 and 14. Well, you bring up Chuck and I think it's a good example, you bring up the example of immigration. Maybe to get concrete on this because lawyers like to have concrete examples. Once upon a time, our denomination joined in signing what was called an evangelical statement of principles for immigration reformed. It wasn't just our denomination that signed onto it, folks like Focus on the Family signed onto it. It was a really broad evangelical spectrum and it was not only just churches but also colleges, groups like Focus on the Family and a bunch of others. And it said, and I'll just read this real quickly, what they signed onto was these statements that as they called for a bipartisan solution on immigration, they wanted government to know that that solution should respect the God given dignity of every person, protect the unity of the immediate family, respect the rule of law, guarantee secure national borders, ensure fairness to taxpayers, establish a path toward legal status and or citizens for those who would qualify and who wished to become permanent residents. And I remember, cause this was a topic at the point in my conclusion about this, I don't know what you think I'd say, but my conclusion to this was, I think this was an appropriate kind of thing for the denomination to sign onto because it didn't get into specifics. But then I pulled up before this video, before we started this video, a number of action alerts that OSJ came up with. And one of them that was real recent was to vote against this particular tax measure because this particular tax measure added to the amount of money that the government had for border enforcement. And there I go, okay, now we're talking about something clearly on the other side because you're getting so much into the weeds there that, and then the worst part about that, I think everybody can say about the evangelical statement of principles, yeah, those are the kind of biblical things that I think Nick is talking about. But then when you start getting into budgets and stuff like that, the weeds get so thick with details that everybody's gonna look at some piece of legislation like that, which is probably a hundred or more pages. And they're gonna view it real quickly as supporting their side and the other side is supporting or going against their side and you start a fight. And it's a fight in which nobody knows really what they're talking about in the first place, but it starts a fight because you're getting involved in that specific legislation. And two, when you get involved in that specific legislation, at least in the United States of today, you're gonna almost certainly be aligned up with Republicans versus Democrats. And that's just a formula for disaster. To the extent that you don't get into the specific legislation, you also don't get into the Republican Democrat thing, which is what hasn't always been such a big problem. I mean, it's always been a little bit of a problem, but now it's almost acute the kind of problem it is. And we prejudge legislation that's hundreds of pages, we've heard five words and already we're taking positions on it. So 14, and I was kind of on that committee that wrote 14, the thing that we wanted to do was we wanted to say, okay, how do we kind of stem that tide a little bit? And part of the problem was we've gotten into those weeds and we think we need to get out of those weeds. But again, that evangelical statement of principles, I think that's something that you can talk about and say, let's find common ground here about what we can do. And so that's the extent to which I like 12 and I like what Nick says. Well, I really liked what you said, Nick. And when you were describing your overture, I thought, wow, this sounds exciting because I, well, I've got a lot of questions about who we mean by we and what we mean by church. So I'm gonna put my clergy hat on here because in reformed polity, there's a real question because we have the local assembly, which is the council, we have the regional assembly, which is the classes, and then the binational assembly, which is Senate. And so I've often noticed, and correct me if I'm wrong, a cultural habit of in the United States, we tend to, when we say church, mean a local church. And often when I hear Canadians say church, they mean the denomination. But I think that there's perhaps a cultural bias there. And when I heard you describe this, what I had hoped I would read in the overture, which I didn't really see, is I'd love to see a plan for fostering discussion, which is exactly why I'm doing this video. But I would love to see a plan for fostering discussion, and I didn't really see that in this overture. And I know that, say for example, the Organization for Social Justice or the Canadian counterpart of that, the banner for example, who has gotten into hot water in the last couple of years for a variety of things. I mean, the mission of those organs, I think, is to do exactly what you say here. But what we've seen come out of these particular organs in the denomination, especially over the last number of years, has been conflict. Those organizations have probably caused more conflict in the last couple of years than any other element of the church. I haven't seen overtures coming to Senate with respect to what is now Resonate or World Renew. Most of the overture, a lot of the overtures have been coming with respect to exactly the activity you're asking to promote. So I don't know if that's a problem with the overture or a problem with the context in which the overture finds itself. So I don't know, Nick. We've just given you a ton of stuff here. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. And I'd like to respond to, why don't I start with you, Paul? But I wanna get back to Chuck and Doug as well. My thinking was that this ought to be directed primarily at the local pastors and the preaching that takes place and the seminary, how we train our pastors. Because if you wanna equip your membership for Christian citizenship or for public witness, which is part of equipping the saints for ministry, it has to take place at the local level every Sunday in the pulpit. That is where God's word is disclosed. That is where we get direction for our lives. Even how people understand the Lord's word and understand the concept of salvation is very crucial to this. If your concept of salvation is entirely dominated by a kind of atonement theory of redemption, then it really doesn't touch politics. Jesus died for me in my stead, and that took place long ago, and now I'm safe and it's all okay. And my soul will happily go off to heaven. But if you have a Christ is victor view of salvation, which dominated the early centuries of Christendom, you get a very different view. So this over to 12, in my view, talks about mining scripture, understanding scripture. It points to eight central teachings of scripture that ought to direct us. And they don't, our denomination as a whole, we don't zero in on those teachings sufficiently. I mentioned the fact that in the last two elections, both here and in the States, there was no commentary in the banner. There was no direction given to us. It leaves the impression that God is not interested in how we vote. It leaves the impression that go and vote, you don't have to bother thinking about how that relates to your faith. And that God is not interested in what happens in Ottawa and Washington. And the way I read the Bible, that is just heresy. God is interested. And if Jesus is Lord, he's Lord over all of life. So we can do a lot better. I was not thinking of directing over to 12 at the agencies you mentioned and the work they do. Because in my view, their work is primarily directed at government. I want to educate our own membership. I think there would be a lot more appreciation for the work they do in government if our own membership had a more holistic view of what salvation is all about and what the coming of Jesus is all about. Now, having said that, I understand Chuck, I understand Doug. And I can understand that there are instances where those agencies in their pronouncements have veered away from general scriptural principles and spiritual values and gotten themselves into the nitty gritty of particular laws. If you want to solve that problem, you got to address their mandate. But you don't solve that by killing them off. And I'm putting it too strong, I know that. Oh, I don't think you probably are. The overture says, stop political lobbying. That is going too far. Now, in a way, I don't like the word political lobbying. When the church as institutes speaks to government, they should not involve themselves in political lobbying. What they should be doing is speaking God's word into that situation. They should be devoting themselves to biblical advocacy. And maybe their mandate should be changed from political lobbying, which has all kinds of partisan overtones, to we're here to speak God's word. We're here to advocate for the Bible principles. That would already restrict their activities. So in short, I can identify with your problems, Doug, but don't kill them. Yeah, but I don't think I do. But if you read Overture 14, I think that's exactly what we're doing. In that last couple of minutes of what you're talking, you both said very negative things about political lobbying, and then you said, don't stop them from political lobbying. I was a little bit perplexed about that. What we do say at the end of 14, and admittedly, Overture 14 is pretty long, but we actually do say that the church should speak to the issues that you in your last five minutes just said we should speak to. What we were trying to do is distinguish between this thing, which was not like another thing, and we were trying to make the divide that I think you're trying to make too. Now, you have to use human words to do that, but we thought that the lobbying was the best one. But Doug, if you look at the wording of the Overture, nevermind all the other things you say there, the Overture says stop political lobbying. But then it defines it. And in fact, it takes pains to define it and distinguish it from advocacy. Yeah, and you admit by trying to define it that it's very difficult, and I think you could do a better job of that. Particularly as a lawyer, you need to put greater emphasis on avoiding the kind of things that you're worried about. And I'm worried about too. I don't think- All right, I wanna give Chuck a chance to get in here. Yeah, yeah. So, you know, and I appreciate sort of this give and take because when I first heard about what became Overture 14, the description that I got of it sounded a lot like what we actually got in 13. And I'm willing to say 13 is just theologically incorrect, and I hope it's unanimously turned out, because advocacy is part of what the church does. Now, we get to, I think Doug and the other drafters of 14, the other people involved with that were wise to sort of separate that out, to understand you can't just say we're not gonna do advocacy anymore, because frankly, advocacy is what, for example, World Renew does. I'm leaving on Thursday to go to Canada for World Renew meetings, and we're gonna spend the next three days talking about all the advocacy that we do. And so when I heard about 13 and 14, I was very concerned that basically this was going to put an end to the relationship between World Renew and the denomination, because we wouldn't stop doing what we do, we just change the relationship. In 14, you're careful to talk about political lobbying, and I would agree that there does come a point at which it becomes inappropriate to get into the weeds. Now, the question is, where do those weeds begin? And I think that's where Doug and I might find some difference as to where do those weeds begin. My hope would be that we can find some areas of agreement. So for example, I think Nick mentioned, well, it would be totally inappropriate for a pastor from the pulpit to be telling their people how to vote. In 2008, I was asked to give a World Hunger sermon three weeks before the election. And after the sermon, I think they were trying to bait me, but after the sermon, someone came up to me and said, but you didn't tell us how to vote. Who do you think I should vote for? And I told them, well, I'm not going to tell you that. Now, some people thought that I did and were rather upset about it. That may have just been sort of three weeks before the election, maybe don't talk about World Hunger because people think you're telling them how to vote. Because one party is definitely pro-hunger. I think you're right. Or because I had a particular political sign outside my yard, they assumed that I would be pro-hunger. The political party of which I'm no longer a member and have joined a much better one. But, so where the rub is, is what does lobbying mean? And do we start in saying we're not going to do lobbying? Are we starting to cut the church off from things that we do want them to do? Is it lobbying, for example, to talk specifically about one of the issues going on in the country at this time is immigration? And here are some principles. And by the way, here are how some of those principles might possibly get laid out. How far can you go in doing that? And what is the role, not only from the pulpit, but now you have a congregation that has a committee that looks into the things. The church I grew up in, Sioux Center, Iowa, had a committee that actually studied legislation and provided information to the members. Didn't tell them how to vote on it, but provided some sort of biblical backing for that. Does that become lobbying? I don't know. And that's where I'm a little concerned that 14 goes further than it needs to go. That said, I do appreciate that they've taken that advocacy piece out of it and separated it out. Now, I'm listening to this discussion, and Doug and I were both part of the last discussion. And I am so grateful in both cases for these discussions because my views on the overtures are maybe not so with 13. Maybe I gotta do another with, we'll get Mincota in the room. That could be really fun. But I've really benefited from listening to this discussion. And Nick, I mean, the kind of detail and perspective you offer really refrained 12 for me. What on earth should Synod do? Because here's my question. I could see, Synod's gonna get all three overtures. 13, I think it's gonna see 14 as a far more nuanced version of 13. And I'm afraid 12 is gonna be interpreted as, well, here's a defense for OSJ. And so exactly this kind of partisanship we see at least happening in the United States, we're very quickly blue and red, right and left. And we're gonna line up and class us Grand Rapids East and some Canadian classes are gonna vote for 12 and others are gonna say 13 and 14. And what I've been hearing also in the conversation between these two videos has been, we're going to have to be really careful with this. And what I fear is that what so often happens with Synod because they've got their, they have a few hours for advisory committee, then you got a little bit of time on the floor. Issues like this are going to require a care with language if they actually want to do something. Otherwise Synod looks at this stuff and says, give it to the council of delegates. So I hope delegates really watch these two videos because I think this will really inform them in terms of what's going on here. But now let's take a step back from these overtures. What would you imagine Synod can do here? Because I think if they say, we'll approve 14. How are you gonna implement that? That's not gonna be easy. Let's approve 12. I don't know if 12 was approved, if anything different would happen in the denomination. That's my fear with this overture. So, anyway. It's revealing to me to hear you speak about overture 12 in that way. I genuinely look at overture 12 as a middle ground. I thought rather than talk about the task of the denominational agencies that speak to government, we should talk about the banner and about what happens on the pulpit and what happens in seminary. Because that to me is far more important. Or that is important in terms of bridging our differences. That is where we have to find each other. And it seems to me that the way that we're doing this is and it seems to me that maybe not in the few lines of the overture itself, but everything before that and also the grounds, they address the membership. They don't address the denominational agencies. They suggest that we lack as a members understanding of our task, our political task. And so, yeah, when I hear you say, oh, they'll just dismiss it as a defense of the status quo, I find that surprising. I'm probably disappointed. You've put a lot of yourself into this. Yeah, I'm really disappointed to hear you say that because if that's how it's gonna be interpreted, it's gonna miss the mark. Ah, legislation. As much as I think that overtures, see, the way I interpret overture 13 and 14 is that it's a quibble about whose task is it? Is it the task of the denomination to speak to government or is it the task of the members to speak to government? Church institute, church organism. And I like to say that is somehow, somewhat missing the mark because as I said earlier, if people applaud when the denominational agency speak in behalf of the denomination on abortion, gay rights, et cetera, and these same people then, when it comes to economic issues or welfare rates, claim, look, the church has no business telling politicians what to do, that doesn't die, right? In my view, our disagreements are not so much about who the messenger is as much as the message. I'd like to see us get greater unity around what the message is. And so if 12, it's gonna be a message, it's gonna be interpreted simply an apology for the status quo. That's a misreading. This is about the membership, not about agencies. Okay, that's really helpful. I hope that 12 doesn't get interpreted that way because I look at 12 is not simply an opposition to 13 and 14. I actually do look at it something. But one of the things that you said, Nick, just said that I wanna push back on a little bit is you sort of minimize the distinction between institute and organism. I understand where you say there's sphere universality and I understand when Chuck says that the church does speak to things, okay? I understand that, and which is why we were careful in 14 to distinguish between political lobbying and advocacy and we went so far as to start defining them, maybe writing too long of a one that somebody doesn't even read that stuff, right? That's always the danger of having an overture that too long, nobody gets to the end of it, okay. But at the same time, I'm hoping to get from the other side some sort of acknowledgement, which we get none of from OSJ and people who seemingly are on the other side of that, that there is any distinction between institute and organism. I thought we were getting to common ground when we kind of all said, well, OSJ shouldn't get into the weeds of the pending legislation. I was hoping that was common ground. Now, there are Christians out there involved in organism entities that should get involved in the weeds. Hey, I do, I get involved in the weeds. I've testified more than once for Oregon Right to Life. I've testified for Public Interest Law Firm. I get into the weeds and guess what? I'm part of organism, but I would never, I would never say, hey, hey Rob, my pastor, hey, you wanna get the church over here to endorse what? No, no, I think if I did, I would discredit myself if I said I and Sunny Slope Christian Reformed Church say these things, they would rather hear what I have to say as a practicing attorney who's practiced in First Amendment law, I did that. Can we have an agreement that there is a distinction between institute and organism? I'm sure hoping that we can. Absolutely, Doug, and as a former politician and someone who's served in the state legislature, I know exactly what you're speaking of and I support all of that. And I do think that there needs to be clear distinctions drawn there. And yes, and I don't know enough about the Office for Social Justice to make the statements you make, but even if half of what you say is true, then I agree with you that the church ought to always speak as a ecclesiastical body. It should not speak as simply another political interest. Its task is word proclamation. It speaks God's word into that situation. I think we quoted you in Overture 14, what you just said. We have common ground. I'm not sure that the distinction between political lobbying and political advocacy gets at that. Okay, and I'm open to other words. Chuck, you got any other words? You're going to Senate, you're the only one of us that's gonna be on the floor. So you gotta bring this home for us, Chuck. And that's one of the reasons I was hoping to be, I'm glad to be a part of this discussion because I have not yet sort of framed for myself what I see that alternative being. I recognize that to some extent I reacted against Columbia's, the language that they use because of my concerns that especially the agency that I'm most connected with, World Renew, I am concerned about how it impacts what we do. But I also recognize that there is probably at some point a need to make sure that just as we don't want to say that the church doesn't speak at all into politics, we also don't want to then have the church take over every sphere and basically think it runs politics. I'm not endorsing Doug's language, but I am endorsing the direction in which they're headed. I maybe just won't go quite so far. Okay, just to reiterate, Paul, in all our discussions, not just in my own head, I circulated this to many people, in all our discussions, also at the classical level, Overture 12 was not directed at the Office of Social Justice. It was directed at the membership because that is where we see the greatest need. That is where our conflict arises. That is where families find they can't talk to each other about political things. Or too many members of the church say, look, I want nothing to do with politics. Or I think you should stop talking about it because I'm interested in salvation, not in politics. From my point of view, 13 and 14, they would be perceived to be on the more conservative wing and the more pietistic wing of our denomination. And they would be decried by the more liberal wing of our denomination, the more Calperian wing. And from that point of view, I think it perpetuates our potential fault lines. And from my point of view, or maybe my peers around found it, but I was really afraid. Now, 12 is not a response to 13 and 14 because it was drafted long before that. But after I saw 13 and 14, I was very happy with 12 because I thought, okay, 13 and 14 are gonna drive a wedge in our denomination. This is gonna be perceived by the liberal wing as the agenda of the conservatives. And if that passes, there's gonna be fireworks. And I was hoping in view of that, that 12 would be seen to be a way to heal that divide. And that was the intent. Looking at all our divisions, we said we gotta get back to God's word. That is where we have to find common ground. I'm, again, really happy for your clarification here. And I now hear 12 as an attempt to address a certain, if you listen to me theologically with Chuck and Doug have more, address a certain evangelical bias, I think a rather Gnostic interpretation of scripture that leads to this hard dichotomy, I'm gonna get into some of my language, between the present age and the age to come. And a lot of my work has been to try to reintegrate what I think is the fundamental conversation of the Bible. The fundamental conversation of the Bible is not the question between heaven and hell. The conversation of the Bible is the reunion of heaven and earth. It begins in Genesis one and it ends in the book of Revelation. We're all there with you. Yeah, and I think this is something that in the Christian Reformed Church, we inherited the tools theologically to maintain this conversation. And this gets into some other conversations, in the process at least south of the border of Americanization and perhaps, I think this is where the cultural divide between the United States and Canada really begins to reflect. The strong influence of dispensationalism, of frontier revivalism in the United States, how that has permeated the membership of the Christian Reformed Church and this much more complex, but I think biblical and integrated vision that we get through Kuyper, Boving, some of our own tradition, holds these things together better. And now I really understand your Overture 12 in that light and I think probably where, I mean if you had sent this to me and I taught a conversation to me, I'd probably say, ooh, we're gonna have to talk about the frame of this because it politically, this has kind of rolled out as it has, so I'm really glad we're having this conversation because it's completely changed my perspective on it. But I really hear you wanting to foster a theological movement in the churches and boy, that's a, you know, if you think folks are gonna get divided over politics, we're used to fighting over theology. Do you know who I think- Wait, we should not be, go ahead. Do you know who I think does a really good job about talking about political things without talking about politics? And I've put articles of them on CRC Voices, so Chuck and Paul, you may have an, I think Comment Magazine, Cardus, Comment Magazine, does a fantastic job of that. And if I were the denomination and I were to look at 12, where if I'm on the committee that takes up 12, and hopefully the people who are on there maybe or some of them will listen to this conversation, if I were to look at an example of what the denomination might do to give reality to 12, I would look at Cardus and Comment Magazine. They do such a splendid job at it. You know, I get all of Cardus' material, but Cardus addresses government. Sure they do. Sure. But 12 is not directed at government. 12 isn't directed at our membership. Well, no, no, I think Cardus does direct toward the membership. All of these articles are not for government to read. It's for the membership's edification, even though it's not part of the CRC. But they're writing articles to not cause you to go red or blue. They write articles that are thoughtful articles. I mean, CPJ over in the area does the same thing. They write thoughtful articles. Yeah, CPJ. Without intending. Yeah, without intending, and they don't get into the legislative weeds, and they don't get red and blue. I actually think that's a good example, if you will, for what I think you want 12 to be. Yeah, yeah, no, you know, largely that's correct. I do think there are times when the church's institute is duty bound to resist a certain initiative. There are times when the spiritual direction is so off that it is so overtly and obviously against how the Bible reveals itself in terms of the tasks and so on of government that we ought to say, you know, you ought to stop that. And I'm thinking, for instance, of the current initiative on the part of the Canadian government to hand out government benefits depending on whether you're pro-life or not, right? I'll agree with that. I'm an old First Amendment lawyer. There is an instant where I think the Center for Public Dialogue in Ottawa should be, they're not, and I take fault with them, and I beg them to get involved. They should be mobilizing our membership to write letters and to urge our elected people to vote against that. So I think there are instances where that is justified, but in my view, it has to be rare and it has to be entirely justified on very obvious principles. I wouldn't rule it out altogether. I don't know that I would so disagree with that. And there's also that area where if the institutional church is directly affected, and if I understand the Canadian scenario right, it's directly affected. And I'll always say where the institution is directly affected, of course, hey, Dork College sued the government over Obamacare, some of the principals in Obamacare. Its attorney, the attorney they represented, I know him very well, worked with him for probably a decade. Absolutely, I think they should do that, even though they were a school and they got their own sphere of things, I thought they should be doing that. I was disappointed that Calvin didn't. The issue then, of course, though, then in defining that is what does it mean when the institution of the church is being directly affected? And I think that's maybe a question that has to be answered in determining what is it that we say should be done and shouldn't be done. If something is affecting a large number of the members of a congregation, is it affecting the institution of the church? For example, many of the Spanish-speaking churches in Cheboygan County have seen their weekly attendance drop to less than a third of what it used to be because people are afraid to go out and gather in places that are sort of identified as places where people who may be undocumented might gather. Does that have an impact on the church? We might have a different answer to that, but it's one of those things that I think perhaps Overture 12 allows us the opportunity to think about and discuss and come at something other than this partisan way of looking at things that seems to have taken over. Well, I don't disagree with that. And I think whatever you do, it's sort of like the concept of negligence. Us lawyers, we sue about it all the time, right? But we will forever be arguing about exactly what negligence means. So whatever the overture is that we write, we are always going to have these disagreements as to what exactly that means. What I'm hopeful though about is that we can, we can actually I think we've reached it in this conversation that we do believe there's a distinction between the institute and the organism. And interestingly, what I do every Sunday in my church is what I think Nick would applaud. I have an adult Sunday school, one of two in our church, pretty small church. And guess what we take up? Other issues too, but we take up topics. I don't know, half of them are politics. Now, I don't tell my people what to think. And what I mostly do is I mostly open it up, provide background information, and we discuss why we should think about these things and how our faith affects us and how our faith demands that we should be thinking about these things too. I get articles off of due justice. I get articles off of the network. I get articles off of Banner, about half of which involves some sort of political overlay. And we do exactly that. And when I heard Nick talk, I'm going to go on, well, he's describing my Sunday school. And I was really liking that Nick said that he was predominantly pointing with 12 to what you do in the local church. You can find a lot of agreement with me. Still, I should not be telling the people in my Sunday school class, I should not be saying, I know about this and you don't, so I know that this is the answer. I should leave that conversation. I should provide information. I can even suggest the biblical things, to tell you the truth, we don't disagree much about the biblical things, but we find those biblical principles together. And the biggest thing is tying then, making a connection between there are these principles and whether you thought about it or not, that does affect that issue. See how you tie that up? See, what you believe in your faith does have a string that ties all the way up through your life toward whether you're milking your cow or whether you're voting or whether you're supporting a candidate or a measure. You've got referendum measures, I don't know how that all works, but still I have to be careful. And we will have differing opinions in our class and I make it a point that we do a lot of laughing. That's good. Because that's a good way to say, yeah, we can talk about these things. That's right. Well, we've been going at this for a little while, let's land the plane and I wanna give each of you a chance to give a closing statement, if you want to basically use this to address Senate and say, do this or think about this or this is what I'm about, go right ahead. This is your platform. Well, so I'll start. What I hope happens, I think what will have been successful at Senate is if what happens is as a result of, whether it's 12 or some combination of the study committee comes up with a more global solution, is if we can find ways to teach each other within the church how to think about political issues, how to talk about political issues, and even how to disagree about political issues, but to do so in a way that is different from the world, that isn't based on this partisan divide, but rather allows us to talk about, here are the principles that we hold in common, here are maybe how we're going to differ and how we move off of these principles, and maybe even occasionally, not so sure I even agree with that particular principle and here's why from scripture. Now, how do we get there from 12? I'm not quite sure. I do think that there is a role for the denomination in some way to do that. I'm not sure it's best to hand it off to whatever we're calling the board of directors now. I don't know that it's best to hand it off just to simply hand it back to classes. What I'd like to see is perhaps some people like Doug, as well as some people like the folks from OSJ, together, as well as some people who are sort of deeply involved in the theology of these things, spend some time and hash through these things. Because I think even today we've seen that there is the possibility that we can come up with answers that are gonna move us away from the partisan divide. Okay, thank you Chuck. Well, if I may, I'd certainly underscore what you said Chuck and I too hope that Synod will find a way to unite us, to bring us together. And again, it has to be around our common beliefs or our common confession that Jesus is Lord of our life. From my experience, and I can't speak for everyone, I certainly can't speak for people self-in-border, from my experience, a good many members in our church either do not want to or do not know how to relate scripture to political issues. And I find that sad and we have to find a way to educate and it's not educating so much, it's struggling together at the local level with the Bible and what the Bible teaches and how do we apply it. And that's what Overture 12 aims to do. And certainly the banner can be very influential. I don't expect that during the election, we're gonna read in the banner how to vote. But I also subscribe to Christianity today and during the 2016 US election, they ran three columns by three Christians, one Democrat, one Republican, and one who said proxy in both your houses, I'm not voting for either. And all three of these gave a very strong defense of their position based on scripture. And that's what I'm looking for. I could read all three of them. And in some points I agreed with all three of them. But I could hear the voice of disciples of Jesus struggling, how do I cast my ballot? And that is what we need to listen and we need to hear from each other and certainly through the pages of the banner. I think our current editor has indicated, several of his editorials have dealt with some of these difficult questions. I'd like to see more of that, but I'd like to see it in the pulpits. Not to be told how to vote, not to be told whether to be a Democrat or Republican, not at all. I wanna hear the word of God, but I want to understand it in terms that speak to my life, the way I live and the way my children and my grandchildren. And if all they hear from the pulpit is somehow totally unrelated to real life, the church is gonna die. And the church is dying and maybe for many different reasons, but from where I sit, unless we enact the gospel, unless we model the gospel, then saying we believe the following is meaningless. It's utterly meaningless. And maybe I'm overplaying this and maybe because politics play a big role in my life, but I see politics is very pervasive. It takes up a huge chunk of human existence in the world today. And if we exclude ourselves from that and our members are not trained and educated and equipped to serve Jesus in that part of their life, we're missing the vote. 12 tries to make its contribution in that direction. Thank you, Paul. Okay, Doug, your shot. Almost like the last video that you invited me to, Paul. When we get to the end of this, I think there's a lot of constructive value to it. Here's the constructive value I see to this one. I think if you took parts of what Nick would say, it could have been in Overture 14. And I think there were parts of what I said and what Chuck said that could be in both Overture 12 and Overture 14. I think if you isolate certain parts of what we say, it'll be a clue that we're kind of coming in at this from opposite ends, but I'm not so sure that we don't end up in the same place. And usually when you come from opposite ends, you fight being told that you are coming to an agreement. But I think largely we are. I mean, the more we talk, the more I go, well, yeah, okay, exactly what Nick said, even though we did come at from opposite ends. I also think that it makes a difference what our experience is. Like Nick talked a lot about, and I don't want to negate this because everybody has their own culture and their own location. He talked a lot about the kind of Christianity that was I'm just visiting here and I'm off to heaven. I'll tell you, I remember that when I was a kid, but I look around me and maybe it's where I am or whatever and Oregon's filled with atheists, okay, fine. But the Christians that are here, I just don't know of anybody who thinks that way. It's like, for me, that's historical, but it just doesn't exist anymore. I think guys like Francis Schaeffer and guys like Jim Dobson, even though a lot of people wouldn't like him, they've changed that at least in the States, at least in places that I've been in where a lot of people have been infected by this reform bug, not just people in churches that are traditionally formed. I just don't see that as a very big threat, but I do think that we're threatened by the current hyper division that we have where we've gone. And obviously I think we have a few elected officials that have just not helped on that. I mean, we've always had left, right divide, but never like we have today. And that is threatening. So the one thing, and this is why I think 14 still has value, of course, I'm gonna pitch for my own overture, is that when OSJ gets into the weeds, I don't understand how that can have an effect other than to do the dividing that all of us don't want. So I'm not trying to keep World Renew, although Chuck and I, I think World Renew is its own organization. We'll have an argument about that. Okay, fine, fine, fine. World Renew has its own purpose. It's related fine, but then so is CPJ and lots of other things. But I just think OSJ, when it gets into the weeds divides, and that's the point of 14. So if you don't like the phrase political lobbying, and maybe I'm talking to people who are gonna be on the committee or people who are going to Senate, that's fine, come up with something else. But look at the concept. I just really think that at the end of the day, I'm not sure we're not all at exactly the same place or close to, even though we'll argue about nuances of where that place is, but I think we're awfully close. And I think if you listen to this video over again, you're gonna find all kinds of spots where it goes, oh, you're in the same place. So one last point. I think there's several places where we need to look to in order to implement the thrust behind Overture 12. One is Cardus, one is Kelvin's two worlds, Matt Tuniga, and then another one is Matt Kamig. I don't know if any of you have read the book, but he wrote a book on the fear of Muslims, Christian hospitality and the fear of Muslims in a hateful world. It's been out not too long time. It's really good. It covers the Netherlands in a very politically astute way. And even though you think that a book like that isn't about politics, it is, it's about pluralism in a really good way. That is another example of how, I mean, I think he does public theology, especially for Calvinists and does a really good job. So I think if you wanted to do 12, and I'm kind of all for that, I do it every Sunday in my church, I think we look for examples for that and that's the best way to implement it. And I don't think, I said this to my pastor, I said this to my pastor Rob right away, he says, I'm not sure that I don't like 12. That perception that 12 is against 13 and 14, I'm not sure I looked at it that way. I didn't look at it that way. It's too short for me, but I'm a lawyer, I want it to be more, but I think the thrust of it, especially as Nick has explained it, I'm not sure I'm not all for that, even though I might argue with some of the text in 12. But I think we need to look at patterns, and if we can find good patterns out there, we can get a clue as to how this can be done well. Good. Well, again, I really appreciate all three of you for showing up and agreeing to this. I sometimes say that YouTube is the place where people go who have little to lose, because getting and making a video that will be a public record, and especially for two of you who serve or have served in the public, all of us serve in the public one way or another. So I deeply appreciate this conversation. I appreciate the spirit with which we undertook this conversation. I feel like we have shed valuable light on not only these overtures that could be helpful for synodical delegates, but also for, I think we've also furthered the conversation in the Christian Reformed Church. And so I really appreciate that each of you have been willing to do this tonight, and I'm going to stop the recording right here, so don't go anywhere.