https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=B2EXSVePg1A

 Hi, this is Paul. I wasn't able to quite pull off the video I wanted to pull off in terms of PowerPoint. I'm still working on trying to package this in the best way. There are enough angles to this conversation that it's not terribly easy to find a way in, but every time I work on it, I see other things. The problem isn't making a two hour video, the problem is not making a 20 hour video, and I don't have 20 hours to sit down and make a 20 hour video, and I don't think any of you would like that anyway. So let's talk a little bit about Sam Harris and morality. Now, yesterday someone sent me a video that was put out on Darwinian truth in Jordan Peterson. This is a subject that I've talked about before. This video has some graphics and that kind of stuff, but I thought some good observations, the putting it, getting it down into a graphic of, in a sense, the sense that Harris and De La Honte have about, you know, the reality is these little chunks of facts that kind of float around out there, and we know something is true by empirical testing, whether it's valid or invalid. In other words, truth equals fact, and this video goes into that quite a bit, and that obviously gets into trouble when you have facts and morality, because there are lots of facts, and then to figure out, usually we talk about morality in terms of action, and again, when you think about, oops, the lights, when you think about Jordan Peterson's basic orientation as being, being, being, being, as reality being a form for action versus a space for objects, the facts and the objects go together more nicely than action. Action and facts do fit. Now, OJ killed Nicole, fact or not fact. You know, it does have a binary sense of it. There are facts and events that you can look at in that way, but as we're gonna get into in this video, reality is very complicated, and distilling even any given moment right now into a list of facts that can be verified, or falsified is not so easy. In fact, this is one of the things that Matt Dillahunty, the claim he basically made in his conversation with Jordan Peterson that he could, in a sense, distill everything down into a list of propositions. So what is religion? Well, Jordan Peterson says, "'Your religion is your axioms "'from which you act out, act in the world. "'The world is a form for action.' "'Sam Harris says, "'A religion is a set of supernatural stories "'that you may or may not believe "'truthfully correspond to the world of objects "'and literal events.' In other words, facts. So the world is a space for objects. Now, morality constructed from moral facts. Dillahunty basically said, "'Everything can be distilled "'into a list of verbal propositions "'that can be verified or falsified.' And I'm with Jordan Peterson on my skepticism of both ends of that statement. I don't think you can distill anything, everything down into a list of propositions. And I don't know that all of those propositions can be verified or falsified. There is, in fact, a modernist Christian position that's like this. And you will sometimes hear certain fundamentalist groups talking this way. And they take the Bible and they try to boil the Bible down into a list of propositions. And then the way they proceed in terms of their Christian life and Christian belief is that Christian belief is, if you have the list of propositions, you say, true, true, true, true, true, and then you're a Christian. It's exactly that kind of belief that Jordan Peterson pushes back against when people ask, do you believe in God? He says, it depends on what you mean by belief. So that's why Jordan Peterson, when he says, I act as if God is real, now you're nested in what he's been saying. Truth and reality are more complex. And part of the problem we have is that we are nested within this reality. So it's not like kind of the modernist perspective of sitting apart, watching this type of monarchical vision. We are in the middle of it. And if there's one thing you know, the Grand Canyon looks different from the middle than from the rim. And in a sense, the modernists like to pretend like we're standing at the rim looking out into the Grand Canyon, we can survey. Almost anyone will say, that canyon will look different depending on exactly where you stand. Being my height, six foot four, the canyon will look different than my wife's height, five foot six. Do we see two different canyons? No, but we have two different views of the canyon. So let's test this. Take one moment in your life, even now, and try to exhaust that moment into a list of propositions about everything true about it. And if you think you succeed, try the other list, which is try to construct a list. No, Google, I don't want to talk to you. Try to construct a list, that try to construct the false list. If you say, I've done it, I can probably find one or two, at least true or false things about that moment that you didn't list, and there I've made my point. My point is, you can't do this because the project would probably take the rest of your life. Now, even if you try to list everything I perceive at this moment, immediately one thing would come to mind, but then as you kept perceiving more and more things, you would begin to see and perceive and think about, and we go on and on and on. Now we're getting into some of what Sam Harris keeps talking about when he's talking about consciousness and how meditation or psychedelic drugs can change our perception, and that is essentially consciousness. This is this world that I'm perceiving, and seeing myself perceiving the world in this whole package of consciousness. And again, we have to, I think, in listening to a couple of Sam Harris' interviews, I can see, I've got a far clearer understanding of how he understands consciousness and how consciousness fits into his worldview. I don't think it fits very coherently, but everyone's entitled to their opinion. Now, what you'll hear from Dilla Huntie and Sam Harris is that laws of physics govern morality. And the project, the Modernist Materialist Project, tends to assume or assert that these laws are external and necessary, okay? And again and again, you'll hear Dilla Huntie talk about the laws of physics and the laws of physics, and we've talked about the laws of physics a fair amount. But if not, only since the Big Bang, but then, so you see, eternal is a long time. Eternal is both never beginning and never ending. And before the Big Bang, it was assumed that these laws of physics were never ending, but now, well, physicists have said that reality is a whole lot weirder than we think. And when Jordan Peterson is asked about miracles, what he says is, well, I know that there's at least the possibility of miracles because none of us can explain the Big Bang. And in another video still rolling around in my head, I do want to talk more directly about natural and supernatural because these are also two words and two terms that we tend to throw out there and use, but I don't think we pause much and ask ourselves a hard question about our capacity to know the supernatural given who we are and what we are. And this, of course, even gets into Sam Harris's conversation about consciousness. So, moral laws, let's say, are like water freezing laws. Now, generally speaking, water freezes at 32 degrees, maybe 32 degrees-ish. I looked up a Smithsonian magazine and there's a few qualifiers here, and then, of course, you know the ocean. If you've got some salt in the water, the temperature can get lower. And if you've ever made ice cream and a vat with a crank, you put salt in with the ice to get it below 32 degrees so that the ice cream can harden. I mean, this is, but there's a law, and the law is water freezes at 32 degrees, or there are laws about when waters freeze, and there are laws about when materials are solid, liquid, or vapor. Now, the moral quality of action should live in a, should be similarly universal if this is, in fact, these facts or these truths from which you are deriving your, from which you are deriving your morality scheme. Now, let's be fair. Deriving an entire morality is a difficult process. Probably not as difficult as getting agreement on the morality that you derive. And all of this, both the difficulty and the difficulty in agreement, should perhaps give us some indication of what's going on in the project. So the moral quality of action should be similarly universal. This can't be relativism or subjectivism, okay? So if it's right, it's right, it's wrong, it's wrong. Now, you can add qualifiers like we do with water freezing. If there's a little salt in, the temperature might be a little different, but for the most part, these kinds of moral qualities, moral knowledge, moral laws, moral universe, shouldn't be relative, just like water freezing isn't relative, okay? Now, please list some of these for me, as well as guidelines for application, because we haven't seen a lot of this. What we usually see is that, oh yeah, we all know morality. In one of the older versions of this, I pull in Christian Smith and his observations on American assumptions about morality. But let's get the ball rolling, and let's start with a Christian, and let's look, in fact, at an idea that's been around for a very long time, which isn't that dissimilar to that. We'd call it natural law. Now, right away, when I mention natural law, some of you are gonna get nervous, because theists have been working this natural law thing for a very long time. Christians and other theists, of course, say that God, or the creator God, or the gods, have built morality into the system. This morality can be seen in the fabric of creation, or the fabric of the world, or perhaps the laws of physics, and this morality can be revealed in laws and story. Now, one of the interesting things, if you listen to Sam Harris' interview, both with Russell Brand and with Dave Rubin, is Sam Harris likes to talk a lot about dogma in a very negative sense. For Sam Harris, he defines dogma as religious, unverifiable claims, often with a supernatural taint, that lock people into archaic story, or archaic traditions, stories, or superstition, and prevent them from having a rationally-based your best life now. There was a piece out a little while ago that was talking about Jordan Peterson as a Joel Austin. In a sense, Sam Harris has a little bit of Joel Austin in him, too, in terms of he is looking to deliver your best life now to the whole world, as good as we can get it, but not based on religious dogma, but based on reason. And again, if you watch either the Russell Brand or the Dave Rubin videos with Sam Harris, you will see Harris, again and again, define dogma in this way. There's some issues with that definition. Always connect it with religion and say, you know, this is a big problem. If they would step out into the pure light of reason, stripped of religion, then they would have morality. And again, I'd like to see this morality. Dillahunty recommends the Humanist Manifesto, but, and this is where Jordan Peterson tagged him, you've not proved humanism to me, like water freezing and 32 degrees. I haven't seen any water freezing law with respect to humanism. So let's not talk about the 1932 version, because there seem to be a little bit of communist sympathizing in the 1932 version, and there's probably some latent eugenics in there as well. So let's just ask, let's just have Sam Harris tell us what, well, let's not call it a religion, maybe we'll call it a philosophy of life, but what he thinks, you know, would really do the trick here. And I think he lays it out quite nicely. Let's put all of that aside for a second. I do want to do a sort of deep dive on the Jordan stuff, because I think maybe we can set the table in a nice way for your conversations. But what's on your mind more than anything else right now that's not political or not? Unrelated to the conversation with Jordan? Yeah, like what are you really thinking about right now? Well, I'm thinking more about the core things that interest me, like the nature of consciousness, and just how to live a good life, given the fact that we wake up every day not knowing how long we've got, and we're absolutely sure that we don't get this day again. So it's just like how to meaningfully engage moment to moment in our lives in a way that's rewarding and minimizes unnecessary suffering and increases joy and insight and creativity. And so for me, as you know, meditation is part of that certainly. And I've just come out. Okay, now he goes off into his app, which is a disappointment, because I think he was speaking eloquently and well about he was articulating what I would call his religion. Now he wouldn't call it that because religion has a different meaning for him. Let's say his philosophy of life, okay? Let's say he was articulating his philosophy of life. And there are a number of pieces in that. And I think in a sense, it's a Joel Osteen type of your best consciousness now. What we want is for each of us to have our best consciousness now, because consciousness is always in the now. And we want to maintain that best consciousness as much as possible. And we want as many people as possible to be able to maintain that best consciousness as possible. And that is in Sam Harris's opinion, dependent on stabilizing and multiplying the possibility of this in the material world, because consciousness is dependent upon materiality. And so if we can establish a big enough, free enough platform for consciousness for people to have the potential to have their best consciousness now. And if you listen to again, more of him and Russell Brand, he'll say, this is best done in systems and structures so we can structure this up. So for Sam Harris, the government has a role to play in this. And so if we can structure this together, if we can do this communally, then we will achieve our best consciousness now on as big a span as possible, in as stable a way as possible, giving everyone maximum choice and maximum freedom. And I think this is a very articulate expression of, again, what Robert Bellah called expressive individualism. And now part of the reason I'm having difficulty putting together a full video on this is that this goes so many different places. I could read from Robert Bellah on this. And I've got all of these things in my head, but to take the time and drop them out for you would be difficult. So protection and propagation of the good consciousness. This is what Sam Harris, if he's freed of all of his, you know, Ubermensch world saving things he needs to do via the podcast in order to, out of the generosity of his heart, deliver this to as many people as possible, there's a good part of his definition of morality. And it's a noble part. And again, I agree completely with C.S. Lewis that I think he's being inconsistent with his materialism, but I'm very happy he is in that he genuinely cares about the world. He is a fine, moral human being. I would love to have him as a friend. I would love to have him as a neighbor. I would happily entrust my car keys and my wallet to him. I have no evidence that he is untrustworthy in any ways. He seems like a wonderful human being. So no arguments. I just don't think he gets there from his stated philosophical underpinnings. And again, this is part of the reason that I think Jordan Peterson wants to talk to him because I think Jordan Peterson has exactly that same complaint about Sam Harris. Now, this is why in fact, however, we abort babies. And I'm not a, okay. I wanna talk about abortion because abortion is an interesting case in this. Because just as if you look at the video I made yesterday and you've got Sam Harris thinking about, oh, what about computers? We're at some point, we're gonna have to worry about the conscious suffering of the machines we create. And then Russell Brand jumps in and says, now, wait a minute. What about the conscious suffering of things we know are conscious? I mean, we believe our dogs suffer and we believe our cows suffer and we believe, plants can perhaps even suffer. And we believe that we can't even suffer and so I talked about this in my video yesterday. But now the inconvenient pregnancies threatening the consciousness, the consciousness potential of the mother. This is in fact the vast majority of reasons given in Florida where you have to give reasons for your abortion by law. 96% basically say, you know, shut up, I wanna do it. Okay, tiny percentages, rape, incest, something like that. Health of the mother. At what point does human consciousness qualify for this protection? Is it potential consciousness? Because in many ways, this is in fact what the people who are getting abortions are saying that my potential consciousness is threatened by this unwanted pregnancy and the possibility of giving birth to a child, even giving the child up for adoption threatens my imagined future conscious wellbeing. So therefore it's better to abort the fetus. Well, every sufficiently happy fetus, you know, that's a limited, that's a potential consciousness you're eliminating. Is it pain? Do fetuses feel pain when they are being aborted? You can Google that and find that out. Is it self-conscious? Well, this gets tricky too because here's the funny thing about human beings being born. Human being that has been given, a human being that is birthed is extremely dependent on the mother. At what level of consciousness does this one hour old baby have? How is that level of consciousness different from a six month old baby, from a two year old, from a six year old? And of course, if you've had children, you sort of watch their consciousness developing. And all of us can try to remember our first memories. And we kind of have a sense that there's a connection between memory and consciousness. To what degree was I fully conscious when I was a one year old? There was a woman in my father's church that used to tell my father, she remembered giving birth or she remembered being born. And she had a number of other issues in her life that led my father to be a little skeptical about that claim. But this consciousness business and what qualifies for consciousness and to what degree do we protect consciousness by law? This is not an easy thing. Now I know Sam Harris again in the Russell Brand video basically says, you know, it's this religious dogma that has people saying that life begins at conception and there should be no abortion after conception. Well, at what point then, and I'm not trying to make an argument about abortion, okay? That's not what I'm looking for. So, you know, I guess if you want to rage about that in the comment section, go right ahead. But the difficulty is at what point does consciousness begin? And if consciousness, according to Sam Harris is our standard, is that standard something that we can really get at scientifically? In fact, again, if you listen to Rupert Sheldrake, consciousness is about the last standard we want when we're talking scientifically. Now, as Sam Harris says, doubting that I am conscious right now, this is about the most direct experience I have, but there is a huge gulf between myself and knowing whether to what degree all of the electrons zipping around in my phone are conscious, or the servers that my phone is connected to are conscious, or the little crying GIFs that I put on my computer screen yesterday are conscious. And so his scheme imagines that somehow regard for consciousness is going to be the moral standard. Wow, that isn't even a big part of the abortion debate. Wait into the abortion debate with this criteria and see if that suddenly cleans things up for you. Or the moral math of suicide. If in this moment I feel despair, can you guarantee me happiness in the future? On whose criteria? Have you ever talked to a person who's terribly depressed? What they say is life isn't going to get any better. That is their firm conscious conviction. And it is as firm as any conscious conviction as Sam Harris has about consciousness itself. So is that a sufficient ground in which to take material action in the world? Now he's suggesting that any story that has an element of supernaturalism is automatically disqualified as a basis for moral judgment. But Sam Harris is essentially saying, the basis for moral judgment is consciousness. And I look at that and I think, you can't find a more slippery thing, a more subjective thing than consciousness, which is pretty close to the definition of subjectivity itself. So the moral math of suicide, how do you do that with respect to his standard of consciousness? Doctor assisted suicide. Often an argument for doctor assisted suicide I get is, we do this for animals and we do. I've had a number of pets in my home and if I go to the vet with a, I don't know if I should tell this story. So years ago, we had a cat that seemed to prefer living in the garage hunting mice. And we kept our car in the garage and whenever we pulled the car in, the cat would get out of the way, predictably. Hundreds of times that cat always got out of the way while my wife was driving into the garage with my father, my parents were over on a vacation and my father said, watch out, the cat. And my wife said, the cat always moves. Well, this time the cat didn't move, at least not fast enough. And my wife ran over the cat and my wife calls me at work and says, I ran over the cat and I said, well, take him to the vet and see how bad it is. Probably have to put him down. Now, ironically, this was at that point in our lives, we had taken in a fair number of cats, soft hearted people that we were. Some person found this stray cat, dropped him off at church. I brought the cat home, we got all the fleas off the cat. The cat had a fairly splotchy coat and so we named the cat Mud Splat. Now, just think that through. Anyway, so put the cat in a bin. My father and my wife took the bin to the vet. The vet is going through the kinds of potential surgeries and remedies for this cat that got run over by a car. And this would have easily cost thousands of dollars, money we didn't have. And so I said to my wife, I said, you know, we're gonna put the cat down, the cat's suffering. We put the cat down. Now let's switch, let's imagine grandpa was in the garage and the cat was in the car. And what if my wife hate grandpa? You know, would I put grandpa down? No, why? Well, again, we get back to humanism. Well, we regard humans with a different standard. Well, the cat was younger than grandpa by a good bit, even in cat years. How do we do this math? Consciousness? Well, grandpa has higher consciousness than the kitty. Is this the standard we use? So doctor assisted suicide, we do it for animals. If I am in pain, can I rationally choose what to do? Okay, so we have laws that say, well, if I am in such pain, later I can choose. Or do we do it for others? Is it physical pain versus mental pain? Remember, all of this is consciousness. Children with birth defects. Some of my good atheist friends, when this subject comes up, they not only say, well, I think it's absolutely fine to eliminate Down syndrome by prenatally testing babies for Down syndrome and aborting these babies. Down syndrome children and adults, in my experience, are some of the happiest people I know. So how does the consciousness test really work for that? Now, well, let's give Sam Harris a break. He's a young man. Let's pick up someone who is a giant in this realm. Let's pick on Bertrand Russell. Bertrand Russell was a brilliant man and Brain Pickings is a terrific blog. And here she has a pretty amazing article on Bertrand Russell on love, sex, and what the good life really means. So Sam Harris and Bertrand Russell seem to be barking up the same tree and again, Sam Harris isn't alone in this. I think Sam Harris has, in these videos, articulated this fairly well, but Bertrand Russell is at least as smart as Sam Harris. I don't know how many of you are gonna out there say a good bit smarter than Sam Harris. Bertrand Russell was a genius of a man. In fact, Alvin Plantech got quipping about the four horsemen of the new atheist movement was complaining that we didn't get better ones. And he mentioned Bertrand Russell. Now there's a truly scary atheist because, according to Alvin Plantech, because he's really smart. And in fact, some of you will look at Bertrand Russell and pull up a quote, this is what Brain Pickings picks up and according to a very popular issue that's debated today. Now this of course calls to mind not only Mark Twain's general lament about how we've used religion to justify injustice, but also the particular superstition with which homosexuality has been historically regarded. But even as early as 1925, Russell, a conscientious critic of religion, recognizes the absurdity of thinking and points to the critical thinking required for making up one's own mind in evaluating the alleged dangers of that, of what such superstition condemns as immoral. So Bertrand Russell, Sam Harris, they're on the same page. And in fact, this is a long history of thinkers that have been making these arguments for a good long time. And I'll read a quote from Bertrand Russell and you can see why he's so powerful. It is evident that man with a scientific outlook on life cannot let himself be intimidated by texts of scripture or by teachings of the church. He will not be content to say such and such an act is sinful and that ends the matter. He will inquire whether it does any harm. And this has become the standard, the legal standard in our culture for sin. Jonathan Haidt has some really good tests on that where he'll make up this elaborate test of this brother and sister using double birth control, deciding they'd like to experiment on sex together. And then he'll bring people in and say, do you think this is moral or immoral? And people will say, well, I don't really want to choose. I don't really want to say, but if you really, really push them, yeah, it's wrong. Go ahead and watch the rationalist delusion video that Jonathan Haidt has on there. So harm is the standard. So, okay. And he will find that especially in what concerns sex, our current morality contains a great deal of which the origin is purely superstitious. We will find also that this superstition like that of the Aztecs involves needless cruelty and would be swept away if people were actuated by kindly feelings towards their neighbors. I could do another video on the relationship between kind and good, because essentially kindness has become the moral standard for our culture. And this is something I think Peterson will probably attack as well. But the defenders of traditional morality are seldom people with warm hearts. Oh my. One is tempted to think that they value morals as affording a legitimate outlet for their desire to inflict pain. The sinner is fair game and therefore away with tolerance. It's Bertrand Russell. He's an amazing writer. He's an amazing thinker. But can we live with our reason? Bertrand Russell was also quite famous for other things. The great philosopher Bertrand Russell, who of all his undeniable intellectual brilliance could never have bedded a woman on looks alone. Hierarchy, don't you know? He was described as suffering from galloping satiriasis. He claimed he could not see a sexual partner as sexually attractive for more than a few years, after which he had to make a new conquest. He had affairs with a long line of women, a few of whom he later married. He included a young secretary, a minister of parliament's wife, the daughter of a Chicago surgeon, a researcher, an actress, a suffragette, several teachers, and the wife of a Cambridge lecturer and his children's governess. His private life was described by one biographer as a chaos of serious affairs, secret trysts, and emotional tightrope walks that constantly threatened ruinous scandal. This was risk taking of the highest order. Now what's interesting is that you could say, see, it's religion that spoiled him because he was living in a far more religious day and age than we are today, and perhaps he would just be a polyamorous today, or perhaps he would have grown smart enough to deny marriage as a good thing. And so what we see is that, well, but now we're getting to our consciousness standard again, and let's look at maybe one of his wives. And here's a very interesting article on the internet on loving Bertrand Russell and his wife who loved him dearly, but how did she feel, his first wife, how did she feel when he cheated on her, when he left her? How was that for her conscious sense of wellbeing? Well, you might say, well, maybe if she would meditate more, she could unhitch herself from her ego and she could have a more open standard with respect to sexuality, and she wouldn't have been attached to Bertrand Russell, but if we go back to a video I made a little while ago, it's really funny because religious people, at least according to some of these studies, seem to enjoy sex more, and religious people seem to feel that they're special with respect to sex. And so if we're gonna look for a like freezing water type of natural law that begins to govern sexuality, I don't know that we're very close to finding one. Consciousness in relationships, in many cases, wellbeing or good consciousness is notoriously difficult when there are two consciousnesses in conflict. Now, we ought to satisfy both if we can. I think most of us would agree on that, generally speaking, but is that really possible? I mean, just have, just think about any relationships you have with people. Conscious wellbeing is notoriously subjective. It's in fact the definition of subjectivity, and so you've got first world problems. You know, if I'm frustrated because I just can't get the kind of financing on my Mercedes Benz, and I might be forced to buy a Saab, and this feels existentially for me as something which might drive me to despair, how am I going to weigh this against someone in a North Korean prison camp who's being tortured? Are both suffering? Pain is notoriously subjective and difficult to quantify. In fact, one of the schools with the highest suicide rates a few years ago was in San Jose, California. This is one of the wealthiest, most prosperous, elitist, highest in anyone's hierarchy areas of the country, and you'd think it'd be the poor kids of Flint, Michigan that are drinking lead tainted water who would be offing themselves, or poor Haitians in a batte in the Dominican Republic like I used to work with, not the children of San Jose and Palo Alto, California, but this is consciousness. All tyranny begins with someone trying to satisfy the demands of their consciousness. Do you have a relationship with a controlling person? What is their controlling instinct coming from? You know, if you look at what Jordan Peterson has done in his life, he's a clinical, he used to be a clinical psychologist, and every time people say, what's the justification for your beliefs? He says, I'm a clinical psychologist. Well, what does that mean? It means he sits in rooms and he listens to, well, he's in Canada, so maybe more people have insurance and have better access to psychiatric care than we have here in America. I would dare bet that's the case. He listens to people talk about their pain all the time, and of course, he's got ideas in his own mind about, I think, your sense of your judgment upon your pain is justifiable or not. The reason Jordan Peterson keeps going down to pain as kind of a starting place, and that way he's got something similar to Sam Harris, is that pain is undeniable, but pain is also notoriously difficult to quantify according to consciousness. In fact, I would say it's impossible to quantify now in terms of consciousness. I have my pain, you have your pain. You might say, well, give it a number. I give my pain a seven. Well, I give my pain an eight. Who's going to judge? Is there any objective criteria? This is where, in a sense, Thomas Nagel's conversation about you have to bring the mind back in, because if you don't bring the mind back in, you cannot really do morality in a naturalist system. Why? You need the mind, because you're trying to evaluate between two minds, between two consciousnesses, and again, Sam Harris says, this is the realm by which we know well-being. This is the standard, and I look at this and I think this doesn't work. What is in the consciousness of Kim Jong-un in North Korea? He has desires, he has consciousness, and if the consciousness of the how many millions of people in North Korea have to suffer for the welfare of his consciousness, well, you might say, well, we're going to count them in terms of people. Each person has one consciousness. Oh, but okay, you have a fight with you and your spouse, or you and your parent, or you and your child. Who wins? You cannot measure consciousness. In fact, and now the psychedelics get interesting, okay, take a pill and disconnect me from my consciousness. Does that help make these kinds of decisions between people? And again, according to Sam Harris, people who are hosting this consciousness, the consciousness is dependent upon their mental organs. Now, most morality, in fact, has to do with competing claims of conscious beings. Remember, C.S. Lewis in Miracles, reason colonizes nature. And so what we have in terms of consciousness and power is that we're always colonizing nature, and because we are at least part of nature, we are colonizing each other. And the consciousness of Kim Jong-un is colonizing the consciousnesses of the people of North Korea. I would argue that the consciousness of Donald Trump has gone a long way to colonizing the terrorized consciousnesses of blue church America. This is what's happening in our country. Now, might we arrive at a water-freezing rule on sex, marriage, and divorce? Well, marriage should be agreed to by both parties. Okay, can there be three parties? I see no reason why there can't be in nature. And so all of these bigamy laws in the United States seem to be religiously based, and perhaps they're the next frontier to overturn. Oh no, we can go down and, oh, now we're gonna talk about monogamy. Well, how about sex outside of marriage? Well, how clear does consent have to be? Well, if alcohol is involved, does that impact it? If power differentials are involved, does that impact it? If it's a young starlet and there's, uh-oh, I better get my right Weinstein, because I've been talking about the other two, not related to those two. If there's a big Hollywood producer and the young starlet says, wow, I have a chance to meet this Hollywood producer, and he was so nice and he was so kind and he invited me back to my apartment, or invited me back to his apartment, even though he's married, and I very quickly got the idea that if I didn't play along with him, I wasn't going to have a desired career. And if I did play along with him, maybe he could accelerate my career. All right, so I gave in. Is that consent? At what standard of consent? Well, now again, we're back to the standard of consciousness. How do you adjudicate this conscious experience we call consent? Now, read how many brain books written in the last 15 years about whether or not there is consent. And then there's Sam Harris saying, we don't have free will. If we don't have free will, we can't give consent. And this entire basis for the Me Too movement just evaporates in a cloud of different yammering consciousnesses. Marriage can end if one person wants out. What if the other doesn't? What if Bertrand Russell's wife still very much loves him? Some of the descriptions of her was puritanical, in other words, and she seemed to be devoted to him, her whole life long while he's going out and doing all this other stuff. Is that fair? Is there harm? Both people want out. Okay, well, that seems fine. But what about the circle of others around them? What if there are children? Do we give the children a voice and whether or not their parents can divorce? Do we give friends a voice and whether or not their friends can divorce? Do we give the community a voice and whether or not people divorce? Are we going to adjudicate this in terms of consciousness? Have you ever had a fight with your spouse? Have you ever in one moment thought, boy, if I never see her again, I'll be as happy as can be? You've never had that conscious thought in a moment when that seemed to be the thought you could never doubt and then something happens called making up. And then you have whole other course of hormones going through your body and you think, oh, how could we have ever fought? And the next day you fight again and then you make up again. You don't know any couples like this? That's not your relationship. This isn't your experience. Oh, but I'm going to have the mental differentiation so that when I'm really angry with my spouse, I can, you can what, have self-control? What on earth does that mean? How do you work with this with respect to consciousness? I have no idea. I have some ideas. But to do this publicly between people, this is in fact almost all of what our relationship dramas are about. Now, where's your water freezing rule on any of this? And in fact, that's to a certain degree the hope behind this. Because the implicit promise of a moral and objective scientific moral universe is actually control. Because if we can predict it, if we can intervene, if we can choose outcomes, then utopia, right? Heaven on earth, we get what we want. Oh, but are we really so sure we know what we want? And will my conscious self an hour from now want what my conscious self wants now? I've been trying to eat better. I'm at that certain age. And weight comes on a little bit easy. But so I learn what I don't buy doesn't come into the house, doesn't go over my lips. And I was at the supermarket. And my wife said, what's Father's Day tomorrow? Bring home a little something special for yourself. So what did I buy? Ice cream, Klondike bars. Put them in the freezer. OK, all the kids are home for the summer. These will go fast. Yeah, I go to the freezer last night. It's like, should I eat one of these? Here it is. Where is consciousness now? Is consciousness the standard for this? Is my volitional capacity within consciousness? How should I, in fact, evaluate this? Now, you might say, yeah, these are really hard problems. These are the problems that religions have been majoring and talking about and working through for thousands of years. Because this is, in many ways, what life is made of. Where would our rationalist law be institutionalized? Democratic government? Do we vote on morality? Well, you know, same-sex marriage. Same-sex marriage was unthinkable for the vast majority of American history. Now, for over 50% of the country, prohibiting same-sex marriage is unthinkable. Wow, that's a lot of consciousnesses being changed pretty quickly. How can we figure out whether or not same-sex marriage is moral? Well, in a democratic society, we can decide whether or not it's legal by elected officials telling us right or wrong. Same thing with polygamy. Same thing with bigamy. Same thing with statutory rape numbers. According to all of our brain science, perhaps we should say no one should be allowed to have consent over the use of their sexual organs before, let's say, age 25. How would that work? 18? 25? How about 16? How about 14? When I lived in the Dominican Republic, I lived initially in a guest house that the mission ran. And there was a woman who lived in the guest house. And she was a national. And she basically took care of the guest house and kept it clean. And in that country, you almost always needed to have someone present there. And so actually, she lived there with her daughter and her grandson. And I remember talking to her. Her name was Marta. Talking to Marta, I was just learning Spanish. And Marta, tell me a little bit about yourself. I got married at age 10. Hmm. Was that religion that got her married at age 10? Now, I think you can make a really rational case. That 10 is too young to be married. But what is marriage? What is marriage in terms of a water-freezing rule? And who is going to institutionalize it? So we don't vote on rules of water-freezing. We've now decided that water will now freeze at 40 degrees Fahrenheit. I know you Canadians have a different scale, zero or 32, of course. We have decided that water will freeze at 40 degrees. Wow, that would be ridiculous. And Sam Harris would call foul. But isn't that, in a sense, what we're doing? Government of the really smart. OK, we need the elite. We need the truly smart. We need the Bertrand Russells and the Sam Harrises deciding what's right and wrong and making good laws. We need the philosopher kings of Plato and Socrates. Well, must they be virtuous too? Must they follow the laws that they make? Must they only make laws that they themselves can follow? This is part of the hypocrisy standard. And churches, as a pastor, I have this all the time. The Bible turns my preaching makes me into a hypocrite, a lying pastor, regularly. Why? Because I preach things I can't do. Love your enemies. Do I ever get angry at my enemies? Do I ever do things against my enemies? Do I ever get angry at my wife? Love one another as I have loved you. Better, greater love has no one than to lay down his life for his brother. I haven't given my life for anyone yet. I'm still here. Well, ought our philosopher kings, our elites who are giving us laws, are they too, in fact, to obey all the laws? Don't we say that no one is above the law? Must they be virtuous too? Must they be able to keep the rationalist laws? Shouldn't all of the rationalist laws be able to be kept by all of us? Isn't that the kind of law we want? If we're going to have laws, don't we want to keep them? How about one world government? It wouldn't make any sense to have water doesn't freeze in Canada at a different temperature than it does in the United States. Shouldn't there be one world government over all of us? And the rules of water freezing doesn't differ by culture. If our laws and our rules and our morality are going to be rational, they should be as rational as water freezing. OK? Where would these be institutionalized? Well, certainly, we would want to avoid the dreaded dogma, what Sam Harris talks about. Religious rules that can't change. Well, might we get them right the first time? No, I don't think we would. Then we'll have to change. Well, won't this quickly become dogma? Because do we change the rules by which water freezes? In 1980, was same-sex marriage immoral? And in 2018, is it now moral? Is there an objective standard for something like that? How about divorce? How about remarriage? Why is Rastu thought taking on Pope Francis with these issues? What's going on? Oh, I thought things didn't change. Well, I keep hearing from De La Honte and Sam Harris, things don't change. Well, the Roman Catholics have one rule, and the Orthodox have another rule. And how many Protestant factions have other rules? Won't applications of these laws and the punishment or correction or rehabilitation or retraining or recertification connected to them be equally universal? In other words, well, do this, get this. I mean, because again, we're talking about the laws governing water freezing. Well, religious, now, it's easy to come back and say, hey, religious dogmas are no better. Fair point. Religious people violate their rules. And let me offer someone up. I've got better examples of religious people going bad than many of you who don't know religion at all, because I live in the middle of it. Let's pick up John Howard Yoder. John Howard Yoder was a top-shelf Mennonite theologian in the second half of the 20th century. The politics of Jesus wrote books that were broadly embraced by people you might consider evangelical, people you might consider mainline. He taught at Goshen College. He went on to teach at Notre Dame. He was a smart, brilliant man and Christians all over the English-speaking world, looked up to him in appreciation, read his books. I read his books in the 80s and thought they were fabulous books. Well, at least Russell wasn't a hypocrite, or maybe he was. I guess we'll have to ask one of his, he'd have four or five wives. Yoder was also trying to overcome dogma. He had some really interesting ideas on how to transcend morally, godly, sexually. If you want to have fun with Christians, ask them sometime, is there sex in heaven? Peter Kreift has one of the best answers for that because he actually talks about this. Peter Kreift will say, you asked me about sex in heaven. The problem with that question is it makes me think more about sex here on earth. So John Howard Yoder, he was blazing new ground with lots of young women. And he was telling them that this isn't adultery or fornication. We're doing groundbreaking theology together. Wow. Well, today, it's not really looked at like he was doing groundbreaking theology. It's pretty much the definition of what today we call sexual harassment. And in fact, it was quite well recorded that he did a lot of it at Goshen College, and now, you know, 2015, a few years ago, say, well, he did it over there at Notre Dame, too. Well, what are we to think about his books? Was all of the theology he wrote wrong? And if you want to just type in John Howard Yoder's sexual abuse into the Google search engine, and you'll watch Christians working through this. Like I said, Christians have been working on, Christians and other religious people, have been working on these questions for thousands of years. And we've been working on these questions with a theology of the mind. And do we have everything right? Absolutely not. Religious people rejigger the rules to suit them. John Howard Yoder did. And we call this corruption, which is exactly what we call it in the non-Christian world. This is a universal human behavior, not one limited by religion. What you might consider, however, are the resources of religion to hold itself accountable? In other words, well, why do you have flexible things? And why do you have God's law? You have an archetypal immovable, and you have a human flexible subjective. Well, these things work together. Sometimes people look at fixed point and center point systems. Well, the thing that's good about having a fixed point is now you can actually do measurement and orientation. And so the church eventually looked at John Howard Yoder and said, this is wrong. Well, not everybody thought it was wrong, I'm sure. But the vast majority of the church did. And there's plenty of stuff that we're arguing about. But without a fixed point, you have difficulty finding things in relationship to it. And in all fairness to the modernists, OK, they're saying there are facts. There are fixed points. Good. I agree. Question is, how do these systems work? And can they, in fact, yield what you imagine they can yield? And for a long time, people have been saying, you really can't get an ought from an is. And this, again, is why Thomas Nagel says, you've got to bring mind back into it. Now, here's the crazy thing about Christians. Christians willingly subscribe to a God who will judge them perfectly. OK, this is archetypal. Christians willingly subscribe to laws they cannot keep. Will the rationalists do this? Or will they make new things to justify what they're doing? How are you going to decide? A philosopher king? Democracy? Put it up to a vote? How about a military strongman? Christians willingly subscribe to facing the consequences of their betrayal of their God and his law. This is part of the Christian theological system. Now, the Heideberg catechism, which is a doctrinal statement in my denomination, is structured with three words. And if you watch any of my sermons, you'll find them. Misery, deliverance, gratitude. Misery means we are natural born law breakers. This is something we accept about ourselves. Deliverance. Jesus upholds the law for us. He's a substitute for our law breaking. Now, there are more atonement theories. I'm going to use the substitutionary atonement theory for the sake of this video. Gratitude. We act to try to keep the law not out of fear of punishment, but out of love and gratitude for what God has done for us. And that then frames, according to the Heideberg catechism, the Christian life. Says, yes, there is an objective standard. And it's held by God. It's archetypal. You can't get beyond it. It transcends time and space. It's also flexible, because we have a judge that actually applies it. But we have a perfect judge. And we, in fact, will fail him. But our perfect judge has made accommodation because he knows how we are. And that accommodation is his son. And now I have a way to live in gratitude for that sacrifice that is offered. There's Christianity. Or at least Protestant Christianity. Now Sam Harris comes along and says, the problem with religion is that it's too subjective. It's fiction. It's superstition. Imagines that his world of correlation with facts is more objective. OK, I appreciate the fact he's trying to get some fixed points out there. You need something that is verifiable. But that is precisely what's the matter with his standard. There is nothing verifiable about consciousness except that I have one. Any kind of negotiating that between others, it is the definition of subjectivity. But this is the basis upon which his philosophy of life is rooted. To me, it's so easy to see why this can't work. Now can I show him why it can't work? I doubt it. But that's the nature of subjectivity, right? It binds and it's blinds, says Jonathan Haidt. But it doesn't change enough to keep up with. That's what Sam Harris says about religion. Well, what are we keeping up with again? Are we keeping up with the laws of water freezing? Does that change? So in other words, if Sam Harris were actually to accomplish his goal of founding a moral system on the laws of physics, would they be flexible? Again, we can pass a constitutional amendment that from now on, water will freeze at 40 degrees Fahrenheit instead of 32, so that as the climate changes, we need to spend less money on freezer units and ice skating rinks, all right? A vote in the United States Congress will not change when water freezes. Sam Harris says dogma. Well, water freezing is about as dogmatic as it gets. You have a problem with dogma? Talk to the water. So what do we know about water freezing? A lot. There it is. It isn't changing. Religious systems are not perfect. We've been working on them for thousands of years. Now I'm a Calvinist. I don't believe in this age. We will get them perfect. And anti-utopianism is built into my religious system. And I think that's a good thing. I will never stop sinning. I will sin until the day I die. I will never be free of my sin until I am renewed and God makes me free of my sin in whatever process he chooses. In fact, I believe that process is already working in me. And I hope that day by day, I am more and more free of the sin which binds me and blinds me. So religious systems are not perfect. Religious systems are both more objective in principle than water freezing, OK? Because all of these laws of physics that De La Honte wants to point to, well, maybe you can see they're starting in the Big Bang. Well, my God goes before that. My God is, in fact, eternal by definition, never beginning, never ending. So in fact, religious laws are more objective, but they're also more flexible because they are applied as a person. So once again, we have Thomas Nagel coming in talking about mind and matter, how the divorce between these two realms is, according to Thomas Nagel, an insurmountable problem. Well, in religious systems, as Thomas Nagel shows, they're already together. What exactly, which is exactly what I think, what you want from a system. You want something which is both more objective and more flexible. Well, let's take another look at this time, C.S. Lewis and Bertrand Russell. This from a mere Christianity study blog. People sometimes ask me about a book to read. I'll recommend Mere Christianity. C.S. Lewis's argument for moral objectivity in mere Christianity. First, an account of subjective versus objective. Something is objective just in case there can be real disagreement in which one party or the other party must be mistaken. Both sides can't be right. If I say O.J. killed Nicole and Ron, and you say he didn't, one of us is mistaken. Even if, as the defense argued at the trial, there wasn't sufficient, there wasn't evidence to settle the question beyond a reasonable doubt. The fact is that either O.J. did it or he did not. So the question of O.J.'s guilt is an objective, not a subjective matter. Something is subjective just in case there is no real disagreement and no one is really right or wrong. If I think McDonald's burgers are better than Burger King's and you like Burger King's better, we both can be right for ourselves. It's a matter of what tastes good and there is no ground for dispute. As Romans used to say, in matters of taste, there is no disputing. Bertrand Russell, fancy meeting you here. C.S. Lewis knew Bertrand Russell. At least, I don't know if he ever met him personally, but he of course read his stuff. Bertrand Russell says, The theory which I have been advocating is a form of doctrine which is called the subjectivity of values. A lot of consciousness in here. This doctrine consists in maintaining that if two men differ about values, there is not a disagreement as to any kind of truth but a difference of taste. I'm wondering how you're gonna get to morality from taste versus truth. If one man says oysters are good and another says, I think they are bad, we recognize that there is nothing to argue about. The theory in question says that all differences as to value are of this sort. Although we do not naturally think of them so when we are dealing with matters that seem to us more exalted than oysters. End of quote. This is the position that Lewis is criticizing in both mere Christianity and the abolition of man and miracles for that matter. Abolition of Man is another book by C.S. Lewis. Lewis's first argument is the argument from implied practice. People are at best inconsistent moral subjectivists. He writes, but the most remarkable thing is this. When you find a man who says he does not believe in real right and wrong, you will find the same man going back on this a moment later. He may break his promise to you but if you try breaking on him, he will be complaining it is not fair before you can say Jack Robinson. A nation may say treaties do not matter but then next minute they spoil their case by saying that the particular treaty they want to break is an unfair one. I've been hearing a lot of this lately. But if treaties do not matter, if there is no such thing as right and wrong, in other words, if there is no law of nature, what is the difference between a fair trade and an unfair one? Have they not let the cat out of the bag and shown that whatever they say, they really know the law of nature just like anyone else? End of quote. If ethics is subjective, then we should expect people to recognize that actions which they are inclined to think of as wrong are only wrong from their point of view. Now, again, let's give credit to Sam Harris and Matt Dillahunty and others. Sam Harris and Matt Dillahunty want to say there's objective right and wrong because there's objective. But they've got problems in that system too as I've been showing in many of my other videos. But invariably, people view wrongs against themselves as wrongs that are really wrong. Therefore, moral values are objective, not subjective. Some examples might be a student once wrote a paper for a professor defending moral subjectivism. He made extensive use of anthropological and sociological evidence and the paper was well-written. He put the paper in a blue folder and gave it to the professor. The professor returned it with an F and said, I do not like blue folders. The student of course protested, pointing out all the effort that went into the paper. The teacher replied, your paper argues that moral values are subjective and that they are a matter of preference. Yes, replied the student. Well, the grade is an F. I do not like blue folders. Of course the student could say, but that's not fair. But to do so, of course compromises his subjectivist principles. A fellow philosophy teacher who has an opponent, who is an opponent of abortion and relativism, was having trouble with her 14-year-old daughter. The daughter said, I think abortion is okay. That's my opinion. And if you don't think so, that's your opinion. I suggested to her, this is better philosophy than parenting, that she tell her daughter, so long as you are under my roof, you do not have a right to your own opinion on abortion. So until you change your mind, you're grounded. Of course the daughter can reply, but that's not fair. I have a right to my opinion. But to do so, once again, undermines her subjectivist principle. In a Calvin and Hobbes cartoon, Calvin was proclaiming that he didn't believe in ethics and that it's a dog-eat-dog world. That if someone is in your way, you have to push them out of the way to get ahead. And that the ends justify the means. All of a sudden, Hobbes shoves Calvin to the ground. Calvin yells, why did you do that? Hobbes replied, you were in my way. Now you're not. That the end justifies the means. By the way one defends, by the way, one way of defending objective moral values, which we have discussed earlier in the Dangerous Idea blog, is from the standpoint of rights. If we have rights, that means that there's objectively binding moral obligation on the part of others to allow you to exercise those rights. Otherwise, the idea of rights makes no sense. If I have a right to life, that only makes sense if you have a moral obligation not to kill me, okay? Lewis's second argument is an argument from underlying moral consensus. If morality were a subjective matter, we would expect to find sizable differences in fundamental principles amongst moral codes. If you look at C.S. Lewis's there's an appendix in C.S. Lewis's The Abolition of Man, which goes through these moral codes. And De La Honte, as he said there, says, see, there's objectivity in morality. Okay, are these tied to the laws of physics? Well, I'd like to see it. If morality were a subjective matter, we would expect to find sizable differences in fundamental principles among moral codes. But there is in general agreement concerning fundamental principles amongst moral codes. And these tend to be pretty dogmatic. Therefore, morality is objective rather than subjective. Yes, there are differences in moral codes. However, some differences in moral codes can be explained in terms of differences about facts. People don't burn witches today, Lewis's example, not because using Satan's supernatural powers wouldn't offer serious offense against humanity to warrant severe punishment, but because we no longer believe people actually have or use such powers. Consider also the differences concerning human sacrifice. The ancient Aztecs thought it was right to sacrifice humans. We do not. However, ancient Aztecs and ourselves both believe that we have a prima facie obligation not to kill people. The Aztecs, however, believed that there were gods who had the right to demand human sacrifices. And when they were demanded, the duty not to kill is overridden by the moral requirements to do with the God's command. The Abrahamic tradition, going back to, well, Abraham, maintains that the true God does not make those sort of demands. Other differences can be explained in terms of how widely we expand the concept of neighbor. Moral codes require that we treat our neighbor with respect, but we may limit the concept of neighbor to one's fellow tribe member or countrymen or member of one's own race, et cetera. It is Jesus' contribution. Jesus? Do we get our morality from him? Did Jesus sneak into our stuff? I got some quotes in three or four unfinished video PowerPoints about that too. It is Jesus' contribution in the parable of the Good Samaritan to our moral understanding that we ought to assess the question, who is my neighbor from the bottom of a ditch? I only ask the readers to think that a totally different morality would mean. Think of a country where people are admired for running away in battle, and where a man felt proud of double-crossing all the people who had been kindest to him. You might as well imagine a country in where two and two make five. Men have differed in regards to people who ought to be unselfish to, whether it is only your family or your fellow countrymen or everyone, but they have always agreed that you ought not, but that you ought not to put yourself first. Selfishness has never been admired. Men have differed as to whether you should have one wife or four, but they have always agreed that you must not simply have any woman you'd like. Now, you can talk about that. The third argument for moral objectivity is from the argument of reformers. There have been reformers in the history of the human race whom we believe have improved our understanding of what is right and wrong. An example from the author of this would be Rosa Parks. Parks challenged the principle that African-American people should acquiesce in being treated as inferiors and challenged the Birmingham bus system's policy of requiring African-American riders to give up their seats. Because of her stand and that of Martin Luther King Jr. and other leaders of the civil rights movement, laws were changed in such a way as to require equal treatment under the law. If you think that laws of the state of Alabama are more just today than they were when Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat, then you are applying an objective standard of justice. If on the other hand, you maintain that morals are social conventions, then Rosa's actions would have been considered wrong because they have contravened the social convention of the day. So the argument is if moral values are subjective, then moral codes cannot improve since there is no objective standard by which to judge one code better than another. But the work of people like Martin Luther King Jr. and Rosa Parks shows that moral codes can be made more just, therefore moral values are objective rather than subjective. So again, I'd love to see Sam Harris do some work on this. We've been waiting a long time for reason morality. Sam, others should bring forth their plan. It should be as obvious as the water, it should be as obvious as the laws of water freezing, I would hope, maybe they can't accomplish that. Okay, I understand that it's hard. It should work as consistently. And that is some of what's motivating us to do it. And we'll certainly have to do some genetic perfecting to make the system work, right? If that's possible to us, maybe we can do it. Well, part of the argument with this is when Sam Harris or Dillahunty sits down with Peterson, Sam Harris and Dillahunty might say, we need to tweak our laws, but we all know what's right and wrong. And we don't do it on the basis of constructing moral arguments. Yeah, why? Now let's imagine a rationalist in, let's say Epicurus, because in some ways, Sam Harris and Epicurus have a lot in common. If we were to see Sam Harris and we were to see Epicurus, and we would ask each of them to morally critique the other's life, would they have more in common or separate? I would argue that Epicurus would see some things in Sam Harris that he would not recognize. And a good number of those things would have come into Sam Harris' assumed world because of one man who lived between 4 BC and 30 AD, and because he told stories like the Good Samaritan, and because humanism, which I don't think Epicurus would have much of a handle on, because humanism is something that's dominating Sam Harris' thought and life. Now, I don't know much about Sam Harris' personal life. He says in the interviews that he's married and has two daughters. My hope for Sam Harris would be that he would treat his wife better than Bertrand Russell treated any of his wives, and that Sam Harris would treat his daughters better than Bertrand Russell treated his son. And you can just Google Bertrand Russell's son, and they're falling out and see some of that. And actually, just watching Sam Harris, I have no reason to doubt that he wouldn't, partly because my watchers watching Sam Harris generally look at him and say, he looks like a trustworthy person. He looks like the kind of guy you can sit down and have a conversation with. He looks like a guy who'd be fine to live next door to, and to say, Sam, I'm going on vacation here, the keys to the house. Could you take the mail in now and then and throw it on the dining room table for me? Sam would say, sure, no problem. I'd say, Sam, keep the keys, and if ever I get locked out, I'll just come to your house and pick them up. And I'm sure his wife is a lovely human being, and his daughters are wonderful human beings too. And I think we can thank Jesus for at least part of that. The reason I think that is because when I listen to Sam Harris, I think about Brave New World, because Brave New World, if you've never read it, listen to the audiobook. As Peter Kreefe says, Brave New World is a prophecy. The technology is different, but the story is the same, because Sam Harris's worldview, it's not his religion, he says, because none of that. Well, Sam Harris's worldview is in that book, and it's played out beautifully. So tell me again about truth and stories. There's an hour and 20 minutes. So this wasn't gonna be a short one. I'm still struggling to try and get everything together. Someone tweeted at me, let's see if I can pull it up. Someone tweeted at me that there's, I retweeted it on mine. Jordan Peterson tweeted on his, if you want to contribute questions to have Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson talk about, there's a link you can go to to offer questions, and I don't know if it's a Reddit thing where you can upvote and downvote. Also, I've been, someone mentioned in the comment stream, you should start your own Facebook page for conversations about your video. I think Reddit does that better, but I don't know a lot about Reddit. So I'm thinking about that. I don't, you know, I'm, again, I'm a small, small fish. Got 7,000 subscribers. I went out of my mind when I had 2,000. I got 7,000. I know how, I know what it's like to have 7,000 now, and you know, again, if I've missed your email, I'm sorry, sometimes emails, it's not like I get one or two a day. Some days I will only get one or two, and another day I'll get seven or eight, and that'll be a busy day, and so then I'll try and go back and find them, and sometimes I miss some of your messages and emails and can't correspond personally, and so I'm sorry about that. But your, I try to read as many as I can. I try to respond to as many as I can, and those of you sending me books and articles and videos, I try to watch some of these. I'll just admit to the fact that I've got my own watchers and interest things, and that which strikes me as interesting or relevant, I'll tend to prioritize, and so on and so forth, and obviously this in the context of I'm a pastor and I'm a father and all of those things going on. So if I somehow don't get to what you sent me, please don't take it personally because it isn't meant to be personal. And this is why we have these crazy games that you can understand. Jordan Peterson, his email got broken very quickly, and Twitter is broken. You can't message him easily, and once you get up a status, just the number of people that want your attention just grows. And so there it is. So again, this is a longish video. I hope to do more on this. Let me know what you think of it. Maybe it was a good video, maybe it wasn't.