https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=o9dX0hRliTA

 Hi, this is Paul. After I put out my Jordan Peterson as a Christian in Soren Kierkegaard video, which was on the heels of the Prager interview, Jordan Peterson put out his own video of the address he gave in Sydney. Now I haven't had a chance to really do a deep dive into that. I thought that video was really good and important for a whole lot of reasons, even beyond the question of how he imagines or what he imagines the word believe means, which again is rather incredible given the fact that, you know, his maps of meaning, the subtitle of maps of meaning is the architecture of belief. So belief is very central to this entire conversation. Now Glenn Scribner, who I did a conversation with about a year ago, I thought did a really good video on this. And so I want to take a little bit of it because I very much agree with what he says in terms of his conclusions about this video that Peterson made. So he plays a little bit of Peterson's video and then he has a little bit of commentary. Do you believe in God? Well, that's part of the answer actually, part of the question actually that we cannot escape from. Well, so that's part of the question. Do you believe in God? Well, that's part of the answer actually. And you know, it's no bleak answer. But the first thing I'm trying to say is try controlling yourself. Try acting as if you're the fundamental source of your own values independent of any, what would you call it, transcendent ethical structure to see if you can do that. But try it for a week, try it for a month. I've never met anybody that could do it. Not even for a moment. So what are human beings like? On the one hand, we are not completely disparate voices. We're not just a jumble of environmental factors with no unity. We do seem to be unified persons, but at the same time, we are not masters in our own houses. And that's a direct quote from the whole video. And if you haven't watched Peterson's whole video, you should watch it. I thought it was really, really excellent. But this point that he makes that we're not masters in our own houses, this is a fundamental point. We are persons ruled by powers, powers that are beyond us. We don't own ourselves, therefore we cannot give ourselves life and personhood and value. We must reckon with a transcendent ethical structure above us. That structure is a given. It must be received. We must live by faith. So for a video entitled, Who Would Dare Say He Believes, I've never heard Peterson be so clear that we must believe. I thought the same thing when I watched that video. And he is basically saying, everyone must believe. He essentially dares us not to believe. See, the question is never whether we believe. It's only what we believe in. And with the question of human dignity, Peterson believes what the Bible sets out on page one, that we are made in God's image and he doesn't give any other potential source for that belief other than the Bible. It's either come as a pure miracle out of nowhere, or it's come from the Bible. Or maybe it's come from the miracle that is the Bible. Whatever. Jordan Peterson has an a priori commitment to something the Bible says about us. What do you call that? I call that a faith position. But it's a faith that leads to good moral outcomes. It leads to treating people well. It's the precondition for our ethical struggles, for taking each other seriously and taking life seriously. Faith leads to obedience. Jordan Peterson spends a massive chunk of this video telling us that we must believe and that that faith leads to obedience. But then he reacts against that. Later in the video, he'll say, who has the temerity to believe in God? And he does that whole thing. Why does he do that? Why does he switch gears in the second half of the video? Well, two reasons, I think. One is good. One is bad. The good reason is the one I've already covered. He's speaking out against hypocrisy in the style of a great prophet of the Old Testament or of James in the New Testament. He is railing against those who say they believe, but it doesn't make a blind bit of difference to their lives. That is the good reason that Peterson is opposing hypocrisy, right? But then there's a there's a bad reason that the video takes the turn that it does. Why does he change his tune in the second half of this video? The bad reason is that he changes his definitions in the second half of the video. Suddenly, he changes his definition of faith and he changes his definition of God. In the second half of the video, faith becomes virtually equivalent to obedience. And suddenly it's meant to produce instant moral perfection. Like, where does that come from? I agree. Where does that come from? Professor Peterson, where does that come from? That's not the kind of faith that he was talking about in the first half of his own video. It's not the kind of faith that he speaks about in any of his other lectures and interviews. Suddenly, faith means instant and perfect obedience. Look, I understand that you don't know what you believe until you act it out. That's one claim. But to say that faith is obedience, that is demonstrably false. I mean, if he titled this video, Who Dares to Say That He Perfectly Obeys God, then we'd all understand. And we'd all say, yeah, no one, no one, no one is able to perfectly obey God. But he calls this video, Who Dares to Say He Believes in God. But then he speaks of belief as though it's exactly equivalent to obey, and it's not. And even within this same video, Peterson gives a much healthier definition of faith. In the first half of the video, faith is the transcendent value structure that you commit yourself to as a precondition of action. Well, Professor Peterson, why not use that definition of faith consistently? That's one of the definitional problems in the second half of the video. And then the other definitional problem is that Peterson switches his definition of God. In the first half of the video, God is the giver of a moral standing, the image of God. In the first half of the video, God is an idea that might assuage guilt. Now in the second half of the video, God is purely a demander of a moral standard. And he is the cause of guilt. I don't know if that's so much a definition of God, but these are obviously aspects of God, sort of like my God number one and God number two. But watch the whole video. It's a good video. He goes through it. You know, this reminded me of Peter Boghossian in his manual for creating atheists, where he has this definition of faith. Faith is, it does so by offering two definitions of faith. Belief without evidence. That's how Peter Boghossian defines faith. And then pretending to know things you don't know. And so, well, so then what really is belief? And as I mentioned in a previous video, on Unbelievable, you can find a debate between Peter Boghossian and Tim McGrew. And Tim McGrew really takes Boghossian to the woodshed in many ways. Faith is believing in something. Here's, I think, a better definition. Faith, believing, faith or believing is something or someone that you extend. So to have faith in someone or to have faith in something or to believe in someone or to believe in something is extending trust in. Boy, what a terrible sentence I wrote. Extending trust through action, often on the basis of partial evidence. And you see this in your parents. You trust in your mother. Now, do you know everything about your mother? When you're an infant, do you know that your mother is trustworthy? You have a tiny little bit of evidence. And as you grow older, you'll learn the ways that your mother is and isn't trustworthy in the ways that you want her to be. Trust in an airplane. You board an airplane. And you simply have faith at the airline and the pilot and the government regulations. You didn't go out there and kick the tires of the plane. Actually, the pilot goes over and gives a cursory inspection of the plane. But quite obviously, the pilot cannot inspect everything in the plane. You have faith in that pilot. You believe in that pilot. And as Glenn said, he understands how this word believe works. He uses it in his book. And I don't really know. It's just a strange quirk of personality for him. Why he gets why he changes the definition of believe when he gets into this question of believing in God. Now, as he says in the very same video, to be a human being is to have all kinds of incongruities within yourself. And that's actually one of my favorite parts of this video, because we are all hopelessly conflicted internally. We say one thing and do another. We say we believe in this and then we act this way. This is what it means to be a human being. We say we love our children and then we ignore them. We say we love our spouses and then we cheat on them. We say we love our God and then we act like absolute villains. This is the human condition. And people have known this for everything for a very long time. But to say you believe in something, you believe in your mother, you believe in the airplane that you're going to ride on, you believe in the airline, you believe in the bridge that you drive over. You never get out and inspect it. You just hope that someone is inspecting it. Tim McGrew makes the point that you believe in the guy who folded your parachute when you jump out of the plane. And so right away you can see again Peterson's insistence that belief be connected with action, because that's very much a part of the definition of the word. You believe in an institution. In fact, a lot of Peterson's success is because he's declared that some of these institutions that we have believed in have become untrustworthy. So that's usually how we use the word believe. And if you go back over Peterson's videos, you'll find him using that definition of belief again and again and again. And I believe, I'm completely with Glenn that why he swaps and makes it, why he does this thing with the question believe in God, well, that's sort of beyond us. It's fascinating and fun to watch, which is part of the reason we love Peterson, but it's quirky. But now I want to dig a little deeper into some of this stuff, because actually there's a lot in this video which is really good. Now, I'm going to play for you here the conclusion of the video where he comes to his grand statement, where in a sense, it's sort of like C-16, he's not going to use those pronouns. This is just how he talks. He speaks in hyperbole. And on later reflection, well, if I really understood why they wanted to use a different pronoun and it was between a person and then I'd do it. But I'm not going to use those pronouns and they can't make me do it. And if they send me to jail, I'll go on a hunger strike. That's just Peterson. That's why he's so much fun to watch. But look at his argument here. And what's interesting is that part of what's beneath the biblical lectures and beneath the changes that he has made is he is making an argument that the Bible is true and he believes it. He might not say I believe in God, but he believes the Bible and we see that by his actions. He acts as if it's true. His argument is that the Bible is true because as a basis for society, it has been proven to provide truth and wisdom, which brought us success. So in other words, he might not be able to say that the Bible is fully true in a way that a religious person or certain kinds of religious people might say. But the Bible is true enough. It's true enough for us to go back to and read those stories and use it as a source of wisdom to gain guides for action. And what he does in his biblical series is he takes pieces of the Bible. He uses them as wisdom and Glenn makes that point well in his video, too. He uses them as wisdom in order for a guide to life. Now, that's basically the definition of the word believe. You believe that the Bible is true enough and good enough to use as a basis for guiding your actions. And so here he concludes his talk. That's Nietzsche. Perhaps an extreme statement, but one worth giving some consideration. But Peterson loves extreme statements. It's like, well, then you look at what do you called upon? Let's say if you're going to proclaim yourself as a believer, you know, and I thought about this a lot as I've gone through the Old Testament. I did a bunch of lectures last year. So what do you called upon? Now, you're called upon initially to act out the spark of divinity that's within you by confronting potential with the logos that's within you, which means to take the opportunities that are in front of you, the potential future, and to transform it into the present in the best possible way using truth and courage and careful articulation as your as your as your as your as your guide. That's his gospel right there. And he says in various different ways, but that's one of the clearest articulations of it. And it's a way of believing in the Bible in the way he does as a source of wisdom. Now, spark of divinity actually comes from George Fox in the 17th century. I don't know if it's used before then by anyone. I'd love to know exactly what he means by divinity, especially because he's so funny about this believe in God thing. But he's he's got no problem about talking about divinity. Maybe it just means that as the top of the hierarchy, which is the bad definition. But the spark of divinity and then truth and wisdom and logos and as Glenn says, I mean, he regularly interprets the Old Testament via the New Testament, one book interpreting itself, which is a very Christian approach to it. And he you know, this is this is how he works through these works through these issues. So that's the first thing you're called on to do. That's a major deal there. That's a tough one. And then the second is to make the proper sacrifices. That's the Cain and Abel story is like you want something you genuinely want it. You want to set the world straight. Now, again, pay attention to the way he uses the Bible. He uses the Bible as wisdom. So the story of Cain and Abel is not a story about two brothers towards the beginning of humanity. It's an example of wisdom and it teaches us lessons. This is this is in a sense his his hermeneutic and and these wisdoms are this this wisdom is in a sense for for us and it's for time immemorial and it's up to us to apply it. Then you let go of what's necessary and you pursue you let go of what isn't necessary, no matter what it is, no matter what it is. And then you pursue what's necessary. And then maybe you sacrifice your children to God. That that was the story. And now if I the reason I jumped I jumped Dr. Jim a little bit ahead on my releasing conversations, partly because it's interesting. Peter's definition, Peterson's definition here of what you know the Abraham and Isaac story. Well, this is a lesson in parenting. And it's well, if you listen to my conversation with Dr. Jim, where we talked a lot about the the Abraham and Isaac story. Well, there are lessons for parenting in there. But is that is that is that really what that story is about? That's one of the next stories that comes up, of course. And you think, well, that's pretty damn barbaric. And the way the story is laid out, of course it is. But that isn't exactly what it means. It means that what you try to do when you raise children is that you try to do everything you can to impress upon them by imitation. It's kind of makes Abraham bringing Isaac up the mountain as a lesson for Isaac. And many people have wondered, well, what kind of a lesson would Isaac learn about Abraham by his father dragging him up this mountain in a three day journey and hoisting a knife over him? It's kind of a hard lesson for a kid. And by instruction and by love and by encouragement that they are crucial beings in the world whose ethical decisions play an important role in shaping the structure of reality itself. And I don't know Isaac would get that lesson from Abraham through that through that series of actions. They have the moral responsibility to do that. And you get your arc in order. That's your family, let's say, so that when the storms come, you can stay above water for the 40 days of flooding. And in our tradition, in my theological tradition, this type of association wisdom was often called exemplarish. So Noah is an example of set your life in order. Abraham is an example of how to teach your children about God. Cain and Abel is an example about how to make sacrifices, how to make proper sacrifices. And again, I'm not saying that you can't apply these stories in these ways. Preachers have been doing this all along. You can find church fathers doing it. You can find reformers doing it. But that style of preaching and that style of working with the Bible, it's basically a wisdom tradition. It's saying, well, here the Bible has wisdom to offer. And if you look at the Sam Harris, Bret Weinstein, Vancouver One conversation, that's a deep part of this is this metaphorical truth that Bret Weinstein was talking about. How do we know whether the wisdom is applicable to us and so on and so forth? And you're capable of leading your people through the desert when the desert makes itself manifest. And you can escape from tyranny properly because you're wise enough to see it. So again, the story of Moses is maybe you deal apply it. Use Moses thinking about whether or not you should get a new job. And it's this it's this type of approach to the Bible. And you take the full burden of being on yourself, all the suffering that's that's part and parcel of that. You accept that voluntarily, let's say, and you do everything you can to confront the malevolence that's part of you and that's part of the state and that's part of the world. And you you you make a garden around you. That's the paradise. So then again, notice in all of these stories and this is this is natural to a wisdom type approach to the Bible. In all of these stories, you are at the center of the story. Now, the difficulty with that mode of interpretation is that I think a better reading of the Bible shows that in all of these stories, God is at the center of the story. God is the one who calls Abraham. God is the one who stops Abraham. He both calls him to go and sacrifice Isaac and he stops him from sacrificing Isaac. God is the one who calls Noah to build an ark. And then God shuts the door. God is the one who creates the Garden of Eden. The Bible is not so much a story, a book about how we are to live moral lives and and do the right thing and rescue ourselves. The Bible is really a story about how God is this seeker of us who comes to rescue us. And that then locates this question of belief in terms of, well, well, where are we and what is belief and what is the Bible? Walled garden. It's a walled well watered place. So the forces of nature and society exist together in harmony and you place your family in that so that they can live properly and you treat your enemy as if he's yourself. And the same with your brother. And well, then you can say, then maybe you can say, maybe then you have the right to say that you believe in God. Otherwise, maybe you should think twice about it because, you know, there's a line in the New Testament that Christ. What's you know, what's interesting to me, I've been reading this book, Crazy for God by Frank Schaeffer, and I have so been enjoying this book. And I know some of you out there, there's a lot of hate for Frank Schaeffer out there. There's a lot of people believe that Frank Schaeffer betrayed the loving memory of Francis and Edith Schaeffer. And I grew up, as I mentioned to Bern, you know, I grew up thinking about it, you know, more and more. I remember not only were Francis Schaeffer's books around my house, Edith Schaeffer's books around were around my house. My mother was reading Edith Schaeffer's books. And there might have in fact been more books by Edith Schaeffer than Frank Schaeffer around the house. And so this is this is one of the things that has interested me and through this whole Jordan Peterson thing is how much echo there has been of Francis Schaeffer and his ministry in Jordan Peterson, even though Francis Schaeffer and Jordan Peterson are very different people coming from temperamentally. There might be some similarities, but but coming from very different places. And then I read this this part of Frank Schaeffer's book describing his father. Dad said that middle class values bereft of their Christian foundation were empty. He sided with the kids against their uptight parents. Dad warned that once the memory of the truths upon which middle class Western norms were built, in other words, biblical Christianity had been forgotten within a generation, those values would be swept away. Then people will want any then people will want order at any price. You take that paragraph. That's Jordan Peterson's message right there. It's it's nearly identical. And so now I can very much see the resonance between Jordan Peterson and Francis Schaeffer's message, even though Francis Schaeffer was was coming out of a much more fundamentalistic. Background and and to get the nuance on Francis Schaeffer via Frank. And now, of course, this is this is Francis Schaeffer via Frank and you can you have Francis Schaeffer via all kinds of people on the Internet because I watched a nice hagiography, a nice, you know, embellished story of Libri and all of that. There's a day of discovery has a three part video on Libri and Francis and Edith Schaeffer. And it's you know, it's it's all the it's all the propaganda you would ever want. Libri is now on the radar screen for a whole generation of backpacking Bohemian travelers on their way to and from ashrams in India, London's trendy Carnaby Street or or or San Francisco's hate Ashbury. That's answer to the rebellion of the happening generation was that the hippie analysis of our plastic culture was correct, but that their solution free love and drugs would not work. Again, there's a lot of Jordan Peterson in this mankind had a God given moral character. If you do not obey God's law, you are flying in the face of reality because the universe is what is no matter what we say it is. And you can hear some Sam Harris echoed in that too, in that in that approach to the to the world. Dad's answer was not to return to the middle class ways, but to accept the truth of the Bible and then encourage artists, poets, rebels to rebel with a purpose to restore truth to its rightful place and to redeem all creation through putting Christ back at the center of their lives. Well, that's Calvin College. That's my upbringing. That's that's Dutch Calvinism. That's that's a Kiperian world and life view from Abraham Kuyper. While they did this, there was no need to conform to petty bourgeois rules. You could keep your hair long and your music hip and smoke a little pot. And it was no better or worse than the martini your uptight parents drank every night. This is this is the message of the 60s in many ways of of this of this in a sense Christian counterculture that that Lebrie was so much a part of rock and roll was fine. It often told the truth about the human condition far, far better than all those American plastic preachers did. You know, there's again looking at this. My upbringing was similar. It came up in a similar moment to that of of Francis of Frank Schaeffer. Northside Chapel was a place where where black folks and white folks and it was often often young people who had this vision. They were college students. They were coming out of college and they would come down into the into the ghetto in Patterson, New Jersey, where all these poor black folks were struggling. And they would lay down their lives for this vision of the kingdom that included black folks and white folks and rich folks and poor folks. And I grew up in this moment and my parents had less status and were more stable than Francis and Edith Schaeffer. That's that's for sure. And my upbringing wasn't in the middle of this this crazy, not terribly well organized communal experience where where Francis Schaeffer was a 15 year old just really trying to, you know, bed whatever 20 20 year old or 18 year old girl he could lay his hands on. I mean, that's what the book is about. I mean, that wasn't my experience. I'm about 10 years younger than than Frank Schaeffer. And my experience was quite a bit more orderly. It was church camp outs and it was sing-alongs with guitars and and all of these kinds of things. It's so funny because just as I'm making this slide, I get a knock on the door from the woman who runs the child care center and there's a homeless lady back here who's been in her office and has her stuff. And I get back there and there's a whole there's a homeless encampment that was so well camouflaged I couldn't even see it and didn't even notice it. And I talked to this lady and well, this lady says her husband is the cousin of the woman who runs the day. And yeah, so, you know, similar moment, less status, more stable. I've continued to live this life. It's it's just and I think that's part of the reason I so enjoy Frank Schaeffer's book and I enjoy the honesty and and even if his his perspective on his parents and on his life and on God and of the nature of the world is his own. I get it. I get it. That was a that was a really peculiar moment. But then you have these strange contradictions and this is the this is the this is in a sense the climax of Peterson's talk here. And so what do you want? Well, you want someone to contend with. Then it's an adventure, you know, and then you have someone that you love and that you're talking about his wife respect. And that's not a bad combination for longevity of relationship. And then maybe if you have someone that you love and respect and that you can communicate with and your children also love and respect her or him. And then that's pretty good for them because they've got some parents that they could love and respect. That's a good combination. You know, it solidifies their life. And so you want to contend with them. You want a job that's challenging. I would say that pushes you beyond what you already are. And God only knows how much how hard you need to be pushed in order to go beyond where you are. But, you know, and here again, this is this is Peterson's gospel. To some degree, if you have a choice, you know, it's not that uncommon that what we'll do is choose to be pushed to the limit, especially when we're at our best. We think, well, where's the limit here? Maybe I can manage that. I'm going to push myself right to the damn limit. Then I'm going to push myself a little bit over just to see if it's possible. And if that happens, then, you know, you emerge with a sense of triumph. I'm now more than I was. Right. And maybe that's what you're here to be is to be here to be meaning mission purpose of life more than you were to push those limits. And to do that, you contend with the world. You wrestle with God. You don't casually say, I believe because who knows? No one. No one knows. Right. We're separated from the infinite by death. Right there. No one knows. Right. This is this is the modern voice. This is contemporary skepticism speaking. This is the battle that he's contending with. Ignorant. No, they say I believe because who knows? No one. No one knows. Right. We're separated from the infinite by death and ignorance. We don't know. We contend. We wrestle, you know, and in that maybe we find our destiny. At least we find our purpose. We find something that's that that justifies us to some degree. You know, if I'm awake at night wondering, I thank God, you know, like I pushed myself as far as I could in this effort, whatever the effort that I'm considering happens to be. I pushed myself. I don't have a weight on my conscience because I let something go or I failed to accomplish something. I mean, I do. There's there's sin for Peterson. Okay, right there. This abdication of responsibility, avoiding engagement with life. In some ways, that's the that's that's the root sin of of existence. If you fail to engage in this again is where you Kierkegaard is all over this and the and the existentialist. That's what that's what runs the top of the we might not. So what happens? We'll get into this a little bit. What happens is that, well, you've got the Mosaic law, but then you've got questions about the Mosaic law. And can we actually use these these ancient books for wisdom? Can they actually be a guide to us? We're we're skeptical about it. And so what the existentialists do in a sense say, OK, well, we're skeptical we're skeptical about the details, but it's the struggle. It's it's the struggle. And as Peterson says, as I as I noted in my talk with Dr. Jim Peterson notes that in terms of the the physiology of the experience of meaning the biochemical resources, it's the reaching where we experience the where we experience the the meaning. But it's not the grasp. And so when when Alex Honnold gets to the top of El Capitan after climbing free solo, it's almost a letdown. And so you're looking for the next great rock. You're looking for the next challenge. This is this is existentialism. And this is, you know, Peterson is is voicing this right here. But but but it's it's in the midst of skepticism. We how can we know? Do often have those sorts of weights. I'm talking about the rare times when I don't. It's like, well, there's something that that that's where there's some atonement and some peace as far as I'm concerned, where that contending and that wrestling has been successful. And I would say that insofar as you're deeply involved in that, like completely involved in that thoroughly involved in that, then you have the right to say that you believe in God. Existentialism. It's it's right there. If if you wrestle, it doesn't matter. And this is where so I hope that I get a recording of the conversation I did a week and a half ago in Oakland in the C.S. Lewis Society. I'm going to do another one in a couple of days or actually I'll probably post this tomorrow. So it'll be the evening of the 19th. But the the difficulty is that with existentialism that what are your guiding stars? See now now Kierkegaard, he knew what his guiding stars was. He was deeply embedded within Christendom. He was deeply embedded within families of faith. And so from that position within Christianity, he was wrestling with hypocrisy, as Glenn noted. And that's what that's what Peterson is contending with here. But the difficulty that you have with this is what are the guiding stars? And since I'm not like that 100 percent of the time or even approximating the percent of the time that I would like to be like that, you know, despite my best efforts, then when people ask me, I'm not going to say something virtuous like I'm a believer because there's plenty wrong with me that needs to be said. I'm not going to say something virtuous like I'm a believer because there's plenty wrong with me that needs to be fixed before I would dare utter words like that. Thank you. Such an interesting guy. But pay attention. What he's violating is the code of existentialism because the code of existentialism is the struggle. That's the that's the sumum bonum. That's the highest. It's the it's the it's the reaching and it's always the reaching for the sky. And it's the dream, the impossible dream to fight the unbeatable foe. You know, it's the man from La Mancha. That's that's postwar existentialism in Europe. And Peterson drinks of that deeply. If you if you cannot exactly if you cannot and you cannot, according to Peterson, reach the stars, then the best you can do is struggle. That's that's his point. But there are strange contradictions in here. We can know enough of the Bible, enough of the validity of the Bible sufficient to provide an underpinning for Western civilization. That's another point of his to say that we discarded out our peril. That's his big message. So on one hand, the struggle. So he's and you know, as Peterson notes, we're all these we're self contradictory in such tremendous ways. So part of him, part of him is part of him is the struggle and that's the highest good. But part of him is well, we can believe in the Bible at least as far as wisdom because its validity is is as a pragmatist, unlike Francis Schaeffer, who was a a phoebeist as a pragmatist. Peterson says we can know the validity of the Bible because it was sufficient to produce for us this civilization that is at the top of the Darwinian hierarchy of the world. And we know it's the best civilization and we know that because people want to get out of China to move to here, at least move their money here because where their money is there, their heart is also people want to get their money out of China. People want to move to Africa from here. People want to move to here from Mexico and from Central America and from South America. Everyone wants to come here. Clearly, this is the height of the world civilization and it's built upon the Bible and we forget the connection to the Bible at our peril. Just like Francis Schaeffer, same message. So there's a contradictory in here. Yet at the same time, it's the existentialist gospel of the noble struggling. Now, I'm not going to say the beauty about hierarchies is that you can actually have fairly contradictory things living in a hierarchy together. It's just in certain moments you tend to put one over the other. And that's what Peterson does. That's what we all do. But here's the question. But we can't know enough to use the words. I believe in God. Now, I played this part of this video before in a previous video, but it really struck me when she when she when she said this and she's working through Verveky and and and Jonathan Peugeot. And let's listen to this again. I thought this was a tremendous passage. Verveky indicates a need for communities, which he calls wisdom institutions to be created where people can come together and cultivate and agog. And now Peterson would say, well, that's that's what the Bible has provided Western civilization. It's provided wisdom. This may also consist of classes or Dharma talks. Let's just say Peugeot sees the breakdown and resurrection of meaning already built into the grand hero narrative of Christianity and that Christianity descends and is reborn. We continue to follow the rituals. And this is the true, true difference, I think, between Jordan Peterson and Verveky, which I got this wrong last time. I said that Peterson's ritual and and for Vicky was experiential. Experiential, but what what it seems like is that. Is that the ritual is important in both regards, one to induce and agog, the other to embody the narrative. But there is a lot of crossover in these two, which makes it so interesting. So. I think the difference. I think something that comes up for me is that Peterson is a deeply religious person or so he has said this, but he can't 100 percent believe in God. He can't connect there, whereas Peugeot does. And Verveky is is declares himself as secular. So these are it's it's interesting. I've had this dilemma myself. I characterize my own spirituality as complicated, and I suppose by complicated, you could say I am as. For baking, Peterson indicated experiencing a meaning crisis myself. I want to be deeply connected to that real world. I've always referred to it as the new edict dimension or the spiritual dimension that that Victor Frankel refers to. But I have a hard time actually having an embodied understanding of God. You know, a belief in God is, if you will, in any kind of traditional sense, I feel like I'm suffering from that same barrier because I want to. But I can't get there all the way in a Christian sense. And maybe this is just because I've been raised in the time I have been. I think that has a lot to do with it. And at some point, not in this video so much, I want to really get back to Frank Schaefer because. How these things go is really important. Yet when Carl Jung was asked, do you believe in God, he says, no, not believe I know. And somehow that resonates. I do have this feeling that no of knowing that is outside the realm of any previous understanding I have of religion. Maybe I believe in God Morris Tao as a force in the universe that is absolutely constant and absolutely constant. Yes, it is absolutely constant and absolutely dynamic at the same time. But that's impersonal. So I have God number one and God number two. God number one is impersonal. God number two is a personal God. Very important, I think. In a way, I feel like this is expressed in the description. Pashow gives of the Trinity. And need I state this, it reflects very much dynamic quality. I would say my belief is that God is something like dynamic quality. Again, both approaches take into account an understanding of the underlying structure of reality and proceeding from there. These are practices that can ground us as we sort out the chaos at the end of the cycle or during the meeting crisis. So I hope that made sense. And again, watch the whole video. I thought it was a tremendous video that she did, but she referenced Jung. And this is a very famous TV interview that Carl Jung did in the 50s. And it's well worth watching. Now, can I take you back to your own childhood? Do you remember the occasion when you first felt consciousness of your own individual self? That was in my eleventh year. There I suddenly... And he writes about this in his sort of autobiography. On my way to school, I stepped out of a mist. It was just as if I had been in a mist, walking in a mist, and I stepped out of it, and I knew I am. Now, right there, that's not just... Carl Jung is the son of a reformed minister. When he says, I am there, it's not just I am. It's just... He's... I am is the burning bush. I am in the Gospel of John is Jesus Christ. I am the way, the truth, and the life. I am the good shepherd. I am the resurrection and the life. So Jung saying I am there is not just... You know, he steps out of the mist, I am. That's important for understanding Jung's perspective. I am what I am. There he just quoted Exodus. And then I thought, but what have I been before? And then I found that I was... that I had been in a mist, not knowing to differentiate myself from things. I was just one thing among many things. Now, was that associated with any particular episode in your life, or was it just a normal function of adolescence? Well, that's difficult to say. As far as I can remember, nothing had happened before that would explain this sudden coming to consciousness. You hadn't, for instance, been coming to consciousness. Scorchling with your parents or anything? No, no. What memories have you of your parents? What memories have you of your parents? Were they strict and old-fashioned in the way they brought you up? Oh, well, you know, they belonged to the later parts of the Middle Ages. And again, if we look at Frank Schaefer, Frank Schaefer's parents were a lot younger. Frank Schaefer's parents were younger than Carl Jung. My father was a parson in the country, and you can imagine what people were then, you know, in the 70s of the part century. They had the convictions in which people had lived since 1,800 years. Listen to that. That's very important. We're going to get into that. They had the convictions that people had lived. What were those convictions? How were those convictions formed? Yeah. How did he try to impress these convictions on you? Did he punish you, for instance? Oh, no, not at all. No, he was very liberal. And he was most tolerant, most understanding. Which did you get on with more intimately, your father or your mother? That's difficult to say. Of course, one is always more intimate with the mother. But when it comes to the personal feeling, I had a better relation to my father, who was predictable, than with my mother, who was, to me, very problematic or something. So, at any rate, fear was not an element in your relation with your father? Not at all. Did you accept him as being infallible in his judgments? No, no, I knew he was very fallible. How old were you when you knew that? Now, let me see. Perhaps 11 or 12 years old. It was hanging together with the fact that I was, that I knew I was. And from then on, I saw that my father was different. Yes. So the moment of self-revelation was closely connected with realizing the fallibility of your parents. Yes, one could say so. But I realized that I had fear of my mother, but not during the day. There she was quite known to me and predictable, but in the night, I had fear of my mother. And can you remember why, can you remember what that period... I have not the slightest idea why. What about your school days now? Were you happy at school as a school boy? In the beginning, I was very happy to have companions, you know, because before I had been very lonely. We lived in the country and I had no brother and no sister. My sister was born very much later, when I was nine years old. And so I was used to be alone, but I missed it. I missed company. And in school, it was wonderful to have company. But soon, you know, in a country school, naturally, I was far ahead. And then I began to be bored. What sort of religious upbringing did your father give you? Oh, we were Swiss-reformed. And did he make you attend church regularly? Oh, well, that was quite natural. Everybody went to church. Everybody went to church. It was completely natural, as it was for me growing up. And did you believe in God? Oh, yes. Do you now believe in God? Now? Did you believe in God? Oh, yes. He doesn't pause to answer that question. Do you believe in God? Oh, yes. Do you now believe in God? Now? Difficult to answer. I know. I don't need to believe. I know. Now, some of you know Skip Conover's channel, Carl Jung Depth Psychology Reading Group. And right at the top of his, I've had some. And for a while now, Skip and I have been sending messages and emails back and forth. And he's made some comments about me in his videos, which are all fine. And, you know, I look forward to continued conversations with Skip. But right at the top of his, the banner on his channel, Whoever Knows God, Has an Effect on Him, from Jung's answer to Job. And the difficult thing about Jung sometimes, and those who follow Jung, is that, like Peterson, sometimes by some of these very large words, they mean different things. Words can get fudgy. And so God is the unconscious and Christ is the self. And the incarnation is integration and salvation is individuation and crucifixion is wholeness. And so you can see, so when Jung, I think part of, now I don't believe, I know. And so Jung goes back much more to the standard definition of belief. And sometimes we use the word believing and knowing as knowing is a higher certainty than believing, because we believe and we act on partial information. I haven't examined everything else about the airplane, but I believe sufficient, pragmatism, sufficient to get on the airplane. I haven't examined the bridge, but I believe sufficient to walk on the bridge. And so when Carl Jung says, I know, and equality existence says, I don't know her name, and I'm going to be talking with her, so I'm looking forward to that conversation. That'll be fun. But she says, you know, Carl Jung's I know intrigues me. And Skip is all over that. So if you talk to Skip, he'll tell you. And Skip's very available and loves conversation and interaction. And there's actually a lot of this in the Bible. And I was kind of surprised that Peterson was, you know, quoting some things usually from the Sermon on the Mount, because when he quotes from the New Testament, that tends to be where he quotes from. But you could zip over to the Gospel of John and, of course, a very famous doubting Thomas. Now Thomas, also called Didymus, because he was a twin, was one of the twelve, and was not with the disciples when Jesus came. So the disciples told him, we have seen the Lord. But he said to them, unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where his nails were and put my hand in his side, I will not believe. Now, again, when you're using believing there, you're using evidence or reason sufficient to action. All right. That's a pretty good definition of the word belief or faith in. A week later, the disciples were in the house again and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them. Peace be with you. Then he said to Thomas, put your finger here. See my hands. Reach out your hand and put it in my side. Stop doubting and believe. He didn't say stop doubting and no. So, you know, again, language is slippery like this. He says believing, he's very much saying, trust sufficiently for action. Thomas said to him, my Lord and my God, very big declaration for a Jew. Then Jesus told him, because you have seen me, you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed. In other words, what's sort of set up here by Jesus is believing without seeing is in a sense a higher status because it exercises more faith. And this gets into a very big conversation about what is belief and what is faith and sufficient reason and foundationalism and all those kinds of things. And so seeing is believing. Well, or seeing is knowing. And so right away, you know, we're in the midst of these questions. But then again, at the beginning of one of my favorite books by C.S. Lewis, the book Miracles, Lewis mentions the business about the ghosts in all my life. I have met only one person who claims to have seen a ghost. And the interesting thing about that story is that that person disbelieved in the immortal soul before she saw the ghost and still disbelieved after seeing it. She says that that what she saw must have been an illusion or a trick of the nerves. Well, maybe seeing isn't believing. Well, Thomas believed after seeing this woman sees a ghost. She still doesn't believe there's a lot going on with this believing. And and and the use a sharp, sharp guy, you know, when he says, I know he's he's basically saying with that phrase, I, I have I have greater confidence now. But, of course, as I mentioned before, you integrate it into his whole system. Now, basically, when Peterson is asked whether he believes in God, he's basically being asked to fit into a rather standard contemporary assumption about belief in God and morality. And it's very interesting how Peterson connects that. And if you go to my video where I talk about Nathan Jacobs and actually, hopefully, when when we post the talk that I gave a few Wednesdays ago on June 5 to the C.S. Lewis Society at the in the book, The Problem of Pain at the beginning of the book, Peterson, Peterson, Lewis nicely goes through the question of the numinous. And we have the idea of the holy. And I've run through some of that in some of my past videos. Generally, there's an implied narrative with metaphysical metaphysical content. And Peterson, in fact, as as Glenn points out, Peterson says, well, this is this is what you need to have. And in fact, this is what you says because we're going to get back to you and Nietzsche in a minute. God watches human beings and will judge them in their more performance. And when when Peterson see if I get that into the next slide. Yeah. When Peterson talks about the communist Christian, that's that's where he goes. Peterson, who are people who keep God's law will be rewarded and people who break God's law will be punished. Peterson understands this about Christianity. And Peterson understands this about basic morality and basic religiosity in the frame of of this world. And in fact, as we're going to see quite a bit later in a little clip from Tim Keller, Hindus get this, Christians get this. This is this is basic morality. This is basic theistic morality where where God is a judge. And and in fact, this idea is the premise of Peterson's entire video of, you know, dare not say you believe in God. The premise is, in fact, leave us now. It gets it gets interesting. So let's let's watch what Peterson does. And this is pretty standard stuff for Peterson. But it's well said. Interesting paper. Just the other day, you know, I tend to talk about lobsters more than the average person. And one of the points I made in 12 Rules for Life was that our neurochemistry, at least some of it is so similar, it's been conserved so completely throughout the immense duration of evolution, hundreds of millions of years, that lobsters like human beings appear to become the lobster equivalent of depressed if they suffer a hierarchy defeat. And that if you give them chemicals that are roughly analogous to human antidepressants, it perks them right back up. Their posture improves and they'll go off and fight. And, you know, when I first discovered that, it just well, it just it just blew me away. I never recovered from it. I thought, my God, really, that the continent is 350 million years of continuity in in in the structure of those systems. And, you know, now, again, a minute ago, I said, on one hand, Glenn notes at the beginning video that I played, played that Peterson is inconsistent in this video. And as within the same video, Peterson, in talking about someone else, says they don't appreciate how inconsistent we as human beings are. We're way, way more inconsistent than we than we like to let on. And the beauty of a hierarchy, in a sense, at least a hierarchy of ideas, is that when Peterson is talking like an existentialist, the struggle is at the height of the hierarchy. But that in some ways in this video is based on this normal conception of theistic morality that finally obeying and complying with with the laws of God or the laws of being capital B. That is what we're all about. And now with the lobsters and the serotonin and the dopamine, he's drawing it down and saying, but pay attention to hierarchy and status, because those are things. And in fact, our our our systems are wired to to keep looking at each other. And we're highly motivated and driven to gain status. And when the lobster wins a lobster fight, he's where's my lobster? He's the top lobster. And boy, a lobster this size. Yeah, good eatin'. He's the top lobster. And when and when the lobster loses the fight, he's the bottom lobster. OK, and this is standard Peterson stuff. So so this you have to integrate into the picture as well. We know the serotonin system, which is the system I'm talking about, does govern your observation of where you sit in a social hierarchy like it does for many, many animal species. And as one consequence of that regulates your emotions so that if it sees that you're a relatively high status creature in your local environment, then it tends to allow you to feel more positive emotion and less negative emotion. And if it sees you as a low status creature in your local comparative environment, that it does the opposite. It overwhelms you with negative emotion and suppresses positive emotion. And so, you know, and that's really bad. No one likes that. It's it's it's fundamentally there's really nothing worse that can happen to you than that. To have those emotions readjusted in that manner so that the incentive reward and the motivation and the positive emotion vanishes from your life. So there's nothing to be enthusiastic or excited about. And all of the negative emotions, pain, disappointment, frustration, grief, all of those terrible negative emotions are tremendously magnified. No one wants that. It's the last thing you want, perhaps. It's the last thing you want. Right there. No one wants that. Now. Now we're no one wants that. This is the bottom. But here's the thing about human beings. It isn't just. You know, lobster versus lobster that does this because the. The context in which we play is so much larger. It's not just face to face, head to head, like one lobster versus the other over the better spot under the ocean. It's it's within this entire system. And as Peterson says in his earlier videos, you know, we multiply hierarchies. There's the there's the pianist at the music school and the violinist at the music school and the vocalist at the music school and the and the person in the sales department. In the business firm and the and the preacher who has the biggest church and the and the women who has the husband that's earning the most money and the men who has the prettiest wife and and human beings multiply these hierarchies. And and and this, in fact, isn't just face to face materiality. It's all over the place, all over the world, all over time. And as Peter just Peterson just finishes saying, terrible negative emotions are tremendously magnified. No one wants that. It's the it's the last. Watch this is is look to heaven in a second. Perhaps you look separate, but maybe maybe hell is worse. But as far as hell goes, this is this is hell. And, you know, that's partly why people are very let's call it. What would you say? They're tightly they're willing to fight for their position in their status hierarchy and even for the existence of the hierarchies themselves. So they're willing to fight for the position in the status hierarchies. Now, I want to introduce another channel, this these Uberboy guys who they're they're Jungians. They spend a lot of time like skip does on Jung. And, you know, I saw part of this video. So Strahan sent it to me and Strahan always sends me good stuff. So I watch it when he sends me stuff. But but now we're going to go back to Nietzsche and Nietzsche and the meaning crisis. Part one. Hope you're all doing well. The main question. That I've noticed from study and all this stuff is the problem of suffering keeps coming up or maybe the main question of why people get attracted to things like religion is the challenge of the problem of suffering. So as Nietzsche says, to live is the sufferer to survive is to find meaning in the suffering. And this idea sits central to everything we do in regards to, to be honest, nearly everything we do. It seems to revolve around this. That's absolutely crazy. All our behavior is like, how do we get out of a state of pain or lack towards a state of fulfillment and pleasure? And in the most basic sense, that can be like, I'm in a state of hunger and now I want to move towards a state of being full. But then on the most profound sense, that can be in a place where it's like, I don't like where my life is at and I want to do something more meaningful. And this becomes a here he's sort of speaking about the contemporary. But this, of course, is an enduring, enduring issue. Massive problem because having when you really get into suffering and pain and all these type of things, you discover that there's a lot more to it than initially meets the eye. People think the pain is some type of almost physical thing of some sort. But it's absolutely astounding how much pain is influenced by meaning, by your understanding of why you suffer. And as Nietzsche says as well, quote Nietzsche like a machine here, he says that a man who was a why can get through any how. And that's because whatever you're trying to overcome, whatever situation you're in, if you have a reason to justify why it hurts, if you're saying, OK, you're on the treadmill at the gym or you're lifting weights at the gym and you feel that burn and you're saying, this is because I want to improve and I'll be more beautiful and people will like me more. That can motivate you through those hard times. If you can keep that conscious in your head and explain to yourself, this is why I'm doing it, you'll be able to push through it. And it's not only push through it. It's again, free solo, the video that I posted yesterday, the yesterday from this. In terms of Kierkegaard, fear and trembling, it's the reaching where there's the meaning. And even if the reaching involves pain, free soloing up El Capitan is a painful process. It requires everything. And because it requires everything, that's why you experience the meaning and that's why you experience the pleasure. And what I really like about this telling, I like all of the parts of the video that I'm going to play in a minute from this video. This is why pain and pleasure are not really opposites. And there are kinds of pleasure that can only be had with pain. But it's always in the context or it's normally, usually in the context of meaning. And this is why hedonism is so shallow because it fails to recognize this truth about pain and pleasure. When people, and especially Nietzsche, this is something I don't think people understand, is when Nietzsche says someone like a great man or a strong man, he doesn't many senses actually mean someone who has the spiritual strength to hold these visions prominent in their minds so that they can pull themselves out of these states of pain so they can keep fighting through them. And so that they can keep that meaning conscious when they're going through the suffering. And that's very hard. It's easy for us to pontificate it, but like when you're in a boxing match and you're after getting 20 punches, odd punches to your stomach, and you're starting to get that sickly feeling that you get when that happens, it's very hard for you to keep visualizing, like as Conor McGregor says, keep visualizing you holding up that championship medal at the end. But if you can pull that off, you can change how that feels in a strange way. It's absolutely profound how it works. And then we have a mistake, there's a mistake going on in modern society where we think the pain is this sort of physical thing, and we treat it this way. We drop like, we have this idea that it's almost like chemical. So what you've got to do is you've got to drop in some pills. And now it's helpful to recognize, let's not get dualistic here. Part of where Peterson is helpful in that there is a chemical aspect to this. But we like to imagine the chain of causality begins with chemical and ends with experiential. Whereas obviously in a picture like this, the chain of causality also includes not simply chemical inside of us, but includes the story verse. It's where we are in the lobster hierarchy and the story verse that is motivating. And as Peterson says, if you lose this, it's bad, bad, bad. I don't remember exactly what he said because that was two hours ago because in the magic of video, I had lunch in between this anyway. So as we're going to see in this video, the context in which the chemical world in an individual lives is within a much larger imaginative story verse. Chemistry and that will change your brain. But this guy here, Lorimer Mosley, I recommend you check him out. He's from Australia. He explains all this in amazing detail and profound. He's the guy who like studies people who have like lost their arms, but then they still feel their arms and all that. Because that's just such a strange phenomenon. He's come to the conclusion and he presents it very well that there's so much more going on to pain than we think. It seems to be a coagulation of sorry, a collaboration of several different inputs. You get that actual physical input, but then you also get how you're feeling at that time, your emotions and what people are telling you. And then, of course, you know, the famous placebo effect. So if someone says, if you believe that something's going to going to make you better, if you believe something's going to make you better, then when you take it, it will help you because your brain will think that it is your emotional, your medical. Like what you think is going on will affect it. So there is something very profound about this stuff. And then again, it moves back into this. This is this idea of why does things hurt? Why are we in situations of pain? Why? Why? Why? Why? How? And yeah, this is the model that we sort of get. How dangerous is the situation really? How? Why does this thing hurt? What is happening? Is it? Is it like? Am I about to lose my hand? Am I about to do that? Was I bitten by a snake? Am I in danger? Now, again, pay attention here because the story verse and as with Peterson's lobster illustration, it's not just am I going to lose my hand? All this physicalness. Am I going to lose standing in the sight of the people whose esteem I desire in order to see myself in a better light and for and to have them see me? It's all this seeing each other within a story verse that that means so much to us. And we will look at gang membership. We will endure physical pain for the sake of status in a group or with people we look up to. And when all these things are pressing on you, everything amplifies up and gets worse. What you interpret as the meaning of the situation becomes your reality, becomes how much it hurts. And so if you can conjure up this belief that you are not as vulnerable as your brain is perceiving right now, you are able to overcome or you're able to feel less pain. And so the the soul of a warrior in Nietzsche's understanding begins in the spirit in that sense. And he even said that the original nobles that he was always talking about in like he'd look at the ancient Greeks and all that you'd imagine that those, you know, those Ubermensch of the past were these big muscular bodybuilder types. But he said, of course, they were strong, but what they were mainly is strong in spirit. These are people able to overcome. These are people able to to to to beat all situations, all pain, all setbacks. And they would do that by gathering meaning and justifying why it hurts. And so, you know, this type of person like I've even seen it in myself. At one point, I got a pretty chronic injury, which led me to go into all this stuff. And chronic pain down here is unlike acute pain. Chronic pain can be debilitating. It serves no healthful purpose. It may be caused by a malfunction of the central nervous system, such as damaged nerves that send signals of a threat without any real stimuli. So that's that's such a weird experience when you're feeling pain, but there is no damage. But that happens all the time. And I had a situation where you can convince yourself that's real. You can kind of teach your nerves that you are in pain. So he's talking about what we would talk about as experiential physical pain in terms of the nerves sending false signals to us. But again, much of the pain we receive happens in this relational story space. So I was just watching the Netflix series, how to how to what was it? How to get rich selling drugs fast on the Internet, something like that. And and so there's one point in in one of the later episodes where he sees his girlfriend broke up with him and he sees his girlfriend with another guy and there's no physical, you know, there's there's nothing physically hurting him in that moment. Why is it so devastating? Why do people do people launch into violence or shrink back and even even contemplate suicide? Why would they rather die than see this thing real in the story verse? And this is why I say again and again, the story verse colonizes the material universe. The story verse is that real to us. This means so much to us. And all of those systems are there. So when you listen to Peterson talking about marshaling himself and facing the adversary and overcoming the challenge, this is deep into us and it's far more real than than physical pain in many ways. And so I hurt myself and I started getting into that in order for me to get out of it. I had to teach myself that I am not a lump of sugar. I was scared because I had this problem with sciatica going down my leg and I was scared of bending over because I went into a doctor and he said to me, OK, you're after busting one of your spinal nerves. And I was like, what? He's like, yeah, you're after damaging like it's after bursting out. And if you move more, it's going to pop out. You're going to lose your disk. And it's going to ruin you forever. And I was freaked out. I was like, oh, I've broken my back. What? This is so crazy. And later on, I discovered it wasn't that at all. But that little story you put in my head for like made me frightened to my core of bending my back because I thought I'd like bend it worse. And so every time I get this little tinge of pain that turned out to be coming from a muscle down in my leg, every time I get this little tinge of pain, I would I would freak out. It's like, oh, my God, my back is bursting more and it would hurt more and it hurt more and hurt more. And then after a while, I met another physio. He was more of a trainer. And he was like, dude, like, no, you're fine. Just just, you know, lift, like lift some weights. And that's the exact opposite of what the other dude was telling me. And so I started doing that. And I got better. And over time, like a very long time, I slowly conditioned my brain to understand that, you know, bending over does not equal. I don't know what happened one day is I was bending over to pick up some weight and I thought my back was straight and I didn't feel any pain. And I looked in the mirror and I saw that my back was bent. And and then I just sort of snapped out of it. I was like, wait, are you sure that that's why you were bending over to pick up some weight? James, please, I'm trying to be serious. And anyway, so I was I was bending over to pick up some weight. And then that happened. So it was super interesting. Again, this all swells around this idea that pain is related to meaning. And this is a huge topic. I would like to dig into a lot more, but I'm not going to do it here. We will come into it later. Instead, what we're going to do is talk about how this maps onto cultures, because in in our current mindset, we do not think that pain is anyway related to meaning. This is what Lumiere is trying to push. He's trying to say, all right, this is a lot bigger video than we think. But this is something we lack. We think that the way we deal with pain is true. Physical solutions, true chemistry, these type of things. But this is not working at all. You see, obviously, there is these these these typical diseases. These are going up. But look at chronic pain. And as we said before, this is something that is often illusionary. It's unbelievable. I am we're using the American statistics here, but 100 million, 100 million. That's like nearly 30 percent of the population, I believe. That's unbelievable. So like one third of Yanks are walking around in chronic pain. And that's only something going on in their heads. And so that's that's an astounding thing. And I wonder what like was it like that in the past? I don't know, because every indication is showing that this is something that's getting worse. This is something like we talk about the depression crisis and all that. And who knows that could be related to this as well. Like is depression a sort of extension of nihilism to some extent? Well, I would say I would say yes, depression is a piece of this picture, because what is depression? So the young man in this in this movie sees his girlfriend with another guy and he gets depressed. This is this is losing status in your hierarchy. This is the this is the lobsters and they're fighting. This is this is exactly what's going on in the story verse. Maybe when you do have a chemical imbalance in your brain, the the the vacuum of meaning that is the modern world makes it unbearable. And I'm not saying there aren't, you know, Jonathan Haidt talks about the cortical lottery. Some of us are higher in negative emotions. Some of us are lower and let negative emotions you have. You have the big five personalities. You have temperament. You have all of this stuff going on. It's very complex, but it's it's also related to the story verse. Considering that many of your ancestors probably had the same thing, but they fucking made it true as well. So that's something something interesting about this. And of course, it's getting unbelievably worse. As we're saying, the opioid crisis, you've probably heard of before, is a skyrocketing right now. And now what is an opioid? An opioid is the most basic drug for numbing your ability to feel pain and not just numbing your ability to feel pain. I've known I remember there was a situation where a woman of the church died. She had cancer and one of her daughters quickly swooped in and grabbed all of those strong narcotics that her mother had been taking. And it's via that that I learned from one from one of that girl's sisters, that woman's sisters, that while she was in, she was in, she had an opioid problem. And to my knowledge, she had no chronic pain. Well, that those opioids aren't just dulling physical pain. Those opioids are dulling psychological pain. Hence the addiction. Now, I'm not a doctor, but seems obvious to me. You've got people who don't have any pain problems at all. What are these drugs doing? Well, they're the the story verse and the chemical verse are they might be mediated by our relationships and our eyes and and our body. But but all of that is part of one whole. That's that's that's what it does. Heroin is people describe it as going into bliss for a while because you don't feel anything anymore. You don't feel any pain. You just feel good. Just you just get endorphins and all that. After you exercise, you get a kick of opioids. Endorphins, I believe. I'm not quite sure what they are, but it is that type of thing. It's a morphine derivative that you get after exercise and you don't feel pain anymore. And this is what people are going through. Now they're they're taking more of these because they're in pain. They don't feel good. And I am suggesting that it's because there's a vacuum of meaning in the sky. We've lost why we live. And everybody knows this. You've heard the story before. You've got that whole problem of meaning of the crisis of meaning of nihilism and all that. And the ancients knew this as well. And this is something that is very important to understand is as as Nietzsche was saying, it's the men of the spirit that become the ones who take over the world, the men who believe in themselves, the men who believe there's a reason why they're fighting, those who find meaning in the suffering, as they say. And how does one get meaning? And it's always a story. When I was bending over and picking up weight, I was picking up weight. I was always I was always really worried because there's a story in my head. The story was that my back was broken. And if I bend over, I was too vulnerable. I would damage. I would damage my back. You suffer because you're weak. Your back is too weak. And so that story would play in my head and make things worse. I would I would move less. And so my muscles would fatigue. And I get a yes, I would get weaker over time from a bad story. Whereas when I changed the story, it sounds like a wooship, but this is fucking as real as shit. You know, when I changed the story, I started to get stronger. I started to cope with pain better. And that's just a very basic example. But this stuff maps to society level things like when you have a vision of Rome that you're fighting for in an army, you're going to and connected to that vision is your family is your wife, your beautiful wife that you're fighting for and those beautiful kids that you had with her and that home that you have. But you see Gladiator when throughout the movie, he keeps having flashes of his wife and children. And that's what he's fighting for. He knows that. And it's that that energy, that story that carries him through the intense hardship of being a warrior and whatnot. And so these ancients like they didn't have the luxury of all these chemicals that we had. So they would have to create a vast amount of stories that would help people that would motivate people to overcome these situations. They would have to paint their reality with stories that make you strong. And so these stories that the ancients had, which turned into their mythologies, were under the pressure of evolutionary success. If their stories made them cucks or weak, they would die out. And therefore, the stories that survived were the ones that gave people the most meaning and allowed them to overcome the most hardship. And you even see this nowadays with modern Greek stories. People still love listening to Greek myths because they just hit something so fundamental about human psychology that they still work. Now, now catch again the video I produced with Dr. Jim about Abraham and Isaac and Jordan Peterson and Kierkegaard and fear and trembling. We talked about the difference between the Greek and the Hebrew stories and Eric Auerbach's mimesis. That's what's so profound about them. And so this is where we start getting into an interesting idea of the free health care system. Now, when I saw this section of this video, I immediately thought of the section in Jordan Peterson's conversation with Sam Harris when Sam Harris leads off on this business about astrology. Well, this will make you think a little bit differently about astrology, not in the not in the way that astrology is usually proposed, such as well, here's your horoscope and this will tell you what's coming. But but look at look at why. Look at look at why this stuff worked for people. Because we have now the chemical health where system, if you will, health care system, but these ancients didn't have that luxury. So what they would do is they collect all these stories and they would store them up in the sky and the zodiac and whatnot. And they would have, you know, Leo doing something with links and cancer and all this stuff. This is all related to a mythological story. And so when someone was down and out, they and they were feeling pain and they were suffering and they had that broken leg and they were like, why, why don't I just keel over and die? Why don't I just give up? And so they would be looking up to those that empty dead night of stars that we see because we look up and we see an empty sky. They would look up and they would see all this and they would be like, wait a second, the gods are up there with their wars and their stories. And it would inspire them to keep going. And so this would act as a tool, as a public tool, because all you'd have to do is sit down with a kid for five, ten years and give them these stories and teach them what is up there in the sky. And they would have this for life. It's permanent mindset, mindset shift, a permanent health care solution. And it would be global. And it would be the entire society would have it. And so this is what they would. This is the tool that they used in order to keep their population healthy. This shows us like there's obviously more to mythologies, but this shows us the most unbelievably basic and pragmatic sense of why you need a sky populated with gods and stories and a myth. And this is, as we said, the zodiac is their way of storing it. And all cultures around the world use the stars in the same way, because it is where you look when you're lost. And what do we do when we're lost? We look up at the stars and see empty, meaningless, burning balls of gas that will eventually die into nothing, whereas instead they saw the stories that brought them hope. And so what we call this is a symbolum. I saw this in Ion since we're in an Ion lecture. This is what Young was talking about is that you need this symbolum. You can think of that as like a collection of stories and you need this in order to keep yourself sane, pretty much. This is what you require the most. And then this is the collection of stories up there in the sky. And the way that this symbolum is established is through a dogma. So you would have, you know, the Greeks would sit down and tell the canon of stories that are kids. And that would fill the sky and fill the kid. The filled kid, the kid's mind would connect to the sky and then they'd have that symbol in them. And then it's like this software program that suddenly they're all engaged in. All of these people are employed with, all of these people understand and they're all unified together in the same set of software. They're all spiritualized, they're all motivated in the same way. So you need that symbolum. You need that sky full of gods. And the way you do that is with a dogma. And so obviously I'm going to talk about a few of them. I'm talking about the Greeks a lot because I think they're they're uber cool. And this is the Greek one. You know, the Greek pantheon. You see this boy over here giving you a look. He's looking at James being like, you're such a such a soy. So I'm going to stop and be mean. He is actually staring directly at me. That's quite nice, actually. You should take that take that red cloak off and we'll really get down to it. I've got to stop. I've got to stop. Yes, yes, yes. This is the Greek pantheon. And this is a good example of their symbol. The symbolum. This is a good example of what they saw as the figures, the powers, the most profound versions of themselves, the most profound versions of their emotions that lived in these stories in the sky and would guide them. And this was their mythology and this was their free health care system. And now, of course, when we moved on from Greek philosophy and you could call that Greco-Roman philosophy, as they say, we moved into the Christian philosophy. And what I find interesting is that people want to say Christianity is like gay and empty and shit and all this. And, you know, it's not as cool as the Greeks and all that. But the more you look into Christianity and especially the Catholics, you see that they have. Well, they have an unbelievably vitalized and rich symbolum as well. Now, remember when Peterson made that? It's funny with Peterson because at one point he made in this video about, you know, dare not believe in God, this remark about the Catholic pedophile priest, but he also made a point, a very laudatory point about Catholics. And that, again, comes from Jung and Jung's story of how this comes about in the West, the richness of the Catholic tradition in terms of providing a symbolum, in terms of very much what happened again and again with Catholicism. It happened in Europe in terms of the evangelism of the barbarians where many different elements of pagan worship and ritual came into the church. And in some ways, when, let's say, I have more experience with the Haitians and how the Haitians took the gods of West Africa, combined them with the saints of Catholicism and became a very powerful symbolum for the Haitian people and, you know, a little bit different religion in terms of voodoo as opposed to Roman being Roman Catholic. You can't be a good practitioner of voodoo if you're not also a good practitioner of Roman Catholicism. There's Santaria in the Caribbean Spanish realm, which again is sort of a mixture of some of these ancient pagan religions with Roman Catholicism. And again, it provides a very powerful symbolum by which you populate the heavens and you live within this story verse. And I think Jung's great insight is that the story in your head must meet up with the story in the world in an integral way for there to be health. And he noticed, again, I get this from this biography, this autobiography of sorts of him, that he noticed in the Insane Asylum how the mental patients were talking. And he began to notice that these were elements of the larger story and that, in a sense, what he had to do was help put the stories together. And this is very similar to pastoral work, which is helping people deal the story inside and the story outside. And so in many ways, psychology grows out. It's sort of a secular pastoral care in some ways because what you're trying to do is manage the stories that have come into conflict and that conflict is causing pain. They have it too. And it's so potent and powerful. And it's even better in some senses because we were more modern when we were under this one. So we've done more beautiful art about it so we can see it more. But the Christians had their symbolum. They had their myth of Adam and Eve and they had their angels that represented similar places, the Greek gods and whatnot. And they had all their great historical events. And the dogma that enforced this was the Bible. The Bible was the tool that they would use to take a youth and fill their head full of these stories that would help them overcome their suffering in life. And people were like, oh, dogma. They were brainwashing them. And it's like, well, OK, cool. But they were doing them a favor as well. Christ's suffering with his cross on his back is a perfect example of someone coping with pain properly. And so having that in your head and believing it is a fucking useful thing. And if you turn around to people and say, all right, it's all just brainwashing dogma and you empty the sky out and then they have nothing else to replace it, you're doing them no favors. And this is exactly the situation we're in now, where all of that is gone. And we are now looking up at the sky, feeling empty and filling ourselves with chemicals in order to cope. And this is another example, like the Greeks had their gods and then they had their variety of different gods. And of course, this is very interesting about the Catholic thing, even though it was a monotheist thing, specifically the Europeans turned it into something quite sort of they took the pagan side of it and made it very, very angelic, shall we say. And this was them honoring the psychological needs of people. They were they were adding in the story of Michael to get that retribution side of people. This is the this is Satan and Michael. So they got that that energy of striking down an evil person and then imposing law and imposing force where Christ seems like someone who's not quite a ruthless warrior and all this. And so they filled out the symbol with these extra stories, which is a good thing to do. And Jung begins to imply over the course of this chapter that we are reading, the chapter on Christian alchemical symbolism, is that Catholicism is by far the best choice for modern people because it is what our tradition was. And it is also what and it's also better than Protestantism because Protestantism just sort of sucks the soul out of all this. Protestantism thinks, you know, Our Lady, the Virgin Mary is a bullshit idea and it calls out a lot of this this stuff and it in in essence empties the sky. And it's it's the first step towards something dangerous, which is the death of a symbol. Well, we'll get into the Catholic Protestant stuff, too. But I really wanted to play that for you because I think that's a that's a very good video of illustrating Peterson's lobster point that this status business that we are wired for it is and Peterson, of course, gets this from Jung. This this this deals with the world above. We look up to the heavens to orient ourselves. We look up to the heavens to have them look down on us and give us significance and purpose. We look to each other for these things. You can't get that yourself. Now, I have some conversations to have for the next two and a half hours, so I'm going to pause this and actually going to have to edit the edit video and splice this together. But hopefully it'll work. Even though no time has passed for you, for my own sake, I'm going to do a little bit of review. Most of the time when I do these videos, I sit down and I do them in one sitting. But for very long videos that usually requires an hour or two, which is usually most efficient. But today I just didn't have the kind of time to do this. And actually, I've been working on this video for a couple of weeks because I'm trying to figure out how to connect the links and put them all together. And then new material pops up. And so I add those. So I began this video talking about Jordan Peterson's video, Who Dares Believe in God? And this is following the video he did. The video I did responding to the PragerU interview where I brought in Soren Kierkegaard's idea of faith. And I began with Glenn Scrivner's, I thought, really excellent treatment of Peterson on this about how Peterson in his video changes what he means by believe and changes how he sees God. And I brought up Peter Boghossian's point in Emanuel for Creating Atheists and his conversation with Tim McGrew where they look at this definition of faith, where faith is something that you act out based on at least usually a partial view of the world. The fact that we always only have a partial view of the world means pretty much whenever we act, we are expressing faith even if we're experiencing some level of dissonance. And I thought that this was interesting because Jordan Peterson and his use of the Bible, his argument essentially is that the Bible is true because it has been the basis for such a successful civilization. And I noticed, and just actually this afternoon or this morning when I was driving in between takes of this, I continued working my way through the audiobook of Frank Schaeffer reading his book Crazy for God, noticing just how much similarity there is between this element of Peterson's argument and Francis Schaeffer's argument that he made back in the 70s and 80s which got put into a film that was first produced and then directed by Frank Schaeffer, much of which Frank Schaeffer has second thoughts to say the least about in terms of his conversation partners back there in the 80s. And I talked about how in some ways my growing up was similar to Frank Schaeffer's, less status, more stable, similar moment in some ways, realizing that there was a, yeah, I'll just leave it at that. I talked about that when I was there. And then I played clips of Peterson talking about the Bible a little bit more and the strange contradiction that we face with him in this video where we can know enough of the validity of the Bible sufficient to provide an underpinning for Western civilization. And to say that we discard it for our peril, the Bible for Peterson is a foundation for wisdom that according to Peterson that doesn't necessarily involve any kind of supernatural inspiration but more of a crowd sourced wisdom sourcing throughout the ages that gets encoded in dreams and poetry and prophets and then written down into the Bible which continues to guide us into the future. But then he ends the video with we can't know. And so right away we have the opposition between believing and knowing. And then I brought in this clip from an excellent video done by the woman that does the channel Equality Existence where she was comparing John Vervecky and Jonathan Peugeot with this in the meaning crisis. Because this is very much what we've been talking about in these conversations. And she talked about how, of course, Peugeot is in favor of returning to the ways of the church and sees this as sort of a cyclical pattern that continues to repeat itself. John Vervecky is looking at discovering and figuring out, oh my camera's over to the side which I use for conversations. There we go, now it's in the middle. Vervecky looking at well can we use, can we understand and use ancient practices to address the meaning crisis so that people don't suffer from it? And I don't know her name. I'm going to be doing a conversation with her coming up in the next couple of weeks or so. But we'll be, you know, she talks about how she just can't, I have many conversations where people tell me this. In fact, I had one this afternoon which was a terrific conversation. He doesn't know if he's going to share the conversation. I'll send him the video. We'll see if he does. But many people I talk to express to me exactly what she expressed to me or to us, which is, you know, I just can't believe and I don't believe in God. And maybe I'd like to, maybe I want to, but as I said to the gentleman that I spoke with today, you know, believing in God is more like falling in love than buying a practical car. And in that sense, the reason we talk about falling in love and the reason we have this mythology around Cupid and an arrow is that it's something that takes hold of us. And in a conversation I did with Cassidy Polling, who I've had a couple of talks with and this will likely get produced. She usually shares her videos. She asked about cults and I shared with her how, you know, we have two impulses in us. One, two, kind of the masculine, which is the hunter, and the feminine, which wishes to be possessed and wishes to belong to someone and something else. One is the impulse to ravage or to ravish and the other is to be ravished. And this plays out in sexuality. It plays out in romance. It plays out in deep psychological ways. And we have these two impulses in us. And one, roughly speaking, is masculine, which is the aggressor, and the other is feminine, which is the receiving. And, you know, this gets deeply psychological and sexual pretty fast. And she referenced the attraction of this video of Carl Jung, you know, do you believe in God? Well, I've always believed in God. Do you believe in God now? And he pauses and he reflects and now I know. And this has, you know, this has launched many channels and I mentioned Skip and his channel. And Skip talks about this quite often on his channel. But these beliefs that we have are not, and I've mentioned this before, are not simply subject to our volition. These are not voluntary for us, but rather we, again, this is the being ravished. We want to fall in love with God. We want God to come to us and have us. In fact, the beginning of the Heideberg Catechism says, I am not my own, but belong body and soul and life and death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ. I belong to him. And in the Bible, the Christ is masculine and the church is feminine. And that's intentional. There's meaning in that. And we want God to be, as C.S. Lewis says when he's talking about pantheism, we want God to be a hunter, a husband, you know, one who goes and looks for us. Luke 15, the good shepherd who goes and leaves the 99 and finds the one lost sheep, the woman who looks for the lost coin and the, as Tim Keller, his treatment of the prodigal son in Luke 15, the elder brother should go out and hunt for the younger brother. We long to be possessed by God. But all of this isn't something that simply is an expression of something inside of us. It's something that we're embedded in. And so then after that I went through this, well, talked about seeing as believing and some of the issues with that. Talked about basically standard contemporary assumptions about belief in God and morality. And then we played the lobster section and where Peterson talks about the fact that we're, you know, again, back to the lobsters and how life, the top lobster is, you know, the dopamine, serotonin systems makes the top lobster big and feels good about himself. But when we lose, well, it's devastating. And the point is that as human beings, it isn't just simply lobster to lobster, but we're playing out on multiple hierarchies in multiple events and in multiple networks and multiple venues. And many of these venues are relational and are actually seen and entered into by our imagination. And this gets into a lot of the really excellent, verveky stuff about perspectival knowing and participatory knowing. And so this serotonin system within lobsters gets played out within us in many, many ways. And as Peterson says in that video, it's absolutely horrible for us to lose. And this is in fact, and many studies have shown that athletes derive far more pain from losing than they derive pleasure from winning. And we talked about the fact that our meaning systems are all about the reach and not so much about the grasp or the acquisition. And then I played a long video by the Uberboyos and they're such a fun couple of guys. I enjoy listening to their videos and they make Jung, people can wade in on how accurate they are, but it's sort of for me Jung for dummies like me and they boil it down and they're fun to listen to and I just enjoy them. But they talked, they spoke well about the fact that we used to be embedded in the world and people saw the stories in the skies. Now I'm probably going to continue to calibrate and fine tune and critique some of this. Because one of the interesting things about the Hebrews is that they didn't, they weren't, they weren't terribly, they weren't astrological as a civilization. And it's a very odd thing about them. Yet they were fought, they were great as Vervecky says in his first episode of the of the meaning crisis when he talks about the Hebrews and narrative. They employed narrative and via narrative now we're embedded in a narratable world and the book of Deuteronomy admonishes and exhorts parents to teach their children these stories. And in fact teaching Bible stories has been part of Christian and Jewish training of children because it's within these stories that we live and they talked about Roman Catholicism and we talked about how in the pagan world the stories were added onto with other stories from the cultures that Christianity invaded. You can see that in Northern Europe, you can see that with Haitians, you can see that with Hispanics in the Caribbean with Santaria and Voodoo. And so there's often a commingling. Now obviously the Protestant Reformation is going to address some of this because part of what the Protestant Reformation wanted to do was address what they saw as accretions to this story verse that we live within. And that's very much going to be part of the debate. So that brings us up to the next slide which is this interesting place where now we're going to bring in John Vervecky and he talks a bit about God in this interview which astounding interview. Okay so you were talking about narcissism and that narcissists. Yeah I'm talking about you get this cultural grammar. So he's talking about narcissism in the sense of the Protestant Reformation because he very much sees Luther as bringing in this narcissism into Christianity and a deformation of Christianity. So you could hear some of Jung's critique of Protestantism coming through the uberboyo boys and you can hear Vervecky's critique of the Protestant Reformation that this sets up a narcissistic environment and we're going to talk about that more in this video. And I'm sure when John and I eventually talk and I should send him an email and say because probably summers are easier for him you know find a time where he and I can have a proper conversation instead of me always talking about him. And he's just so amazingly gracious as he is in this little clip. But does the Protestant Reformation and Luther and I'd argue that many of the times when he's talking Luther he's really talking Calvin because a lot of this stuff gets accentuated more in Calvin than Luther. But let's hear what he has to say. That's being created for narcissism and then you know as that God becomes more inaccessible and more absurd. And that's the critique of what Protestantism does and you can hear Jonathan Pigeot with this critique sometimes that in Protestantism God moves further and further and further away and pretty soon it's deism and then it's atheism and of course as a quality experience as Jonathan Pigeot talks about. Well then it all flips and it comes back round and that's that's sort of a cycle and a process that Jonathan talks about. He starts to drift out of the picture. Think about very close. Think about Shakespeare. Think about Shakespeare. Titanic intellect, deeply concerned, artistic sensitivity, one of the titans. Notice how small a presence God has in his work. Like even by the time Shakespeare, God is right. This is where I get into some of my God number one, God number two stuff because the God that is diminishing is God number one, which means that in compensation God number two and you can read this in in Frank Schaeffer's Crazy for God. I'm just loving that book. I know some of you are really going to be bothered by that, but I find the book refreshing and honest and maybe I don't usually reach out to a lot of high status people and whether Frank Schaeffer's high status. I don't know, but maybe by the end by the time I'm finished reading that book and I look at his newest book and maybe I'll reach out to him and see if he wants to have a conversation because because I think that might be fun. I think we'd probably have some commonality, but you know that the Verrechi has a point in all of this and and you know you following some of Charles Taylor in terms of this this progression towards atheism where God is no longer axiomatic where God sort of sort of floats away. And so when God comes out of this picture that grammar right that grammar it doesn't go away. So God is when we talk about God we're using the grammar of meaning or meaning is associated with the grammar. Yeah, I mean we're using God. I'm using God. I don't mean this. Jesus. I don't know. I didn't say Jesus. I don't say that I said, Jesus. I don't mean this. I don't mean this to be disrespectful. No, I try never to do that because I hold. I just I appreciate this so much. I mean, I mean, John is so he works so hard to to to engage but but not not trigger these food fights and I so appreciate that. Jesus is in very high regard. So I want to that's important. But when I'm using it, I'm using God as and I mean this term very deeply in which we had time to unpack it. I mean God as a as a participatory symbol of you know this higher reality. And it's not it's not just a word or an abstract symbol. It's a participatory symbol that actually affords transformation and self transcendence. And and and that I'd love Pearson to give such a such a to just to just lay out such a such a clear definition of what he imagines God to be. I think John just kind of set it out. Now it's a it's a fairly Protestant God in that it's it's a it's a symbolic it's a participatory ideal. I love the way he phrased that. Now, of course, as a much more of a classical theist that that sounds very even God number one light and and he shows himself very much embedded in you know post Protestantism with with God just flying out. I mean, it's not even deism where God's just kind of out there. It's God. God no longer exists. But, you know, again, I the clarity with which John just kind of says that is so helpful. I'll play it again. And it's not a Tory symbol at time to unpack it. I mean, God as a as a participatory symbol of you know this higher reality. And it's not it's not just a word or an abstract symbol. It's a participatory symbol that actually affords transformation and self transcendence. Interesting. Interesting. God affords meaning as a symbol. That's right. God affords meaning. And this, you know, again, we're Peterson's open agnosticism. Peter, I think Peterson would say, you know, in terms of what John said, of course, he critiqued it and molded and shape it in a new way. But Peterson would say, you know, that's perhaps a minimum because Peterson doesn't want to doesn't want to too quickly dismiss the possibility of more God number two-ness in the picture. Right. Or God affords transcendence. Right. So so so a more because there's always meaning even even when you've got even when you've gotten rid of God. Yes. There's a more profound meaning. So there's different levels. There's higher. Oh, definitely. There's always levels. I'm hesitant to say hierarchies, but there is there are at least levels of meaning. It's very non-Peter Sonia. Yeah. And this is something I would like to talk to Jonathan about because I take I take Jonathan Peugeot's like I've said this before. I take what he does very seriously. And he has a lot about hierarchy that I would like to talk to him. You're talking about you watch his videos or does he have a book that you've read? I watch his videos. I've watched his videos and I've had the pleasure of having like an online discussion with him that was filmed. And then I've also had the pleasure he came in. He was in Toronto and we spent a few hours together talking and having a meal together and we correspond periodically. And I I deeply respect because I think people like Jonathan and John the Peugeot Paul medically, they're really I I see them as Christians wrestling very deeply. But there are Christians in like the history in the legacy of people like Tillich. They're wrestling very deeply with the meeting crisis and trying. Don't don't tell my denomination that I'm like Paul Tillich. I could be in trouble. To reformulate wrestling very deeply with the meeting crisis and trying to reformulate Christianity into a plausible response to the crisis. And that, you know, and right there where where he says a plausible response right at that moment, I think that's that's that's where let's say Jonathan and I and and John Verveke and maybe Jordan Peterson. I mean, if we that that's perhaps if we had a four way debate, Jonathan Peugeot and I would probably be on the side of saying, I think it's still viable. And and perhaps Jordan and and Jordan Peterson and John Verveke would say, no, it's not viable. And and that's where a quality existence is. And many of the people I talk to, in fact, again, I had a conversation with one guy today. It was such a cool conversation. So many good conversations. I'm so blessed by you all who watch these videos and and want to talk. And I wish I had more time and more slots. And, you know, I wish you could all come to local meetups. And, you know, my my thinking of what the life of the age to come is in that fact, we will have time and so on and so forth. But but anyway, I fully appreciate. I fully appreciate the difficulty that that many face in unbelief. You know, Tim Keller often says that, you know, one of the first steps to actually believing is wanting to believe. And I think that's right. And I've often emphasized in my videos that let's take a let's take a formational approach to believing where we're going to be able to do that. And I think that's right. And so I think about it's not a good idea to take a formational approach to believing where, you know, participating participating faithfully regularly in the life of a local church. Jonathan Pigeot would talk about participating in the liturgy that that in a sense, you embed yourself in this community. I think about can't always come up with names. And so Adam, I think about Adam, who, you know, sent me this and Adam joined an Orthodox church and many others who have who have joined Orthodox churches and other churches that I've spoken with. But but yet I think about Joe who, you know, he's been attending the reform churches in his town, you know, still doesn't believe in wonders about that. And this is where I get into the point about that faith in some ways is a gift. And this is, of course, where this is my Protestantism. This is my this is my narcissism coming through because in my vision of I think part of the problem of that that people have with divine election in Calvinism is that it becomes immaterial. It becomes dualistic, whereas decisions are made in life every day. And I don't see I don't I don't heaven and earth are are are connected and figuring out the relationship between them. So people don't have a problem realizing that they, you know, people die all the time and horrible things happen. And it's enormously complicated that end of the that end of the conversation. OK, but where was it going with this belief is a gift. And and I was I was blessed. The the life that I've lived. Watch if you haven't watched the conversation I had with Rod Huygen where I talk about, you know, you know, religion is basically giving widows and orphans. If you haven't watched the conversation with Rod Huygen, watch that conversation because Rodney in so many ways exemplifies this idea of, you know, he's had much hardship in his life and he pastors a church of people who've had great hardship. But yet he sees his life as having been a gift. And and the parents I had and the upbringing I had and and all of that was I see it as a gift of God to me. And I'm deeply grateful for this. And and now getting into Verveckis take on Protestantism, I can take no credit for the parents that that I am born to. And it's part of even that language, which I resist, is the idea that somehow Paul VanderKlay, you can imagine a Paul VanderKlay apart from Stan and Barb and Patterson, New Jersey. No, you can't. History doesn't work that way. And so I was simply. The the Psalm that we read at my sister's funeral, her favorite Psalm, Psalm 16, the boundary markers have fallen in pleasant places for me. That was what was our grandfather's, my father's father's, one of his favorite Psalms, one of the things he loved to say. And and so this is a gift from God. And the challenging thing is, well, why is the problem of evil? Why why doesn't everyone get a gift from God? And does does thinking this way make us lazy? And actually, a little bit later, I'm going to argue, no, it doesn't at all make us lazy. And this is part of the point that Glenn makes in his whole video. If you watch that video that that that faith belief is a gift and it's not meaning that you have the whole thing, but our response to it is is is where we act. And this if you watch my rough drafts for Sunday, you'll notice that I end almost every sermon with the structure of the Heideberg catechism, which is misery, deliverance, gratitude, because the good that we do is a response to the gift that we've been given. It's not an attempt to earn it. It's not an attempt to acquire it. It's not an attempt to reach for it. It's an attempt to express gratitude for the riches we have. And you might say, yeah, well, Paul, that maybe is good for you. And, you know, there's not there have not been hung involuntarily hungry in a serious way a day in my life and so on and so forth. Of course you've had a golden life. Of course you should be grateful. And absolutely, I should be grateful. But I can point to others like like Rod Hugen and people who live in the Dominican Republic and Haiti, who have had far have received far fewer of the things we ordinarily call blessed. And they will testify to God's goodness. And you can find this. And yet even I love the section of Job when, you know, Job, God has just wiped out his children and wiped out his wealth. And he's sitting there with his wife and he's in a world of trouble. And his wife says, curse God and die. And Job says, naked I came into this world naked. I will leave it. Blessed be the name of the Lord. And then Satan says, all right, let's up it a bit. Let's let's give you chronic pain. And and the book of Job is this crisis of faith. And and it isn't a book where Job is somehow heroic and and always says the right thing. No, Job says all you know, he challenges God and he's angry with God. And he says all kinds of things that many well put together Christians, the kind that Frank Schaefer would would look at and say, but they're a little they're a little nuts. And at the end of it, God doesn't despise Job for his challenging. And this is where we get into Jordan Peterson's existentialist faith, where he is he is going to do battle with God. And there's a job like quality about that. And there's a Jacob like quality about that. But there's there's also other aspects to it which are not so good. So now you got me preaching and the third part of my video, which is maybe why I should always just do these in one sitting. But let's get back to John for Vicky. I don't ultimately agree with that project, but you late Christianity into a and trying in the legacy of people like Tillich, they're wrestling very deeply with the meeting crisis and trying to reformulate Christianity into a plausible response to the crisis. I don't ultimately agree with that project, but I really, really, really, really deeply respect it. So to go back to it, I think like God is like it's a participatory symbol that affords you getting the this this and a God getting this reciprocal realization going with deeper aspects of reality. It opens you up right. And it opens up and discloses the world to you. And then when that goes away, all of that machinery just doesn't it doesn't just disappear. It latches on to other things. And I think we have this. Use an analogy of the grammar that we've changed the words, but we still use the same grammar. That's exactly why I use the term. We change the vocabulary, but the grammar is still there running. And see, I'm not making the argument. And this is where I would differ from Jordan and perhaps from Jonathan. I'm not making the argument that we're all sort of inevitably Christians that, you know, you know, no matter what we do, we're part of me. What about Roman or Greek? Well, we're sort of all of these and none of them. I love that answer because I think that is so right. Right. We're a Buddhist. Well, I guess so. I mean, I don't I don't even consider myself a Buddhist. I don't think it's Buddhist of me. I think it's a great answer. All of this stuff has come has come downstream to us. And so pieces of it have have come into us from culture and from thought and through writing and through family and through mannerisms. I think it's a great answer. But yeah, where I would differ is I would I'm trying to say that this grammar in fact doesn't make us inevitably Christian, although it has a Christian heritage to it. It's now got an autonomous functionality to it. Right. And but it's still it's still latches on to things to use your metaphor. Of course. So, so I mean, the thing is people should pay more attention to the work of Dan Sperber, who I think had a better way of talking about the mimetic aspect of things. But in a shorthand way, yes, there's a way in which the these ideas have a life of their own. Right. And the way they link, you know, minds together, they they they link various domains of interaction together. They they even perhaps help link various areas of the brain together. And you can see in this this connects into the the uber boy, oh, boys, where these ideas are out there, too. And they're not in our functionality. They're not gods, but they're sort of functioning in the same way. And they're functioning out there. And they're part of this dynamic process where we're we're trying to locate ourselves in the story verse. And there are other ideas. And, you know, of course, Jung's you don't have ideas. Ideas have you. So I want to I want to talk a little bit about the narcissism. Because part of the reason that I continue to find, well, maybe part of the reason that Jonathan Peugeot and I continue to find Christianity a viable, a viable option is because we live it. It's viable for me. Seems viable for Jonathan. I find it viable for for many people. I don't want to push that too far, because, again, I talked to many people like the woman at equality, equality existent, equality experience. What is it? I'm going to talk to her about the name of that channel because that intrigues me. But and I take very seriously. And I'm sure John Verbecky is partly in that, too, that, you know, I just I just can't believe in this God. I just can't believe in this. But one of the things that has come up is this resurgence of conservative reformed Christianity, which I've spoken before about kind of the layout of of the Protestant, the Protestant church movements in the late 20th century, where you have the seeker movement, which was fundamentally evangelical. But adapting some missiology to create a safe place to hear a dangerous message. That was that was Willow Creek. And that was followed by the emergence, which was a pushback. There's always sort of a Hegelian. There's a Hegelian struggle that goes. So the emergence arose and the emergence split into progressive evangelicalism and and another major factor. Not the only one, of course, was this was this was this young, restless and reformed movement. And and Frank, Frank Schaeffer is very much a part of the sort of a part of the progressive evangelicalism. I found a really interesting YouTube where he's talking to Brian McLaren, who is very much part of the progressive evangelical movement. And I do want to do some more work on those issues, because it's very much in that same moment as a quality, a quality experience, quality existence experience. I can't remember the type of the name of the channel. Sorry. I get so caught up that I forget details. But and in fact, both of those were going to have other versions of this talk. Both of those were going to play a primary role. But I think I'm going to put them in other videos and use them with some of the some of the the Jacob Harris stuff. I'm going to be talking to him in the in the upcoming upcoming, too, because this this difficulty of believing is. Is to Verveckis point. OK, because and I think it's very interesting following those who like in. This is why I make PowerPoint, because I forget names. Jacob, Jacob Harris is the the nuns that he gave to the Orthodox Church of America that presentation. And he'd done he had done his movie on there's a that's part of this process. OK, and and these processes are long and the world is large. And so they impact communities in different ways and the pervasive skepticism, the unbelief and what it really is, is a shaping of belief. So one of the strands that comes out of the the end of the the kind of the push of the seeker movement, it still has a lot of legs in it and a lot of places. But was this what was this new and reformed resurgence? And what comes out of this? This is Jonathan Piper and Tim Keller, who are both primary leaders in this. These are these are celebrity pastors. But but what comes out of this is and I know John would look at this and say, boy, that sure looks like narcissism. And it is. And I would say it's using the mechanism of narcissism. But the the end goal of this, if you would listen to someone like Tim Keller and someone like me, it's misery, deliverance, gratitude. The end goal of this is not self centeredness, but a selflessness that allows me to serve my neighbor sacrificially in a cruciform way. And so some church somewhere made a little little YouTube video of it that that really nicely encapsulate encapsulates it. This time with with John Piper speaking, not Tim Keller. Most of the time, a much more Tim Keller fan than a John Piper fan. But but just just listen to this and see how it feels to you. You are more sinful than you ever thought you were. And you are more loved than you ever dreamed you could be. The beauty of that statement is that it doesn't become unrealistic at either end, not the sin end or the grace end. Now, now, right here is the sort of the two ends of Jordan Peterson and his daring to believe in God. He recognizes that he's a sinner. But if you can't believe in God, if you struggle to believe in God, and even if you do, and for many people to believe that you are loved and to have to Kevlar always says talks about the penny dropping and to imagine that this then can turn into the kind of selflessness, sacrificial life that would say propel my father to become a minister in Patterson, New Jersey or or or Mother Teresa to go out and serve her father. Your sinfulness, which is worse than you think, is paid for at infinite cost. And God's valuing you is a free gift of grace that you don't deserve. But he delights to give. That's why he gives. He wants to value you. And so go out and serve the poor. To value you. And so go ahead and let yourself see the fullness of your sin. But with every glimpse, remind yourself of the infinite cost that was paid so that you don't dishonor the beauties of the Lord's sacrifice by holding on to the guilt that he paid to remove. And every time there's the slightest sense he loves me, he values me, he's taking me into his family. Don't let that produce a big hit. It won't because you don't deserve any of that. It is a free, blood-bought gift of grace overflowing from the heart of God. You didn't earn it. You didn't constrain it. But he loves to give it. Now God's disapproval of our imperfections, which are real and daily, is never a contempt for us. His disapproval of things in us is never contempt. So Hebrews 12 speaks of discipline, right? And what are the words used to describe that? For the Lord disciplines the one whom he loves and chastises every son he receives. And Proverbs that's being quoted here is even stronger. The Lord reproves him whom he loves as a father, the son in whom he delights. Those things feel separate to most of us. And so we have to re-school ourselves with texts like this for God's children, even while he is spanking them, even while there is a frown of disapproval on a behavior or an attitude. He never holds them in contempt. He never ceases to love them. He never ceases even to delight in them as his children. So let's dwell on the wonders of grace. Let every sense of unworthiness send you higher into orbit of praise for the infiniteness of the price paid for you. It is your father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. There's a lot of psycho technology in that baby. There really isn't. That's part of the reason I like Vervecki's work because there's all these mechanisms that get engaged. Now, I think Frank Schaeffer might have a fit that might give him fits in some ways, but because he sees he saw all the contradictories in his parents life, which, okay, if he was my kid, he'd see the contradictories in my life. I don't I don't. And he rightly, if you look at the conversation he had with with Ron Dart, you can find a video of him talking, Frank Schaeffer talking to Ron Dart, talking about the book. Frank Schaeffer, on one hand, very much doesn't accept a lot of this stuff from from his what his parents believed, but yet loved his parents deeply. And so, again, these kind of internal contradictions, human beings were were full of these things. But but there's there's various psycho technologies, powerful ones in that that that new young restless and reformed approach by by John Piper and by Tim Keller that that are powerful to to to put people in a new world. Okay, to give them a new framework around them. And they live in that. Now, of course, Frank Schaeffer doesn't believe any of that. And if you don't believe any of that, it won't work. And you can't adopt it in order to get the effects of it without believing. And you can't just believe it because you want to. And that, of course, is why we say, well, faith is a gift. Well, why do some people get the gift and not others? And and as a good Calvinist reform person, I say, I don't know. That's God's business. And and don't you know, there's this probably apocryphal story of a young man coming to Augustine and say, you know, I'm afraid I'm I'm afraid I'm not elect. And Augustine says, well, go find a church and get yourself elect. And it's it's sort of that it's sort of that approach to to these questions where. And I want to end with a video from Tim Keller at at his Google talks. And if you haven't noticed, if you look at the Google talks and Google has a variety of these talks, we'll see if Google pulls my video down. I just saw that poor poor Benjamin Boyce has gotten gotten demonetized. My channel isn't monetized. So. But but this but this point, I think in some ways, this video sort of wraps it together for me because we go back to Nietzsche and on and so and and summarizes this this this Protestant way. If you're a person who says, because of my rationality, I cannot believe in God or Christianity, what you're actually doing is you're assuming a set of beliefs about how rationality operates that are really a set of beliefs. And they're not self evident to everybody. They're contested. So they really a set of beliefs. So I can't believe in Christianity because you haven't proven it is a set of beliefs. Then the other thing that a lot of besides what I call proof ism, which is a set of beliefs about rationality, which can't be proven. Most secular people I know also are what you might call a humanist and humanism means they believe it's important that every human being be treated with dignity, that people's rights not be trampled upon, that we not oppress people, that we share our goods and our power with others and not exploit them. Right. When you say most, I mean, put this way, most of the atheists and most of the secular or non-religious people I know believe that. But here's a question. How do you prove that? What is that? Not only is that a set of beliefs, but frankly, those beliefs take more faith to believe in. See, if you're a Hindu, you believe the world is such that you will get off the cycle of reincarnation if you live a good life. If you don't live a good life, you keep getting reincarnated. If you live a good life, eventually you can be taken off the cycle of reincarnation and go into eternal bliss. If you believe the Bible, so if you are an Orthodox Jew or you're a Christian believer, you believe that God made the world, a loving God made the world, and you should love your neighbor so that you're like God and you can know him and you can be saved. In other words, to live a good life of humanistic values fits in with the Hindu view of what the universe is like. And it fits in with the Christian view or the Jewish view of what the universe is like. But what is the secular view of the world? It's called a materialist view, which is to say there's no supernatural, there's only natural. There's no soul, there's no heaven, it's just everything has a natural cause. So just to show the problem with that or I'll just say the amount of faith it takes to have humanistic values with that view of the world. Last year I found this, this was written in the New York Times. It was actually a letter. It says, there are 30,000 galaxies of over 13 billion years old, so there's 30,000 galaxies 13 billion years old, with many trillions of stars and many, many more trillions of inferred planets. So, how significant are you? He's talking to individual people. How significant are you? You are not special. You're just another piece of decaying matter on the compost pile of this world. Nothing of who you are and what you do in the short time you are here will ever matter. Everything short of that realization is vanity. Therefore, or it says so, celebrate life in every moment, admire its wonders and love people without reservation. Now the word so, most of us think the word so means this logically leads to that. When you say so, we think that somehow what comes before the so should lead you to do what comes after the so, right? But here's the question. The first part of that statement is a bracing, wonderfully honest look at what it means to believe in a materialist universe. You're not here for any purpose. No one put you here. You came up through evolution, red in tooth and claw, you know, the strong eating the weak. Your ancestors, you're only here because your ancestors killed weaker organisms. And in the end, eventually you're going to die, then the sun is going to die, then civilization will die, and in the end, whether you're a genocidal maniac or whether you're an altruist and philanthropist will make no difference in the end. There won't be anybody around to remember anything that anyone's ever done. So in the end, nothing you do will matter, right? Therefore, he says, love one another. See, here's the question. If that's the case, the nature of the universe, why should I love other people? If my ancestor got here by destroying and eating the weaker organisms, why should I now suddenly become unselfish? And the answer is, if you want to believe in humanistic values, I'm glad, by the way. I am really glad. The more people that believe in humanistic values, I think the better the world will be. But it doesn't follow, from your view, the universe at all. It's a huge leap of faith, unbelievable leap of faith. It doesn't take huge faith to go from the Hindu view of the universe to humanistic values, or from the Christian view of the universe to humanistic values, but it does from the materialistic, the secular view to humanistic values. You can believe them, but don't tell me that that's not a leap of faith. It's an enormous leap of faith. And you know who's going to tell you? Nietzsche. Friedrich Nietzsche is going to say, and this is what he did say, and he argued incredibly, I would say, in an incredibly convincing way, he would say, if you say, I'm an atheist, and then you say, but we should not starve the poor and we should treat everybody as with an honor of equal rights, he says, you're still a Christian, whether you admit it or not. Because he says, those ideas came historically into the Western society when people believed in the Christian understanding of the universe, that you're here for a purpose and you're made by a loving God and you're made in the image of God and all human beings are children of God. He says, those values made sense when we believed the Christian view of the universe, but we don't believe that anymore. And therefore, if you hold on to those values, you're actually being a Christian and a very, very inconsistent person, even though you won't admit it. And I don't think you can answer, Nietzsche. So now here's where we are. Fundamentally, there are no irreligious people. At one level, absolutely everybody has a set of beliefs, including secular people and irreligious people have a set of beliefs about the universe, that A, you can't prove empirically, B, it are not self-evident to most of the rest of the world. See, even if you can't prove something, sometimes you can say, but everybody knows that. And you can't say that about any particular set of beliefs about the universe. So in other words, you can't prove that if you're a secular person, your beliefs you can't prove, B, your beliefs are not self-evident to most people in the world, and C, as I'm going to show you here in a second, is your beliefs have as many contradictions and problems that attend to them as any religious faith does. And you can watch the whole video. I'm going to end this with, I can't play it because I just had the conversation this afternoon, and it was a truly wonderful conversation. I can't say who it was with because it's a he, and he hasn't had a chance to look at it yet, and I don't play clips or play conversations until after the people give me their permission. But he, at the end of my conversation with him, he basically articulated almost exactly what Peterson did about not daring to say he believes in God. And I really respected that from him. And I respect it from Peterson too. It's inconsistent. But I deeply respect it because what I think is at the bottom of it is actually a layer of the fear of the Lord. Now, they might not be ready to say, I believe, but sort of like John Verveckis, he doesn't use Jesus' name as some cheap thing. And there's a respect there. And I think in some ways, in some weird ways, even though belief for them is not upfront, there's an implicit maybe act as if and a deep reverence. And this individual, he had been talking to a priest and he had been going to church, and he very much wants to believe, but he can't believe. And because he can't believe, he will not lie about it. He will tell the truth. And so he won't say he believes in God. And it's a little different from Jordan's. He can't keep the law or he can't fulfill God's commandments or God's expectations. He takes this stuff so seriously, he will not make light of it. That's something I deeply respect. And so for all of you out there that are in this place where you've sort of become curious and you sort of want to believe and you want to inhabit this world, I will give you all the normal recommendations of start worshiping in a church and fake it till you make it. And you don't have to sing, you don't have to pray, you don't have to close your eyes. Just be in the room and listen and meet the people. For Jonathan Pujol and the Orthodox tradition, it would be go into a church and see Jesus up in the dome and listen to the liturgy and see if that begins to move you in this lectio divina sort of way. Because that is part of it. But yet, faith is a gift. And I think I had another delightful conversation where I got permission to this afternoon. And I will play this one. This was a fun, fun little half hour conversation. But where this woman, she married her husband and she was a believer and he was an atheist and for a while it was fine because he didn't put any impinge on her at all. And then he started, he didn't want her to watch her Christian programming or her podcast or anything. And this really just ticked her off. And so she began to pray that God would give him the visions and supernatural sightings that she has. And now he's a Christian. He believes. We fall into Christ's arms like we fall in love. It's not buying a sensible used car. And here's a thing about speaking as a Christian minister. God works on his own time and in his own way. And that's why he's the warrior. He's the husband. He's the hunter. And we are his beloved. We are his prey. We are his children. And part of us wants to be autonomous and to rebel. But part of us wants to be ravished and held and belong to him. So this will be a very long video. I don't know if we're going to post it in one part or two. But let me know what you think.