https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NYDJjVbG3mk

 Hi Sherry, how are you? I have no idea who you are. Tell me a little bit about yourself. My name is Sherry Souter and I'm from the interior of British Columbia. I have a farm. We've been kind of self-sustaining for about 22 years living in Canada. We moved from Switzerland. My husband is Swiss, I'm Canadian. I'm starting to remember your email. Yeah, yeah, and you know, you know what, it like right now I have one of my ewes is lambing. I have sheep and so it's possible that my husband might have to interrupt us. He's gonna keep an eye on her and make sure everything goes okay, but yeah, she had to pick today and now. Yeah, yeah, yeah, it happens. Those animals, babies of every kind don't seem to are terribly considerate of their parents timings. Yeah, that's right, that's right. Yeah, so I've been listening to your stuff on YouTube for some time and of course I've been following Jordan Peterson. That's what led me to you and before anything, before I forget, I just wanted to thank you for, I know many people have and I know that they all mean it as sincerely as I do. We really appreciate all the time and effort that you put into this because it's really really helpful and I've been able to refer lots of people to your YouTube channel just for that extra insight, you know, that they can get from watching your videos. So it's been great, really great and the conversations are actually really great too. I've enjoyed them a lot. Well, thank you. Yeah, the conversations never get quite as many views, but I love the conversations. I do too, I do too because it's where the rubber hits the road, right? Yeah. And so that's what really interests me is how is this, you know, this is where everybody is applying all these ideas and how is that working out for them and where is it leading them ultimately? And that's of course surprising both myself and you too, I think. Well, exactly and I think you said it very well. So usually we just get the show, what's going on, but what a huge, as a pastor, especially because you get this as a pastor, because you preach, but you also get it coming back. And so for me, being able to have this channel, to have a podcast talk about, are these ideas changing me? What new ideas am I having? And then to have people share their stories, this is just so much fun. It is and that's what really matters, you know? I mean, people can have lots of ideas and they can talk till, you know, the cows come home. But it's where, it's all those ideas are improving their lives and spiritually and emotionally and physically and even financially. And so that's really, to me, that's, I'm a very practical, I'm like the ultimate pragmatist. If it doesn't work, that's it. Well, you have no choice when you're on a farm. I mean, that's... Well, that's right. Yeah, you kind of get formed that way, you know? Like, experience forms you into this person who, yeah, you just don't have a whole lot of time for things that aren't applicable. They don't have to be practical, but they have to be applicable. So, yeah. I'm also a Christian. I've been a Christian since I was about 19 years old. I didn't grow up in a Christian home. I'm 56 now, so it's been a long, long time. I'm also married. I'm married for 33 years. I have three children. Congratulations. Yeah, and my oldest daughter has three children, so I'm a grandmother. Wonderful! I'm jealous. I'm not a grandparent yet. I'm leaning on my... They're not married yet either, so I don't lean too hard, but it's like, at some point, y'all, little something return here, grandbabies. It's great, but the only problem is they're all in Europe. I'm in Canada. Oh, yeah. They took advantage of their Swiss passports and they all went traveling and then, you know, met the loves of their lives and so on. So, that's where they are. Yeah, and they're doing well. I'm actually very proud of all my kids. I think they're fabulous. Wonderful. Yeah, and as far as my personal life, my Christian life, I was not raised in a Christian home. My parents became Christians when I was about 14 years old. I had a, you know, turbulent teenage years and so on and so forth that, you know, I don't really need to get into all that. But my conversion story, just in a nutshell, was that I was pregnant at the age of 19. I moved back in with my parents. I was not interested in going to church. My parents, by the way, they came to know the Lord through the Plymouth Brethren. So, yeah, so a very conservative, very tight-knit group. Not closed, but very close to it. Yeah, and I moved in with them and when I had my daughter, I decided that I needed to give her all the best options in life so that she didn't have to go through some of the things I did. And I thought I would start just by reading the Bible as a textbook. I remember saying that to myself. I'm just gonna read it as a textbook, you know. You fool! No! So I got, I got, I got sucked right in. Sam Harris wasn't around to warn you. No, no. No, I figured, you know, it's still a lot of good for the world, I think. So, you know, maybe it'll help my, help me raise my daughter. And I fell in love. I started in Matthew and by the time I got to John, I was madly in love with Jesus. Wow. I just, I couldn't believe, I think the thing that stood out to me the most was that I couldn't believe how smart he was, you know. Like, it was just like his responses to people were so, like they were not human, you know. And he, he drove it home every single time, you know. So, and that to me was just divine, you know. Like, there was no other explanation for that. So, yeah. So that's kind of that in a nutshell. There's a lot about, there's a lot of, that's a great story. Yeah. Yeah. And of course, I, being Canadian, when Jordan Peterson raised his head above the parapet for Bill C-16, I was like, well, who is that, you know? I like that guy. He raised his head, hey! I found Buckle last week. So, he's back in the office. He's back in his, back in his spot. Back in his place. He always falls, he always falls off the shelf. So, drinking lobster. Anyway, go on. I'm sorry, I interrupted. That's all right. Yeah. So, I, you know, I've kind of always had a bit of a radar for truth and honesty and integrity. It's just something that, that it stands out for me, you know. I can spot it. I'm not always right, that's for sure. But when I, when I saw that, I saw it on the news actually. And I was like, okay, who is this guy? And, you know, googled his name. And he's either, he's either fabulous or he's absolutely crazy, you know, which is actually what he said, right, about it. And, and of course, I ran into all his lectures online and I thought, and I love, like, I'm, I did the personality test and I'm very high in openness. So, I'm just like, I love ideas. I love talking about things, you know, I love, yeah, anyway. So, when I saw what he was all about, I just thought, well, you know what, I'm going to start with the personality lectures. And he was, he had started the biblical series at that point. He was kind of made away through the biblical series. And I, and I, I have to give myself little rewards. So, I promised myself that if I was a really good girl and I listened to all the lectures, I could have the biblical series at the end. I know that strategy. Yeah, yeah. And so I slogged through everything. And of course, by the time I got to the biblical lectures, I had a really good idea. And it was a good thing. I did it that way because, and I wanted to, because I needed to know what, you know, what is this driving force for all of this? You know, what is the, you know, the focus in this man's life? And, you know, there's got to be a lot of impetus there. So, yeah. And then, of course, I, you know, ran across your videos and I watched many of them. And I, you know, I don't always have a lot of time to do, to watch as much as I'd like. Winter is my, you know, I hunker down and, and, and do that. Yeah. Yeah. Now we're, now we're lambing and gardening and, you know, that'll all start pretty soon and then it gets too busy. But, yeah. And one of the things that, that stood out to me about what, what you were after was what is going on here? You know, it was like, you were, and I, and I understand this as a Christian for many, many years and I've been to many different churches, you know, and I've seen this and that. How is it that a psychologist can rally all these people to the Lord, like to God, you know, in that direction at least. And the churches are just like, you know, they're just, you know, they're like the hunchback of Notre Dame, you know. Just limping along on one leg. Ooh, hunchback symbolism. Oh my, this is going to be interesting. Yeah. So, and I have, I have, you know, being, being the kind of person I am, I'm always thinking about things, you know, I'm always, I'm always tossing ideas around. And so I thought I'm gonna, I need to talk to Paul and I need to throw this out to you and I need your opinion on these things. Not, I, I don't want to tell you what I think. Okay. Because I, because I think that, like I actually don't get to have these conversations very often. Being where I live. And, and so it's nice for me to also share some of this with you and get your feedback. You've been to seminary, you've been a pastor for many years and I know that you know a lot more than I do. So, so I'm just, if you don't mind, I'm just going to kind of throw out a few things. And then we'll get your response. I'll get your response. Okay. Don't feel, if I go on too long, don't be afraid to cut me off. I will. I, you know what, we can always do it again, because I think it's, it's the kind of thing that it's pretty heavy. I think it can get pretty heavy, what we're going to talk about here. So, I'm just going to look at my notes really quick here. Okay. So, I'm a firm believer in getting back to the beginning, you know, so to speak, quote unquote, right? And for me, the beginning is Genesis. And then, and there's, there's so much truth in Genesis. There's so much there that you can always kind of go, you know, back and then from that point move, try to move forward. So, thinking about the difference between, or the, the difference in effect that, that Jordan Peterson is having compared to the church, let's say. My question is, or my observation, and it's going to be really hard for me to get this all, you know, coherent. Oops. Everything okay? Two babies? Oh, wonderful. Oh, wow. Whoa, congratulations. We can still talk. Yeah. Okay. So, so the church places a lot of emphasis on our lack of, or lack of, you know, our insufficiencies, let's say, you know, but this is my experience. Okay. Now, I, you know, this might not be everybody's experience, but so there's this, you know, this idea of the sinful man, the dying to self, the crucifying the old man, that, you know, all this kind of thing, right? So, the church, generally speaking, places a lot of emphasis on that. And just as an example, this is kind of a living example. I was in counseling many, many years ago, and one of the things with a, with a church person, and one of the things that we were doing was learning how to die to self, right? So, it was like, get up in the morning and you could pray through some of these prayers, and you could do these things, and then you, you know, you get up and you move, and you try to be the best person you could possibly be. And I just felt like this was, it was like spinning my tires in a big mud bog, you know, like that's how it ended up feeling to me. And I did the, I made the analogy to this person who was well-intended, and it was all good, that I felt like, you know, if I get up in the morning and I crucify the old man, right? So, I'd literally like, crucify myself to a cross. Then I'm hopping around on a pogo stick, basically. I don't have my hands or my feet, and the slightest obstacle sends me flying face first into the mud. Okay? And that, and so, that was what I was seeing. Now, years and years and years later, and a brain injury later, I was in cognitive behavioral therapy, and I said to my psychologist, this is just like Christianity. This is, you have to do the work, you have to change your mind, that will change your feelings, which will then change your thoughts, right? Like, so, you got to get up, you got to crucify your old man, you got to hop around on your pogo stick, and hope to God that you don't fall flat in your face. And so, I said to him, this is not going to work for me, because it didn't work for me in the church either, right? Because that, to me, that isn't grace. And I know grace can be taken out of context, and I know it can be used to, you know, ice over a whole lot of really bad things, and that's not how I mean it. So, let me say it this way. Let's say the church says, you're a sinner, and you need God, okay? Which is what the church says. Compared to Jordan Peterson, Jordan Peterson says, you know you're a sinner. You know your insufficiencies. You know you're not cleaning your room. You know that you need to be a better person. You know that you need to be a better husband or a better wife, right? And you can be that, okay? So, I think that there is a gap there for people, and I think that that gap, now here's my question to you. The church tends to see our humanity as the sinful part of us, right? Christ comes to indwell us, and then we're safe, but we still have to deal with sin. Now, is that my perception, or is that correct? Well, the task of pastors and theologians is to split words, and the church has traditionally said we have three enemies. We have the devil, we have the world, and we have our sinful nature. I just finished doing a video on the first, on the big Liberty video with Peterson, and there's a video that comes after it that you might or might not have seen. I did watch it. Okay, the second one. And actually, a conversation I had yesterday with Nick, where we talked about, Nick brought up Calvinism. I started it, but I haven't finished that one yet. Okay, there's an unresolved question in Christianity, and when I say unresolved, I mean that the entire, all of Christendom has not yet resolved it. And so, this is Calvinist versus Arminians, this unresolved question about how does God work with respect to how do we work? And C.S. Lewis actually addresses this a bit in Mere Christianity, and says that God's work and our working is not like two bricklayers standing and each contributing bricks to a wall. And that, I think, gets into, now I often talk about with Jordan Peterson stuff, God number one and God number two. God number one is imminent. It is the God that is built into us via psychology and formation over thousands and thousands of years. God, you know, has built stuff into us, and that's the imminent God. And then, but then there's the transcendent God, which is much closer to the conscious agent that acts, that we associate with action. So, you know, I'd actually like a lot of Peterson's imagery in terms of burning off the dead wood, that's very similar to Christian mortification. But exactly knowing what is dead and what is living is never, you're never quite sure. And, you know, perhaps it's kind of like, and you, in terms of farming, deal with these unsure places all the time. For example, I'll use an illustration like clipping the nails of my cat or my dog. I mean, you can, you gotta clip those nails, but you, you know, you don't want to cut it, the phrase, cut it to the quick, where you're going to hit that vein and it's going to bleed out. But, and so you're always, you're always in there. And so when it comes to our mortification, it's, it's, it's, it's a process of discovery moving forward. I love your imagery of the pogo stick, because what, what happens too often, I think, is that, okay, so you have the set of rules. And so you have the mosaic law, for example. So here are all the rules. And if you listen to David Nasser in the video talk, he likes to set up a very clean dichotomy. Here's all the things in the Bible and here's the bad me. But, but sin is far more intertwined than that. And so it isn't God's, God's sanctification of you, his making of the new self, he is going to keep using parts of the old self that will painfully have to die. And it's more like the weeds and the tears in that they kind of grow together often. So that, okay, well, that imagery help. It does. It does. And then, well, let me get back to CBD cognitive behavioral therapy. You know, I was reading some of that in Jonathan Haidt's book, The Coddling of the American Mind, because all of these, you know, all of these issues that we're dealing with in the culture war have their connections to pastoral issues as well. For example, victims and victimizing. And Peterson is dead on right in this. If I say to myself, I'm a victim and everyone else, everyone else is to blame. Now I've made all the deadwood that has to burn everyone else. And I've just sanctified myself. That's a very unhelpful way. So cognitive behavioral therapy means I've learned, I've learned, I was listening to a story by a comedian about his use of psychedelics and, and Gabber, Matei, so I listened to a video about that. And he was telling the story about when he was young, he had some trauma in his childhood. And what had happened in him was that he had taken on some patterns of behavior that in a sense protected him as a child. But now that he's an adult, they need to die. And there's a lot of that going on that in cognitive behavioral therapy, those are the kinds of things you have to address. And it's very similar in terms of sanctification and mortification. But that process is the reason that- Well, that's the mystery. Yes. That's the mystery. And see, so for me, what happened was I told my psychologist that I didn't want to do CBT anymore. He had to find me another form of therapy. And so he did. He found me a form of therapy called acceptance and commitment therapy. It's based on Buddhism. And I read through the literature and I said to him, okay, this actually coincides with my belief system, so I can make this work. And so, you know, Buddhism does come alongside Christianity in certain places. And especially in this place, and I'm not promoting that by any means, but what I'm saying is that it's about accepting your situation, your flaws, your demons. Okay, so this is from a purely psychological viewpoint. But committing to making that path forward. So you're going to the city of God, okay? You're going to pick up your load, you're going to climb those steps, and you're going to get to the top. And Jesus uses that kind of imagery when he says, my yoke is easy and my burden is light. Right? And the beautiful thing about acceptance and commitment therapy is it's actually not hard once you understood it. Okay? Whereas cognitive behavioral therapy, and I'm using these as kind of juxtaposition, like showing the different approaches to the, you know, sanctification, I guess, is that what you call it? Yep. Yep. Yep. You know? So the cognitive behavioral therapy is the pogo stick, right? It's the oh, oh, oh, oh, you know, and oh, I'm sorry, you know, excuse me, crash, bang, boom. And trial and error and failure and people, you know, like, that's a horrible feeling, right? When you fail. Yep. And whereas acceptance and commitment therapy is, okay, I'm going to pick up this load, and me and all my garbage, we're all going to go together, and I'm not going to care what they say to me. Yeah. Yeah. They can say whatever they want. Because the theory with acceptance and commitment therapy is that if you engage with all these voices, all these demons, all these, you know, distorted thoughts or whatever, then you actually pull, you're pulling over, and you're not going anywhere. Okay. Right? You've turned around, and you've engaged, and you're not moving forward. Right. So, so they have this little image, there's actually, I think, a little YouTube video about it, just to help people understand the concept where you're on a bus, you're driving the bus, you know, and you're headed for value mountain. And, and, and so if you, if you just tell them all, listen, you can talk all you want, you can do anything, you can say anything, so don't bother me, because I'm driving here, I'm going here. Yeah. And it, and it, and it disarms them, it actually, like, will disarm your, your, your thought processes. And, and, and that can be, I mean, it's not identical, but there's something to that in the Christian life, for me anyway, where I can, because a lot of people, you know, I grew up around a lot of Christians, and a lot of Christians beat themselves up because they're not the best person that they could be. Right. And yeah, we could go on about this for a long time. Bob Dylan said, Bob Dylan says in one of his songs, temptations, not an easy game. And I'm giving the devil rain. But sin, you see, I've got no choice. It runs in my veins. And this is the thing that I think is so true. It's like, it's a, it's a disease, sin. It isn't an act. It's not like I hit my sister, so I'm a sinner, or I watch porn, and that makes me a sinner. It's a disease. Right. And, and when, and when, when God created Adam and Eve, he created them in his image. And he walked with them in the cool of the evening, and he fellowshiped with them in Genesis. So this is getting back to the beginning. And everything was cool. Right. Between God and man. Yep. So humanity was not a problem. You know, like, our humanness wasn't a problem. Right. It was when that sin entered through Adam. Right. You know, which was, which was actually just an independent move, right? It was, it was independence from God. And, and then the relationship was broken. Yeah. And, and so I think that Jordan Peterson is making that distinction somehow. What distinction? It's, well, it that it's okay. God made you human. He knows your failings. Right. And you don't have to jump around on a pogo stick. You just have to pick up the load and move forward. Right. You got to keep moving forward. There, there are, there, there are times, you know, there are times when, when you do wind up on a pogo stick. And, you know, when you, when you look at, especially when you look at, say, someone who is, is trying to get sober. I mean, that for them, I think probably often feels like it. So, yeah, it's the past. It's not to say that you don't try. Right. It's not to say that you, you never get up in the morning and try to be, you know, it's like, but there is something about this identity. Like, you know, we're told in the scriptures that we are everything, we, everything that Christ is, we are everything that he has, we have. And how many people actually acknowledge that first thing in the morning, you know, and walk in that. Yep. Yep. And, and the, oh, no, that's, that's so right. And, and so, you know, I just finished again listening to that video again. There, there's so many things I try to, one of the things I try to get across sometimes is that, is the idea of more than, because so often we like to handle paradox with balance. And that's sometimes a very helpful way to handle paradox with balance. But, you know, Tim Keller, for example, has a saying, you are more sinful than you can imagine. And you are more loved than you can believe. And, but there's also more of those more than's. And one of Jordan Peterson's, which is you're more powerful than you understand. And you're also more vulnerable than you understand. I mean, all of these more than's are, are there. And I think part of it is because this gets into, I mean, one of the earliest things I picked up from Peterson was the low resolution, high resolution language, which when I heard him using it, I thought, oh, that's genius. That's really helpful. We work in this world with such low resolution. And so then someone makes a discovery. I'm way more powerful than I thought. And it's like, yeah, you are. You're also way more vulnerable than you are. And so that's when we try to get into balance. I'm, I'm so, I'm way more loved by God than I can possibly imagine. Wow. I'm also way more rebellious and sinful than I'm aware of. And so it's kind of the resolution continues to heighten. And sometimes we get glimpses of a more than. And then when we don't see some of the other more than's, things do get a little out of balance. And that's usually, wow, I'm more powerful than I am. And then you go out on that and you discover, wow, I'm also more vulnerable than I thought I was. So life just continues to up the resolution. And I think that's where we get into kind of C.S. Lewis's last battle further up and further in, because you never exhaust that there's God. Oh, and that's the beautiful thing. That's, that's, that's the thing about going back to the beginning, right? Because when, as soon as you get back, you start going back to the beginning, it gets so deep. It gets, you know, then it's, then you're talking about redemption, right? So that's, that's when the story of redemption started. As soon as Adam, you know, as soon as sin entered the world through Adam, this, it was on, the redemption story was on, you know, and, and, and everything else, you know, from that moment in time on is the redemption story. And look at the name of the tree. The name of the tree is not tree of the knowledge of evil. No, it's tree of the knowledge of good and evil. And so actually, and this gets me, and this gets into, this gets, there's, there's ancient theological debates that surround these issues that are also unresolved, but we don't pay much attention. I've thought a lot about, I've thought a lot about that whole, yeah, yeah, yeah. Why, why did God put the tree in the garden? Yeah. And I, I remember speaking to, speaking to a, a Jewish, a Jewish man who was a Christian, and he taught at a church that was for Jewish Christians. You know, I don't know if, I don't think he was called a rabbi, but anyway, and, and I asked him that question. He just looked at me and smiled and said, good question. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I was like, oh, it's one of those, you know, it's one of those, but yeah. So, what, one of the things I wanted to ask you about too was, what do you think about the whole idea of this? Like you've talked about, I can't remember how you phrase it, but you've talked about, you know, the end game being the new heaven and the new earth. Yes. Right. Yes. How do you phrase that? The reconciliation of heaven and earth. The reconciliation of heaven and earth. Okay. So do you think that that is somehow symbolic as the reconciliation between man and God? Yes. Because. That's it. Okay. Okay, good. Good. That is it. Okay. So, so this idea of God making us human, man, and then us sinning, so disease, you know, this disease enters our line and it just, it's, it's like a cancer that just putrefies everything, like right down the line, right? Yep. Then, then Jesus comes and he is a man, but he's also God. Yes. Right. Yes. So there is this embodied reconciliation. Yes. Of man and God. Yes. And I love that. Yes. Okay. Because what that refers back to is the garden. Yes. And God walked together in the cool of the evening, you know, and that's the thing that just sends chills down my spine. Yes. Yes. You know? That's all built in there. It's, it's, it's all there. That's what Peugeot is so good at is, is helping people see, oh yeah, yeah, Jesus. And the Bible talks in these flat, these ways sometimes. And we, we look at them and we kind of puzzle, but it's all built in there. Jesus is, Jesus is the story. I know. He's built into him. But then, I know. He's, he's creation 1.0. He's the reconciliation of heaven and earth. And then in the resurrection, he's creation 2.0. He's the reconciliation. Right. New heavens and new earth come together. I mean, all of those things come together in that story. It's, and, and so on. Yes. Yes. Death, which was, which was the consequence of sin entering, right? That's right. Was, was there, was taken care of. Like that's, that's like, it's that redemption story, right? Started then, and then found its culmination in, in, in Christ. Right. Yep. So, so somehow this whole reconciliation thing, now I'm just going to toss this in here and see what you think. It's like a marriage, right? Which is, which is what the church and Christ are described as, the bride and the bridegroom. That's right. And, and in this marriage, and, and I think this is the reason that many people seek a partner and, you know, a commitment, a lifelong commitment is a knowing, right? A knowing, a deep sense of belonging. And, and so that, that brings me to the, you know, the verse, right? From Paul, for now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face, now I know in part, but then I shall know even as also I am known. And to me that, that is, you know, we have, you know, I listen to all the conversations and I listen to Jordan Peterson and I listen to you. And it's very informative and it's great. I love it. But now we see through a glass darkly, you know, and so there's this moment in time where everyone is going to be known so intimately, it's going to bring about this incredible feeling of being in this marriage, in this, in this reconciled state, you know, it's just glorious. Isn't it Paul? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. And that leads off into, into so many glorious places and we can, we can just kind of touch it with our imaginations. But, you know, C.S. Lewis deals with some of these things until we have faces. If you've ever read that novel, it's his best. Oh, it's his best novel. And he actually wrote quite a bit. He kind of co-wrote it with Joy Davidman, which is interesting because she was an interesting person too. But this, no, that's exactly right. And it's, you know, it's this Augustinian idea that every, every taste. So, so again, the big Liberty video of the convocation itself, Note in the Network is a guy who, who makes videos too. He's, he watches my channel and sometimes he refers to my videos in his channel. And he made the comment that, you know, when that, when David rushed the stage and said, Oh God, you know, Note says, well, you know, is he talking about, is it just an exclamation or is he looking for God through Peterson? That's very Augustinian. That's very right. He's, you know, he's, that's what we're doing. That's what we're looking for God in beauty and in good food and in the beauty of creation. There's a, there's a story, you'll appreciate this, told to me by my father, was told in by his father, my grandfather was pastoring churches in rural areas in the Midwest. Almost all the Dutch immigrants were dairy farmers. So they, one of the, one of the, one of the, one of his parishioners once asked him if, you know, if there will be, if there will be calves in heaven, because he doesn't know anything more beautiful than the, than the look of a, than the eyes of a newborn calf. And, you know, and so through those eyes, in a sense, he begins to see God and the world is full of his glory and no, that's right. All those things come together, everything. And it all always leads back to this Genesis. It's just, it's, it's such a complete package that it's mind boggling. Yeah. Really. Yeah. Because it doesn't stop. Yeah. And then there's the whole idea of, you know, in you and through you and to you and, you know. Yes. Yes. So it's, it's, it's, and it's, it's just fantastic, actually. And Jordan Peterson has actually helped me to see it from a different angle, I guess. Yep. You know, to, to, to say, okay, yes, I understand this, this idea of death and resurrection and burning off the dead wood and carrying your load, you know, and being responsible. Those are, or should be consequences of your, of you knowing who you are, you know, kind of reminds me of the characters in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. They all had to learn to be royalty. Yes. Yes. They had to learn that they were kings and queens. Yes. Yes. And take on that position, you know. Yes. Yes. And as, as Christians, we, we, we have to really believe that about ourselves, you know. Yes. Yes. And, and, and even, and that's where the Edmund story is so precious because, you know, Lucy, Lucy's the golden child, you know, Susan, what happened with Susan? Peter is the high king, but Edmund is the rebel. And, and Aslan. So just in the video I talked about, I introduced Leo Bebb and the Book of Bebb. I don't know if you've ever read Frederick Beekner. No. No. But Leo Bebb comes in Frederick Beekner's first of four novels called Lion Country. And he's a, he's running a diploma mill, but, but he goes to this one park where there's all these lions out there. And, and Aslan, of course, is the great lion. And Aslan isn't in Leo Bebb, but they comes together in that the great lion allows himself to be sacrificed, you know, for Edmund. And I know it's beautiful. Yeah. It's beautiful. It's beautiful. And it's, and it's all, you know, all that power that's found in that, in that truth is ours, you know? And, and, and this is the thing I think that, that what Jordan Peterson is helping people with is, is giving them that you can be the hero. You can do this. You can carry that load. You can be, you know, the high king and the queen, right? This is your true calling. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, and so it's, it's great. And, and as far as people going from atheism to, to God, it's kind of like my story. It's, it's, it's like, you can't read the Bible as a textbook, right? You put a toe over and either you recoil in horror because you just encountered the living God, or you get sucked right in like a vacuum cleaner, you know? Like, like there's, it's just, you know, I wanted to read a quick quote. Is our time almost up? Yeah, no, we're okay. Okay. I don't have a call after you. I've got some flexibility. Okay. I have this quote. I, I wrote it years ago in this little, little book here, and you'll probably recognize it's from miracles. CS Lewis wrote this, look out, we cry, it's alive. And therefore this is the very point this is the very point at which so many drawback. I would have done so myself if I could and proceed no further with Christianity and impersonal God, well and good, the subjective God of beauty, truth and goodness inside our own heads, better still, a formless life force surging through us, a vast power we can tap best of all, but God himself alive, pulling at the other end of the cord, perhaps approaching at an infinite speed, the hunter, the king, the husband, that is quite another matter. That's right. There comes a moment when the children who have been playing at burglars, hush, suddenly, was that real footsteps in the hall? There comes a moment when people who have been dabbling in religion suddenly draw back, supposing we really found him. We never knew, we never meant it to come to that. We're still supposing he had found us. So it is a sort of Rubicon, one goes across or not, but if one does, there is no matter of security against miracles. One may be in for anything. That's right. And I think that's what's happening to these people. They're playing, they're pulling, they're dipping that little cord in and see if they get a tug back. Oh my God, they do. That's right. That's right. That's right. You know, Peterson, again, in that Liberty video, I just finished the video on this and he repeats the same story that he told in the Sam Harris video of the prayer story. Well, if you sit on the edge of your bed and you really mean it and you, you know, something will talk back. It's like, yeah, that's right. Something will, something that you put that light in the water, you know, be prepared for what might be coming out of the water. And yeah, and that's, you know, that is, and that's, you know, converting, converting is not like making a decision on a sensible used car. Converting is more like falling in love. I mean, it takes, it's absolutely that. Yeah. Yeah. It takes you. And then I love your story where I'm going to read the Bible because whoa, and then, and then other people will come to me and say, well, I read the Bible and it didn't take. And it's like, well, again, God number one and God number two, God number two is God. And you can't, yeah, you can look for him and you can find stuff. Sure. But he's not, you know, that's the difference between pantheism. Pantheism is everything is passive. You know, right. This is an active agent living being who can come after you. Then what? And yeah. And then suddenly our pride, our self-sufficiency, then we're, then we are the bride of Christ. And that's right. You know, yeah. And we're just, we don't want it. Yeah. I hope, I hope that, you know, if anybody watches this, that they're not frightened off from, you know, this kind of conversation about God, because it's, it's this, it's, it's really the adventure of a lifetime to be in relationship with God. You know, I was reading Hebrews 11, because I was thinking about this whole knowing idea. And I don't think we have time to get into it, but maybe we could another time. You know, one of the, one of the things there's just a little short blip in the old Testament about Enoch, you know, and, and Enoch, Enoch was, you know, he didn't even live that long, apparently he was what 300 when he died. Yeah. Yeah. Everybody else was a mere youth. A teenager. That's right. But somehow he pleased God and he was, you know, according to the New Testament, he was, he was just taken. He wasn't, he didn't die. Yeah. And, and I don't know, like there, there weren't, there wasn't any real law when Enoch lived, was there? Not that we know. Those, those early chapters of Genesis are so evocative rather than descriptive and detail oriented. I just thought about it from a purely, let's say, you know, the idea that Enoch could please God so much that he wouldn't die. And yet there were no laws. Okay. He couldn't fulfill anything. Yeah. Right. He was just a man who was in a relationship with God, with the living God. And, and the relationship was so great and he's listed in Hebrews 11 as a great man of faith. Yeah. And so then you have to wonder, well, what, what is faith? Is faith knowing God? Is that what it is? Like really like knowing him as your husband, as your king, as you know, like this knowing, is that what faith is? Like you can't, another, another quick example is Job. So Job was tested, right? God allowed him to be tested. And I thought a lot about it. And I thought Job never, God said, yeah, go ahead. You know, it'll work. He's not gonna, he's not gonna cash in his chips on me, you know? And Job is also listed as a great man of faith in Hebrews 11. Yeah. And I thought to myself, you know, if you know somebody really well, you know them so deeply and so well that people come along and tell you stories about them and it must be this and must be that, that they, that that's the reason that they're treating you like this. You would actually say no, no, no, because I know them, right? And they would never do that. They wouldn't, that wouldn't be their reason. Yeah. And I think that that's the same for Job. He, he knew God so intimately that he couldn't deny him. How could he? Would be like denying your mother or, you know, some living thing that you've had a relationship with, right? You just, so. You've been married to your husband for 33 years. You know what you can trust him for and you know what you can't trust him with. Am I right? I didn't think I could trust him. Yeah, oh yeah. I didn't think I could trust him with lands, but he did really great. Well, you're, you're not done together, so. Yeah. That's right. And Hebrews, you know, Hebrews 11 gives this contrast of faith and seeing. And, and so faith is this, faith is this, is this grasping onto what we don't see. And, and, and also, you know, so the, the crazy thing, and this is where again I come, so, so how to, how to talk about the Peterson stuff and where does the resurrection fit in? It comes, it comes into these, these questions of, let's say, so Abraham, Abraham, the Abraham story too. God says, I'm going to make you a great nation. Everyone's like, great, this is what I've been waiting for. And then nothing, you know, God strings him along for 25 years. He's already 75. And as wife is already 60, you know, becomes 95. And, and then, you know, all these ways that Abraham tries to do it himself and God's like, Nope, Nope, Nope, I'm going to do it. And I'm going to do it in the, in just the way you say, I can't do it, which is through your old wife. And, and then he does all that and we have Isaac and then kids, you know, 13 or whatever, take your son, your only son to a mountain. I'm going to show you. It's like, oh, and, and, you know, all the way up the mountain, build the altar, the whole nine yards, raise the knife. And God says, now I know. And it's like, what? You know, I'm just, I've, I've been reading Soren Kierkegaard's fear and trembling. Have you, have you ever looked at it? No, I've never read it. Okay. Well, in the very, it's all about Abraham. And in the very beginning, he gives like, I don't know how many, six or seven different versions of Abraham's story, just from a, like a novelist, right? How, how Abraham felt when he got up and how what Isaac felt, you know, and what they talked about, or if they talked and, you know, so it's a different scenario. Like he just does these little scenarios, you know, and he takes you through every human, you know, conception of what it must have felt like for Abraham to go and why it made him such a great man of faith. And I think one of the main points that he makes in it is, is not necessarily that he knew God would either raise him from the dead or, you know, God, God's going to fix it, whatever happens. It was just that he trusted God, period. Yeah. Right. And, and that kind of trust, I mean, I never thought about it until I read that, that that kind of trust is not very common. No. No. Because we have so few who are trustworthy at that level. Yeah. Yeah. And, yeah. So, so then you get to, you get the hierarchies, okay, you're, you're husband. And so, you know, if something were to happen to you, would he be there for you? And, you know, in a relationship, you, you work through these things. And of course, that's why betrayal is so important. Betrayal, as Peterson says, is such a powerful thing because it is trust betrayed and broken. And that's why I love, that's why I love the, the description in, in first Corinthians 11 of the Lord's Supper on the night he was betrayed. I mean, it's just, I know on the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And he said, this is my body given for you. And it's like, oh, I know. And the, and so, you know, the, then back to the swinging back to the Peterson thing. One of the things that Peterson, I think has done is the, the church had kind of a black and white coloring book outlines of things. And for some things, Peterson has taken in the colors and made it colorful. So now post Peterson, when I think about betrayal, I see it more vividly than I did before Peterson. I understand it at a different level. And so much of Peterson's contributions have been in that way, which is really interesting. So yeah. And also just, just this innate sense of God, like that we, that we carry with us, right? We have this, it's like we have all these little receptors out, but we don't even know we have them. And, and, and when we come in contact with certain things like this whole awe thing, right? How, how awe is a physical sensation and how, you know, it's like, it's like we get a little plugged into God for a minute, you know? And yeah, yeah. Yeah. Time to go. Paul, thank you, Sherry. Thank you so much for being out. Yeah, it was really nice. Yeah, it was great. And I'll, I'll send you the copy of this and you can, you can look at it and decide if you're comfortable having it posted. And, okay, that sounds good. And, you know, it's, it's always, it's, I don't want to post anything that people are like, oh, I don't know. It's like, no, you, you gotta, you gotta be sure. And, and a lot of people, a lot of people say no, which is totally fine. But it's, I, again, the part of the channel that has been, has been really fun have been people have a natural curiosity. Who else is watching Jordan Peterson? We're all isolated here in YouTube land, unlike in a church where you look down the aisles and after the service, shake someone's hand and introduce yourself and hear their story. And, but you don't get that in YouTube land. So yeah, unfortunately not. But it's been, it's been really fabulous listening to everybody's different stories and seeing their journeys. And yeah, it's, it's encouraging. Yeah, yeah, yeah, it really is. There's a lot of, yeah, a lot of good things happening out there, right? Yeah, there are, there are. So thank you, Sherry. And good talking to you. And I will send this to you. Okay. Thank you very much, Paul. Okay. Good luck with the lambs. Yeah. Thank you. Bye-bye.