https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=b0udYDMDVt8

 Well, that's what I always think. I post about half of the conversations that I do. You know, some of them aren't appropriate for YouTube. I got pointed to you by by Stefan Fox over one of the uber boyos there. And so then you and I have exchanged some emails back and forth, but why don't you introduce yourself? Okay, hi, I'm Neil Whitman. I am a pastor here at Sovereign Grace Baptist Church in New Brunswick. I work right beside the army base where I recently retired after 20 years as an infantry officer. I've served in Canada in the north and I have been to Haiti and to Afghanistan and to Kuwait and to Israel in service capacity. And I have, I guess, a bit of a different experience than a lot of pastors out there and probably than a lot of people who are engaged in this conversation. So I thought it'd be great to touch base and, you know, certainly appreciating what it is that you're putting out there. And so, yeah, that's me, I guess. Have you had much of a chance to watch much of it? I mean, I put out a lot of videos. So what you do, that's for sure. You know, the funny thing is, Paul, so I had mentioned to you, I think in the email that I had sent that the reason I got in touch with Uberboy in the first place with Steph there in Ireland is because one of the young fellows that I meet with quite regularly, usually twice a week, and sit down and talk through, really, it's a young guy that's looking for meaning. He's looking for God. And as I kind of indicated, he's not always sure that's what he's looking for, but that's what he's looking for. And he ran across Steph and he listened to pretty much everything that he produced. And he got me to listen to some of that. So I sat down and I worked through Steph and Jimmy's Aon videos and got in touch with what Carl Jung had to say in that through their interpretation with him. And then I got in touch with Steph, had a conversation or two. And then he said, hey, there's this guy, Paul, and Paul's a guy that you really need to get in touch with because he's in this conversation like you are. And I think that you have a shared interest that you ought to communicate about. So that's really what led to me contacting you. Now, it is an aspect that has interested me for a long time. I think I may have mentioned to you, at least in passing an email, that the folks I call Petersonians basically are every officer I've met under the age of 30 for the last five years. Wow. Of course, being a Canadian professor and that being a subject of much concern in the midst of our own service as well, the subject for which he was first called out and then his meteoric kind of rise to prominence in the conversation. He has been kind of a rallying point, I think, for a lot of young men who are looking for something beyond just the bland political correctness that seems to be the driving force that is pushing down from our government, right? And so he's become enormously popular. And I've definitely familiarized myself very much with Peterson. I'm ashamed to say I haven't read much of his work. I've just listened to a lot of his lectures and sat through that to familiarize myself with his perspective and what he's bringing to the table, which I know I'm waxing long, but I've probably listened to about six hours of you since I was introduced to you there before Christmas. So I particularly appreciate the Paul and Freddie show. Oh, people don't value the Freddie and Paul. It's Freddie and Paul. It was one episode was Paul and Freddie, but I insisted we put it back because, yeah, and I'm sure you as a pastor have some understanding. I mean, I love how you come to this conversation because for a lot of people who watch my channel, you know, there's a lot of mystery out there. What do pastors do? Yes. And you described it very well. You meet with this guy and you talk and, well, what do you talk about? Well, you talk about whatever it is you need to talk about. That's right. It's actually funny because tonight I was teaching on the First Timothy 3, which is always an uncomfortable passage for a pastor, isn't it? But one of the points that I was highlighting is that there's really no description of what a pastor does. There's a description of what a pastor is supposed to accomplish, and there's a description of a pastor's character, but there's never any explanation of how you do it. And the reason for that is because you do it in the only, in whatever way you have to, to get it done. That's true. Well, I'm really, I want you to say more about that statement about, you know, a Petersonian is every officer that you've met under 30 for the last five years. Flesh that out a little bit more. I mean, for those of us, I mean, Peterson obviously really struck a nerve in the United States, but, you know, he, his, I mean, he's Canadian, you know, thoroughly. So my, I have a brother-in-law who grew up in Manitoba. So, and when I started listening to Jordan Peterson, I thought, oh boy, it kind of sounds like my brother-in-law, Tom, in some ways, that Northern Canadian, especially Western spirit. So, so what do you mean by every officer that you've met under 30 for the last five years? What have you seen? Well, I mean, that is a story that probably takes a little more than just a casual telling, but let me try and be as succinct as I can when I answer that. So context matters when you're talking about something like this. So the context is Afghanistan. The context can't really be understood without understanding that Canada participated in that conflict in a very direct way. So starting in 2006, the Canadian forces moved to Kandahar from where we had since 2001 been just doing security kind of on an American base up in Kabul, which, you know, we did lose men up there, but it was still a relatively benign portion of that conflict. And then when we did go down to the Kandahar area and start operating there with the American forces, it was deeply kinetic. There was a lot of fighting and a lot of Canadian men and women lost their lives doing that. You know, the tour that I was on in 2007, it was interesting. One of my sergeants made the point afterwards that, do you know that if we just dealt out a deck of cards on the plane ride in, jokers would have been dead. If you want to do the numbers on how that went down. And that seems not so bad, I suppose, in terms of conflict. And you'd be right. Like it's not the D.F. That's for sure. It's not the D-Day landings. But in a tight-knit group like that, it's very significant. And that doesn't at all speak to how many guys were deeply injured or badly wounded mentally and spiritually over there. So we came out of that environment where we were told to be warriors. And everywhere you went in the army, there were posters about the warrior ideals and the warrior ethos and the, you know, the ideal of being able to rise above yourself. And all of this was like the classical manly characteristics, if you will, right? That was being just praised and celebrated amongst men and women. That, you know, you go and you overcome and you strive for the greatest performance that you can. And you sacrifice for others and you be a defender and all of this stuff, you know, was just the champion's idea of the armed forces during that period of time. And it was very important. And we had a very strong morale within the armed forces. But then, you know, I guess it would be the turning point happened around 2012. And we left that field of combat and went on to a training mission. And at about the same time, you know, there was a big shift in the focus. And it wasn't dramatic at first. The Conservative government was still in power and they still spoke a lot about the positivity of, you know, soldiering and all that stuff. And the messaging didn't change, but certainly the focus changed. And then we did get a new government and that new government put out a new white paper, which is defense policy. And they really stripped everything away. And the whole focus of the military became to be the kinder, gentler, more politically correct army. And that had a very profound and damaging effect on the psyche of so many of these soldiers, because you've been told for so long, it's a good thing that you're a warrior. It's a good thing to be violent and aggressive, you know, and, you know, I will actually acknowledge that we tolerated a lot of really, I won't disagree, inappropriate sort of sexualized dialogue and behavior, which should never have really been the case, but it was there. And it was part of that. And it's sort of a traditionally soldierly thing to just kind of ignore and push off. And I'm not saying that's right, but the focus changed. And there was a thing called the Deschamps Report that came out. And the Deschamps Report basically spoke to gross sexual impropriety within the Canadian Armed Forces. And at that time, the CDS got fired for basically saying you're overreacting and in fairness, you know, he was to a degree correct, because what had happened was someone who was an academic had gone in and basically taken a survey, but they made extrapolations on data based on the reports that they got, which were a very small percentage of the total population. But then, you know, without really acknowledging reporting bias, they extrapolated bias, they extrapolated that data to the whole Armed Forces. And I would say some of that is questionable to be scientifically extended. But certainly the parts that spoke about the experience of sexualized joking and language, I never contend that's not a huge part of it, and that there were very real tolerance of sexual abuse that happened there. And that's not cool. But the response at that time was then to say, okay, we've got a volatile army that's not playing the game. And so they instituted OP Honor, and this was a new operation that was targeted towards removing any sexualized behavior in the Armed Forces, and to coming down extremely hard on anything that might even carry the flavor of discrimination against gender or transgender or sexual behavior of any kind. And then there was a huge input to try and create more recognition and celebration of these other lifestyles. And this became literally the stated main effort of the Army was to change our sexual behavior to a modern, inclusive attitude. And what that did was it took warriors who had sacrificed a great deal in what they thought was service of the country, and it told them, your monsters and your aggressive behavior is monstrous, and we don't actually care about aggression and violence like we've been asking you to do these things. Those are bad things you shouldn't have done in the first place. And what's really important is that you just don't ever think dirty thoughts. Wow. Right. And so you can imagine then that the reaction to that has been to covertly look to something that doesn't destroy morale. So badly. And Peterson is that polite and reasonable guy who can say, you know, no one's saying that that males taking license and treating women disrespectfully is a good thing. But at the same time, making men enemies is a bad thing. And, you know, particularly in the more male dominated combat arms, I think there's a perception of persecution and it's not without grounding amongst the young men that they're looking for something that actually gives them affirmation. And they're not finding it in the army. So they have founded in Peterson and in quiet conversation about, you know, hey, we're not really terrible people. And that's really where I think that comes from. So I'm sorry for taking so long. No, no. And, you know, it's, I mean, these are obviously, one of the things you learn making videos is that, yeah, context matters. And people know me somewhat because they hear me talk maybe an hour or so a day and people don't know you at all because you're just a pastor on the other end of things. Now you weren't a chaplain in the armed services, correct? No, no, I was an infantry officer. I was a rifleman, a leader of riflemen. Yes. And I think it's, you know, it's always funny it's always interesting to me having watched the reputation of Christianity in the past waves of cultural change where Christians on one hand get mocked for having a, for professing standards of sexuality, which are unreasonably high, because of course, I mean, no one who reads the, no one who reads Jesus or the New Testament would get a sense of why Christians have, you know, traditional Christian sexual morality is what it is. Even though, you know, Christians quite often fail to live up to it. I mean, that's also true, which we know, but the knock has been that Christians take sexuality too seriously, all of a sudden then to see in an interesting way voices that have been cheering a much more libertine, liberated sexuality swoop in and, you know, take the other position in a, you know, it's in some ways men just can't win this. I think that's probably fair. Yeah. Because, because, you know, the church has traditionally told men, you know, you need to respect women and respecting women means self control. It means that Christian men do and don't say certain things. Christian men do and don't do different certain things. In fact, Christian men do and don't think different things, but this is contextualized in a realm of Christian devotion and to have the government sort of come around the other way with a, you know, so these are the ways you're supposed to be sexual and these are the ways you're not. I mean, that's all I'm saying. You know, so these are the ways you're supposed to be sexual and these are the ways you're not. I mean, that's always turn it on, turn it off and well, for most of us, you don't really just turn on and turn off sexuality. You walk around it with it all the time and you, you modulate perhaps your expression, your words, your behavior, some of these things, but it's, it's always something you're dealing with. And so again, to have Christians for a long time being told you're way too prudish and now come around the other side and say, oh, you're way too sexual. They're wait a minute. I'm not quite sure what you'd like us to do. Gender is the offense, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, so you, so you wrote this about me, but I was quite struck by your story. You, you came, I mean, you're in the ministry now and a lot of people are very curious about how that goes. Why don't you say something to that story too? Well, the joke I like to tell is that my previous job was about sending people to God and this one is too, so it seemed like a good fit. With, with quite different means, however. Yeah, yeah, it's an interesting and if you'll bear with me, I'll, I'll wax a little long to explain that. So I, I gave my life to Christ. I found my meaning in Christ when I was around coming on 17th and it was about six months later I joined the army and I went off and did my basic training and all that stuff and spent four years at military college and I don't really need to get into all that, but you know, I was like any young man, not without my sins and errors, but God was still the center and he stayed the center and that was, you know, an important part of my growth as a young man and I went to battalion for the first time in 2003 and it was six months later I went down to Haiti and something about that is that although I was a believer, I, I think that it's as is common to a young man, it was very much my faith, you know, and I was exercising it and it was a tool that I was using and I, you know, like, like every young man was going to be great, right? So I'm 21, I show up at battalion, I'm now in charge of a platoon of 30 men and within six months now I'm deployed to Haiti and doing peacekeeping operations there when the iristi government had fallen in 2004 and, and you know, I was there and I was going to do good things and I was going to be a force for good in the world and what I quickly found was that nothing worked, right? That's Haiti! That's Haiti, as you know, right? Yes. So uh I would say one really symbolic thing that happens would be when we were looking for a gentleman by the name of T. Will, who was the leader of the cannibal gang in Gonneve, I would go out daily, usually twice a day on patrol, I would cover my platoon in half and we'd patrol different areas and we would just canvas people and talk and then if we found information we would do things like coordinate searches and you know we did a lot of quite successful rounding up of gang members and weapons and things like that that were being used for violence and it probably helps to say that we started in Port-au-Prince where we had been very successful but then we moved up to Gonneve and after we left Port-au-Prince and the UN took over that area a great number of the people we've been working with were executed in the streets because the gangs took over again and then they made a point of showing that they were not defeated by doing a lot of like schoolhouse shootings and marketplace shootings and all of that was peripheral awareness through our intelligence mechanisms of what had started to happen down there and so I was at the police station to pick up a ride along from the local police forces who as you'll not be surprised to hear weren't paid you know and all of that that comes along with that in third world police agencies which generally means they're gangs too and I picked this young fell up and he says to me I know where T Will is awesome you know young 22 year old now Neil Whitman is going to go and catch the head of the catapult gang right awesome let's do this and I set it up and got a plan in place my boss approved it and we got over there did our little search and there's no one there there's nothing there and the next day he was executed back ahead the one who had told you the informant yeah and I was like right and then four days later I was picking up my ride along at the police station and different young cop gets in and he says I know where T Will is and I was like all right if you do this they're going to kill you and he said I know but I joined the police to help my country and he was a Christian he said you know I love Jesus and this is right and this is what I want to do so we did a search that's right found nothing the next day he was killed you know yeah it's like what am I doing yeah there is a funny sort of conclusion to that story which is that later some some time later that individual drove right into one of our vehicle checkpoints and when my sergeant stopped him and said you know you got me guns he's like I'm T Will who do you think you are and Blair Williams my sergeant was like excuse me who did you say you were he said T Will is like oh well I'm Big Willie bam get in the car we've got a hold of him but I just you know I guess that's God's blessing to that young man maybe that's he he did that but you know like instead of doing good nothing good is happening and you know you get very cynical and dark-minded and you deal with that every day and you know it didn't feel good but as a missionary you're there and you're you're doing something that is got at least the promise of some eternal worth maybe but I'm there to give peace and security to people who are just going to die anyway yeah and I will tell you the culminating thing that happened for me on that tour was I was doing a cordon and search on a house which turned out to be a voodoo shrine which was associated with the gangs and whatnot and and as I was I let my Acadian interpreter Frankie who spoke to local Creole quite well after that amount of time there to grill the owner of the house for a bit and while my guys were searching I walked back and leaned against the wall on the other side of the road and this little girl walked along and street girl and she climbed up on the wall right beside my shoulder and I looked up at her and said hello and she looked down at me and she said you know in French that you know Bonjour Monsieur Esque tu peux, wild is it wild you know hi sir can you see the stars and I said yeah I can see the stars they're pretty aren't they and she said yes they're beautiful and did you know that that Jesus made them for you and he loves you very much and I said yeah yeah I know that and yeah and then she said to me did you know that if you love him back that you'll get to go and be with him when you die that's where I'm going and I thought you know what is it about this that brings hope where nothing else can yeah right and and that that and that that changed my mind about a lot of things that did that I had put so much of myself into trying to be the hero and as I did that you know that always stuck with me but then we went to Afghanistan and you know I I have no reservations about what we did there our our means of doing it was I think legitimate I think what was trying to be done was honestly with good intent I think was pretty naive to imagine that a fundamentalist extremist Muslim population was going to turn American if they just got democracy but but I think the idea was nevertheless quite altruistic you know might not be popular to say this I think that your your former president George Bush was was actually reasonably decent in his intentions even if he wasn't always wise in the way he executed them and and yet you know we did that and we killed a bunch of people man people man we killed a bunch of people who who wanted to risk that happening to them to try and undo what we were trying to do and that didn't work and yeah and you know it's like did that and went to went to the north to do sovereignty for three years running around the arctic doing all kinds of crazy cool stuff and then what's that what do you mean went north to do sovereignty what does that what does that mean what oh well we have we have what are called the Canadian Rangers they're they're first nations primarily reservists that that live all across the arctic territories so east of Alaska and so we worked I worked with them for three years doing like regular training and high arctic patrolling you know that's where I shot that guy got the muskox at home and whales and seals sorry to your animal loving people but the inuits still live off an all-animal diet and so that's what we did and yeah it's it's basically about just preventing someone else probably mostly you guys from claiming that you own the arctic we say it's the russians but we really mean you guys well there might be oil under there anyway and after that I went back and uh you know I've commanded a rifle company and a support company I went over to Kuwait where I worked with General Dynamics land systems for about three months trying to sell create international trade agreements on their purchase of our lab three which is actually the same platform your army uses they buy it from Canada go figure the striker and uh and a good vehicle but uh which was an attempt to create unity and peace through commerce you know yeah we all know how well that's working out and then I spent a year in Jerusalem as a diplomat working with the Palestinian armed forces and the Israeli defense force you know peripherally to uh to help them professionalize and meet the international standards and we all know how that's working out so the long answer to your question is I would like to bring the only hope that I know that does something because I know that what that little girl had works and I know that nothing else does and I see all around me my peers and colleagues falling victim to hopelessness and despair to post-traumatic stress disorder which destroys the soul and I often feel like I'm just standing there with a jar full of water and people in the desert that are dying of thirst and they don't want to drink it yeah and so here I am and here I stand with the only thing I can bring to the table okay okay so so tell me about your church yeah it's not a big church uh we were right outside we were right outside the army base it's probably about half military uh maybe a little more and a little bit of the local folk and folks that have retired here and from the army and such as well and uh it's a baptist church we're uh we're just trying to live christ in this community and be lights as best we can you know got about I'd say 80-ish regular attenders and uh and that's all I can really say to that question I suppose okay okay okay well I've peppered you with questions and anything um you came to this that wanted that you wanted to cover yeah well um so here's what I would uh throw at you I suppose some thoughts that I have in regards to the conversation that you're engaging in and uh say that it's a conversation I'd like to engage in as well uh I don't comment this arrogantly presuming like I have anything like the genius or wisdom of yourself or verveky or or peggio or anything like that um I do think that I have some experiences which afford me a different perspective than is often given to this problem of the meaning crisis and uh two points I just throw at you and I'd love to hear your thoughts on this my observation would be particularly in regards to your observations of the I believe you call it the progressive post-evangelicalism yeah is I think what I perceive to be one of the major problems that is leading to this bleed and this despair really that that causes people to run from the church as a competent counselor would be firstly that the evangelical church has really failed at giving a prophylaxis to reality so as a guy who has experienced in a very raw and real way the brokenness of the worlds and the incredible depravity and capacity for evil in mankind as I know you surely will have done also I don't think the evangelical church has generally done a very good job of trying to prepare people for that reality I don't think they have really for that reality I don't think they have really tried earnestly to address the problem of evil or if they have perhaps uh the problem that you articulated which I think is very astute is that the god that they have been taught about is not the god of the bible and that's part of the problem is that we've created our own god who isn't exactly jehovah and who doesn't have exactly that answer to evil that he does and I think that's part of the problem the second part of it that I think is is very real is it it lacks also a remedy when people have been hurt so you have poor prophylaxis and then no remedy because when somebody comes in and they have been hurt by the world and by evil rather than try and deal with that in a way that is intimate and based on spiritual truth the church runs the psychology and says well those guys are the experts so go talk to him and something that I would observe is that psychological treatment is possibly quite good and and can be quite good for a lot of things but it does nothing for moral injuries because it denies the reality of morality even as a thing beyond a figment of your imagination so when what someone is dealing with is the fact that they themselves have sinned or participated in sin by not stopping sin psychology has nothing to do with that and I see this all the time and soldiers that you know I'll give you a really quick and interesting anecdote and then you can comment on every nonsensical thing I just said that sense so so when we were in Afghanistan one of my sergeants sergeant Colette got himself in a bit of trouble actually because one of our national broadcasting Canadian broadcasting corporation reporters had come over and he'd asked Colette why we were doing this you know like what motivated us it was a I think a pretty genuine and benign question but Colette being the introspective and serious guy that he was he paused and responded and said words the effect of well I think that some guys are here because they just always wanted to kill someone and this is the only way to do that that's acceptable and I think that some guys are here because they actually believe in what we're doing and they have an ideological reason but there's not a lot I would say in the main we're here because we're getting thirty thousand dollars to show up and everyone's looking for a new truck and you know what that's not enough for killing people or losing friends that was very insightful that's uh this is a problem when we don't equip people with sound reasons for what they're doing and then they do something and they don't have a good reason to have done it and then that gnaws away at the inside of that person until that's maybe an extreme example but I believe it extends to so much of life that's when we don't go informed into the world and know why we're going to do the things that we're doing that we risk hurting ourselves quite badly and hurting our consciences so that's my thoughts what are your thoughts I think those are all good thoughts I haven't talked about this partly because it's hard to formulate you know the the most difficult things to talk about are the things that are so ubiquitous and assumed and present all around us those are the hardest things for us to see you know it's it's like the old fish story where you know one fish talks to the other how's the water and the other fish says what's water the I have for for many years been convinced that part of why and I think I think you and I well I'll tell a little bit about my own story I don't I do a lot of talking but I don't necessarily tell my own stories that much on my channel I think that's true well you know but most of us don't necessarily think our stories are that interesting but when asked we talk and you know I went I went well first of all you know I grew up my father was a pastor in a very poor neighborhood in Patterson New Jersey and he was called by the local Christian Reformed churches to see if he could in 1960 transform what had been sort of a you know handout bread and sandwiches sandwiches salvation station in an area of Patterson where poor black folks moved up from the south to get industry jobs in Patterson and the Dutch were sort of doing the Dutch immigrants were sort of doing well and moving up to better houses and suburbs and you know things in the post-war years and black folks had moved up and had settled in these old neighborhoods and the churches have sort of moved out but there are always some soft-hearted kind-hearted Christians who looked and said you know these these poor people they you know it's it's hard and it's a mess and they suffer so we we ought to try and do something and so you know they they try and do something with whatever lights they have you know it's whatever they think might help and sometimes that helps and sometimes it doesn't because no none of us know and so they have this little mission station and after a number of years of just throwing money at it they thought why don't we try and turn it into a church where it's not just a a mission station but it's a church so they called my father and in 1960 he and my mother fresh out of college and seminary went there and my father I don't think my father ever saw a black person perhaps outside of a porter car you know because he was from he was from Minnesota and Wisconsin and Iowa my grandfather had churches out on the prairie and then my grandfather took a church to Owensound Ontario which later I met some folks from Owensound they said yeah it's right under the elephant's tail and so what did he know about black folks moving from the south and he went there and he basically because he understood christianity from my grandfather and the gospel figure out well love people as best you can in whatever weird circumstance you're at and you know try to do church and you know when you look back on it you know all kinds of mess but you know you just learn you know if you're if you if you want to love people you just learn and so that's that's the context that I grew up in and and and then I you know I I get an education and I knew about ministry and I knew about poverty and I knew about all these things because when and where I grew up and then you know I my wife really wanted to go overseas because her parents had been missionaries in Nigeria and so you know all kinds of things who wind up in the Dominican Republic and I've got my seminary education and I've got you know books and and and you know working with Haitians and Haitians who are illegal in the Dominican Republic for the most part and they're they're picking coffee and they're cutting sugarcane and when the political winds blow you know they can get rounded up and put on a truck and trucked over to Haiti and dumped off on the other side of the border and you know most of the pastor that I'm pastors I'm supposed to teach are twice my age and more than twice my life experience you know and most of the pastors the average education they had was second grade Haitian and you know I'm there to teach them well yeah I learned a lot um I learned a lot about how much I didn't know and I learned a lot about how complicated the world is and I learned a lot about all all these good intentions that we you know tried to do to help people learn this or do this and no you don't change people or change a culture or change a way of life but I remember I came back after a year and I'd have a seminary exam because my first year was my internship and you know I had a they wanted the the person the person um examining me wanted I had written a sermon in which I had I was a little bit too in this person's mind a little bit too a little bit too talking about you know life after death and I you know not enough realized eschatology in that sermon I said well I'll tell you something most of the people I'm working with are working with don't have a lot of realized eschatology in their life their life is hard and it's short and they suffer and they're often just trying to do whatever they can to get by and in the midst of that every now and then you'll meet a crooked pastor who's who's just trying to you know use the church to make money or you know sleep with people or whatever and then sometimes you also meet people that the faith that they have and the sacrifice the sacrifice that they bear for the sake of the gospel you know makes me feel like an idiot and you know can make me feel guilty about who I am and what I've had and where I've gone so yeah that doesn't leave you and so then where was I going with this oh yeah this is why I take note so I can remember here in North America we live in this place that is so secure I mean I remember coming back from the Dominican Republic and just laughing at the fact that in North America when you run a clock you plug it into the wall because electricity is that you know reliable that you can run a clock on it in the Dominican Republic the water goes on and off the lights go on and off you know and I'm living a life far more secure than any of these Haitians but we live this life part of the island too yeah yeah you know I I've taken you know I've been to Haiti and you know a lot of people told me you know going from the United States to the Dominican Republic it's about that same difference going from the Dominican Republic to Haiti and and there are places in the world that are far worse than Haiti you know you look at places like Somalia some places in Africa and so you realize in North America that we're we're submitted to a barrage of that that carries on a subtle message that says something like this life is easy if you're kind of moderately moral you'll be rewarded if you do the right thing you'll be happy and successful and all of your dreams will come true and you know in for a lot of people in a lot of ways you can carve out a really nice life in North America compared to a lot of the rest of the world especially compared to history wow we have it good we have it so good yeah and then you read the Bible and you know I listen to a lot of atheists that I think both you know Tom Holland recently and oh I can't I think of his name right now it'll come up what's that Sam Harris oh no not Sam Harris Tom Holland and I can't think of his name he's a he's a French he's a French but basically the complaints the complaints about Christianity are all from Christianity and this is what's so ironic about you know the the number done on those soldiers by the change in the Canadian government it's sort of a you know respecting women yeah that's a Christian idea you want to see a place where women aren't respected look at just about most of the rest of the world and that respect has to come from the inside out and it has to come from a changed heart because we as natural human beings and we as natural men very much want to use women for our own gratification and that's what's natural that's how we are and and what it takes to not do that it takes a lot and it takes a lot from the inside and it takes training from the outside and that's that's really tricky business and so you know the god and then I watch I watched the the rise of the problem of evil and and Tim Keller in his book on suffering which I think is his best book noted that you know the the current shape of the problem of evil really didn't take get popular traction until sort until modernity and the enlightenment really got going and I think that says a lot because whereas when I talked to Haitians they certainly suffered and they certainly asked where is god and why and why does this happen to me and all of that and it you know it sounds like Job and it sounds like the Psalms that version of the problem of evil is ubiquitous but this this western version of the problem of evil that basically sets up for us an expectation that you know god's just here to give me everything I want and when I don't get everything I want and and that those expectations keep getting higher well then I'm going to be angry at god and judge him and I think what sense does that make you're almost better off giving up all the all the language about it and going and being an atheist because you know go ahead judge god if you want to god seems quite capable of hearing our judgment and not flinching so the god the god that we've been taught about is not the god of the bible I think the god that we've been taught about is has seeped into our pores by a million subtle messages from a consumer culture that suggests we live in a world that we don't live in and those times and places whether they're in war zones which are overseas or war zones that are in the middle of an affluent neighborhood with a divorce underway those are revelatory and and they're revelatory I think you're exactly right they're revelatory about who we are yeah and once I think you're I think and I like how you put it there's a moral hurt there's a moral injury and you know when Peterson noted he said you know people don't get PTSD by seeing stuff people get it because they've done something and they seem and for the little I know about it what I would imagine is they had a vision of themselves which has been brought about by this culture that says you are a good person and you will make good decisions and really you're quite nice to people that's how you are yeah that's how you are until until something happens and your niceness is no longer working to get you what you want and then another side of us comes out and we're not prepared to see that person but I think for most of human history we've not lived within that warm bath of a consumer marketing culture that has subtly suggested to us that we're really moral you know we're really moral heroes no we're not we're just have really easy lives and we live in a culture that has been dramatically good in many ways affluent and successful that affords some you know a pretty a pretty low-grade morality to just get by but if you're in a place in the world where you afford none of that things start to look differently and you know part of the reason part of the reason you know I stay a Christian and you know you say this you can say this stuff and people don't believe you because they see me on YouTube and he's a pastor you know blah blah blah blah blah and I say you know I'm you know I'm a Calvinist because I know what a monster I am on the inside and people are like oh you're not a monster you're nice yeah yeah but a lot of my niceness is you know a lot of my niceness is pretty self-serving and you know the accusers comment to God when God says consider my servant Job you know I think you'd say consider my servant Paul and God would say yeah he does a he does a lot of nice things to improve his status among people and he's good often because it pays and you pull all that stuff off you know I love it when Jesus says you know even though you're evil you give good gifts to your children we always jump over that Jesus Jesus just said good parents are evil yeah he did and yeah he was right and you know I can't exclude myself from that community of the evil I just live in a place that affords me be good parents what's that I should or at least that evil people can be good parents yeah yeah yeah so you know that's that's my take on this jump in for a second there Paul it's it's interesting so when I went through training as an infantry guy and we still do this to varying degrees of severity one of the things that they do is that they subject you to sleep deprivation so when we went through that they took us for like a six-day combat withdrawal which means you've got your rucksack on which is loaded with 60 to 100 pounds of gear and then you walk a kilometer dig a hole in the ground for five hours and get attacked and then withdraw off the position walk a kilometer dig a hole in the ground for five hours get attacked and repeat for like six days with no rest periods and that's not to say you didn't fall asleep but there was no actual rest and when you did fall asleep it was not a pleasant experience when you get caught so what that does is it strips everything away all of the polite stuff that you tell yourself you are it goes away when you are deprived of everything and only the very core things that you have are still functioning you know if you looked at david grossman who wrote the the book on killing and the book on combat really good psychological analysis of people and the reactions to these things talks quite a bit about that and the sleep studies would say that you know after not sleeping for i think it's four days you're you're functionally mentally handicapped like you've lost like you know something like 60 of your iq points and that just reveals you and i think it's it's unfortunate for those people that you describe who it's not until they end up in the divorce proceeding in their upper crust environment and life that everything gets ripped away and who they really are gets revealed to them you know they can cushion it for an awful long time in our affluent society and it's those extreme moments i think part of the reason they are so traumatic is that it takes and strips so much away that has built up over years that perhaps your your haitian friends as believers have stripped away much quicker that's right they never had they never had it built up on them i mean it was it was bad from the start and most of humanity has lived that way yeah one one thing that i thought was kind of interesting just as an aside but not entirely because it speaks to our culture and one of the things we we are contending with in this conversation if you look at samson the character of judges and you look at the commentary surrounding samson so no one ever said oh samson was a great guy through and through and he never did anything wrong and it was very obvious that samson was a sinner he slept with a prostitute he he uh he slept with delilah and gave his secret away and and bad things happened but no one before the 18th century ever said anything bad about the way that he killed people that is a very modern invention that samson was an evil bad man who wasn't a good christian because he killed philistines that's interesting and why i say that is there's something we've done as a culture where we have gone and said the the warrior mentality that's bad and violence is bad and you know anything that isn't tolerance is bad and that gets really hard because the reality is that that can't work right you you tell people that the only thing that works is tolerance but it is impossible to function if you are not subjective in your evaluation of cultures and ideas and yet you're actually causing people to sin against the values you've told them they must hold when they then have to do the thing that you've told them they can't do in order to just function as a person it's it's tremendously broken yeah yeah in these you know these questions are these questions are so hard um they're so they're so difficult and and the you know one of the things that i you know that they get interested in peterson but what when he when he talked about the fact that he said you know when you go through auschwitz you shouldn't you shouldn't imagine oh what horrible people did this you should recognize no this is this is what we are capable of and and and as a pastor one of the things that i've seen again and again is that so often you know we're not really serious about we're not really serious about the gospel and this is this is until like you said all those things are stripped away that's why there are so many people that become christian in prison that's why so many people become christian in rehab you know this world you know there are there are answer there's so many questions we can't answer and i i myself am not a pacifist um but you know it's christianity looks to the day that all wars cease and how do we how do we work that out in the meantime you know and and and you have that in small ways too you know i'm a i'm a calvinist preacher who preaches grace and at also other times i you know hold people accountable and you know i have my ways of working that out but these are all difficult things and um and i i i yeah each each moment we live in is you know the the current cultural moment they keep they keep moving and they keep changing and we don't know how they go and we each we each have to make up our minds about what we will do with the time that we've been given so we do so i i really appreciate that that you take the time to meet with that young man and to talk with him because you know as a pastor those are those are some of the most important things that we do and you know that i mean standing in front of a group of people and giving them a message yeah that's important and god works through that i'll put it the other way i appreciate that he meets with me yeah yeah well and this is the strangest thing about this whole video thing for me i was just commenting to someone who wrote me said you know for for years as a small church pastor i can go through i go through quite a few weeks of of not having someone sit down with me and have earnest questions about reality and get to talk on a heart-to-heart level um and and then i start a youtube channel and they come out of the woodwork so i guess youtube's not a bad thing well it's uh it is quite neutral it can be used for good things and bad things yeah yeah another another thought i just if you uh don't mind me throwing a quick one at you that's probably not that quick uh the meaning crisis as i i listen to a lot of the conversation that's going on in this regard i uh i wish for a different dialogue not a different dialogue maybe but uh but put it this way the meaning crisis is a very complicated thing and you just talked about how complicated the world is and it is it is a very complicated thing and you talk about you know not a pacifist but we don't actually want to celebrate violence you're yeah and how is it that god who wants to take the life of someone who murders can also then say but you need to now go and kill those people and that both of these things can be true and that's complicated and that takes perhaps some real serious talking to work through and investigating things but uh yeah if we're talking about hope we're talking about purpose the meaning crisis what is the reason to be what is the reason to actually do anything and to strive for anything it strikes me as a gordian knot type problem that the problem itself is enormously complex and yet i i think sometimes the conversation admires the intricacy of problem when what's needed is a sword to chop the knots to pieces and uh i don't say that vainly i i realize it's it's a thing you've got to engage with and to to speak to and i i delight in philosophical conversation i could i could spend hours talking philosophically but at the end of the day the answer does have to be well this is what i know and this is what has helped me and that's that's kind of my take on it so i don't know and maybe that drives people away or but that's what i you know i again another thing that i learn as a pastor you spend a lot of time just waiting on things that you can't make happen oh yeah you know and and our beliefs our assumptions you know so often you know i now you know i'll talk to people and then they'll get to the point of saying i want to believe in god but i don't and i can't and that's true and and christianity has always said faith is a gift and um so i i on one hand it's it's interesting to me to to look at the you know to look at the meaning crisis and and it's it's interesting to to ask okay how what what is this long what is this long road of philosophy and and success really delivered to um to the west and it's very interesting i think peterson i mean the meaning crisis seems to be predominantly a male thing at least in the west um you know never 100 but women and and you know once once you have a child um boy that that that child is going to be a sword cutting through that gordian knot for a lot of women because and you know and including my conversation with both that i just had a couple of days ago um one of my first conversations after i started making videos was with someone local who you know saw my video wanted to talk to me and told me almost exactly the same thing that i did and told me almost exactly the same thing that boss said he said you know i and he had been a christian he had in fact been interested in going to seminary he but then he just sort of looked at the world didn't believe it gave it up you know got a job got married and then suddenly and then had a daughter and he looked at that daughter and said i can't just look at her and think she's just you know she's just a highly evolved mammal or there's no there's she's of no more significance to the world than you know any other clump of matter um but my um the the stuff i find myself believing in does not afford you know is creating dissonance in that because i want to say i'm an atheist and and this is this is the way the world is but then i look at my daughter and it's like i can't say that what do i do and you know this is a guy who had spent a long time in church and so i like like many of these things we have to see with new eyes and how does that happen you know i'm often struck by the fact that and i've said this in a number of my videos if there's ever been a capable preacher it should have been jesus because well you know he's the son of god um truth be told his sermons continue to be read far more than anybody else's sermons in all of history but the canonical account of his ministry is that he wanders around the galley you know huge crowds start following him but he himself is fully aware of the fact that a lot of them are just following because they want to see a magic show and they want to get something to eat and then he calls him out on it and they'll walk away except for these disciples who themselves don't really get him and he comes to jerusalem and he's hailed by the crowds as a you know son of david that's sunday and by thursday another crowd probably elements of the city probably some people are in boats are yelling crucify him and they kill him because they want to shut him up well if that's a lesson about anything it's a lesson about human beings and if you can buy the fact that jesus is the son of god and the revelation of god and for the most part this is this is the performance of his preaching um and even his disciples you know red crucifixion oh catastrophe resurrection what on earth is this end of the gospel of matthew summer worshiping him that's a very unjewish thing and the gospel of matthew fully honest and some doubted yeah i can understand that too beginning of the book of x uh now will you restore the kingdom to israel and it's like this this whole thing is just this dramatic mystery and we as pastors spend years waiting around praying hoping thinking doubting trying failing sometimes making more of a mess of thing than if we just kept our mouth shut and so i'm not surprised by a meeting crisis i have one sometimes sometimes too so and i think you're right it's just that i i so often don't have that sword that cuts the knot yeah and and then you have to ask well if anybody had it it was jesus and then look at how that went and then you know i also often i talk about this too i look at the apostle paul and his his you know divine intervention his revelatory moment seems about as dramatic and as gordian not cutting as any yeah jesus seems to wait until he's well into persecuting christians and on the road to damascus and you would have thought when he's over by stephen holding the coats and the heavens part of that jesus could have said yeah stephen and you paul too look up here paul doesn't see it then so you know there's just a lot of waiting around in this business and people are going to cut their own gordian knots well or rather someone has to do it yeah yeah but i don't think either of us know how nope that's someone who's not human that's for sure yeah no i i get that and uh and i hope that isn't taken as a critique personally i guess that uh you know what i really meant by that was that there is not much conversation and i'm actually appalled frankly at how few you are that are are communicating into this community so you've got you know you've got sam harris trying to give his answers and you've got peterson trying to give his answers and and i have mad respect for peterson i have mad respect for the effort that he has put forward and the fact that he didn't seek this out this came to him and then he said okay well here's what i'm going to do and he tried to to bring something forward that could help people and and i respect that i also you know i i look at it and see that's that's good it's also limited and it it fails to go all the way that it needs to go and it's good for now but but of what eternal worth is this you know of what what true life-changing worth is this because it totally depends upon you to do it and that's a problem because as you state like i know me and talk about oshoits camp supervisors i i know me and uh and so that's i can recognize that i also know that i can't do that without something bigger than me and uh and unfortunately you know to although dr peterson is to a degree pointing towards something you know i i'm actually sat in the how few men and women frankly from the christian camps are saying well well i know what that is would you care to talk about that and let's let's work this out together you're doing it and i respect that um you know i know rabbi's doing his best to communicate in this field and uh and he's much more brilliant than i will ever be um but there aren't a lot you know there aren't a lot who are reaching in here and saying well it's great that you've understood your nature now let's talk about how you can do something about that nature and uh i know what you're saying is absolutely true i can't convince anybody and the people i've had those same conversations you've had where it's like i want to believe i actually intellectually believe but how do i believe i believe there's a god and i believe that jesus is his son but i know that i haven't surrendered to him and uh that's that's i can't tell you how to do that that's got to be you reaching out to god and and seeking his wisdom to do that and i know that um you're never going to argue anyone in but i just you know i want to see the offer extended and i you know one of one of the things that you know peterson has this idea of you know you want to be asked to you know continue to play the game and i think that's i think that's i think that's part of it you know as you know as a pastor you know you also know how uh yeah you yeah i already said it you know we wait around and we wait for we wait for we wait for god to do his thing and and you and i also know that sometimes it doesn't happen and you think or someone who should know better you know no they should know better and and and yeah yeah yeah yeah we'll see you know it'll it'll i was i was frustrated you know peter the peterson moment really the the first peterson wave the first big peterson wave was october 2016 to spring 2019 you know when you know his you know with the illness of his wife and all of this and of course he's been sort of out of action since then my frustration was that more um to me i could see the opportunity as a pastor to make myself available to talk to people who wanted to talk and and i think it's been i think it's been fruitful work and um i'm deeply humbled and grateful to have had the opportunity to do it and i was frustrated that more pastors didn't see the opportunity and jump in um but well that's that's the way these things go and you know i can't answer for others i have to answer for myself if i see an opportunity i have to decide what to do and then you know what i say i say and usually i don't say it quite right so well i appreciate that i only started pastram six months ago so give me some oh you've only started six months ago oh gosh i just retired yeah in the past summer oh wow yeah well i'll tell you nothing teaches you ministry like ministry that's right uh i have actually been a uh an elder at the church for like eight years so i've been oh okay yeah i've been in ministry but it's yeah full time and uh and uh fully committed i'd like yeah it's it's different it's different when you're not a volunteer yep because there's a reason they pay you yeah yeah they pay you know it's it's the it's the golden they're not that golden but they're handcuffs it's like all right you're gonna stay here and you're gonna do this and volunteers can just say oh i'm not feeling it no you're feeling it it doesn't matter you feel it or don't feel it so anyway well well this is neil thank you so much for um is this something that you would like me to share with others um if you think it's worth it i'd certainly love to get it from you and i would be more than happy if you you put it up and actually my my intention is to enter this conversation so okay my intention would be actually i've kind of drafted and outlined an introductory dialogue that i'll have up by friday night at the latest and if i can figure out how all this technology works and uh and see if if there's an appetite for that conversation so okay well do you have a or do you have do you have your youtube channel up already is there a link that i could then include did you send it to me already or not i didn't no okay send it to me and i'll include it here and and that way i mean and follow i'll probably post i don't have a video to post yet tomorrow morning so i'll probably post this tomorrow morning and um then just follow the comment section because people will engage you in the comment section and it's my comments and my youtube are pretty civil but um it's but you're you're you're a big fella you're not a you're not afraid of a little a little rough and tumble that's obvious that was my point in the comment you said about the roughness of uberboy and i said well yeah my my greater fear would be that my own instinctual roughness might come out you know in my experience i'm not you know it's not going to be everybody's cup of tea but in my experience quite frankly people are are often willing to hear somebody's unvarnished opinion and you know if they're going to take offense they're going to take offense but you know let them know what you think and but then then also later if you have a change of heart and you're wrong nothing gets people's attention like you know what i was wrong and that you know if as long as you know i talked about my father i think about my father entering ministry in patterson and he couldn't have known anything about how to relate to these people but but what he was was honest and genuine and loving and you know what there's no substitute for that and that's far more important than all of the experience and skills and um you know you'll make mistakes but you learn in the you learn in the process i mean again just like i would imagine just like being a soldier and that you do basic training and you have all this training but once you're someplace doing something there's no preparing you both haiti and then afghanistan how can they prepare you for that how can they prepare you to have you know the you know the guy who told you this and you follow you know you were going to do the right thing and the guy shows up that how do you prepare for that so yeah the real deal well i will post this tomorrow morning and um just keep an eye on the comment section and oh folks will have stuff to say yeah i'm sure and some will want to get in contact with you and and we'll have to see what we'll have to see what stef has to say yeah yeah i uh i would uh love to do that sometime if he's uh came to do that i'm actually talking to do that i'm actually talking to him tomorrow so oh good yeah i think i i think watching you two do a video together that would be fun those two guys i know i i haven't i don't have time to watch all their videos i don't have time i wouldn't have time to watch all my videos but but you know i those two guys are sharp and they are witty and clever and you know young is hard and you know i can't i can't judge how right or wrong they get young but they sure are fun to listen to i uh i actually do have one video uh that i can send you a link to it's unlisted but it's it's me and stef chatting and uh just kind of establishing our left and right of arcs for future engagement so oh fun about a half an hour and uh okay it's really means to me to listen to that guy because of how tremendously insightful he can be yeah yeah and some of the uh some of the the ways that he communicates ideas which are amusingly i think original to him although other people have used similar analogies but he's he's really perceptive of what christianity ought to be yeah and that's that's interesting so yeah i'll uh when i send you the link to my youtube channel i'll fire you that link and if you haven't have i think it's 25 minutes long after we hashed a bunch of stuff out you might find that entertaining okay i'm sure i will well thank you neil god bless paul great bless you yep bye bye