https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rJ32L_dlQiM

 Well, I got your email and I read about a third of your paper this afternoon. I was very impressed. Thank you. It was well written. It was clear. I'm not a Kierkegaard expert by any means. And so I learned a lot from it. I didn't have time to read anymore, but it was really good. And if you want to, if we share this video, if you want to share the paper, I'd be happy to include the link in the notes and then other people might read the paper. Yeah, it's on the discord already too. Oh, did you? Okay. Yeah, I put it on there. Okay. So, well, people are funny when they see a, you know, a 30 page paper, they just kind of back up a little bit. But you write well. And right from the start, I thought it was clear and engaging, at least for those people who are interested in Kierkegaard. So what do you want to do with our time? You want to tell me a little bit about yourself, kind of the standard treatment or you want to jump in depth on other things? What's your pleasure? Yeah, it doesn't matter too much. I figured we could talk a little bit about, you know, some people are interested in, like life stuff, but we can do a bit of that anyway. I have a couple notes here. People are naturally curious and other people are naturally curious about other people. So where do you live? I live in Southern Ontario, the Niagara area. Oh, okay. Yeah. So, agricultural, lots of Dutch people. Yeah, lots of Dutch people. You got a name with a van on it. Yeah. Did you grow up going to church? Yep. Canadian Reformed. That was the first church I grew up in. And now in the United Reformed Church, which is obviously very similar. Okay. They're almost exactly the same. You probably know more about this than I do, but basically the history is that the Canadian Reformed Church split off earlier from the Christian Reformed Church than the United Reformed Church did. Okay. But theologically, they're very close and they don't really have any disagreements to speak of. They're just historically, historical differences basically. Okay. Your sound is pretty, whatever mic you're using, it peaks pretty quickly. Okay. Let me see if I can just use the... Is that working? Yeah, now you're pretty soft. So as long as you stay close to your computer and speak up, we'll probably be okay. Okay. Well, that's pretty far away. Is it just the mic on your PC that you're using right now? Now it is, yeah. Okay. Yeah, I'm not sure how to do that. Yeah, you may be better go back to your plan A. It's pretty harsh, but at least we can hear you. Yeah. All right. Okay. How does it sound now? How's that? Oh, that's better. Yeah? Yeah. Oh, that's much better. Okay. Good. So CRC split off. Did your parents still go there? Do you still go there? Or what's up with you? So my parents still go to the Canadian Reformed Church. Okay. And there's no hard feelings or anything because they're the same church more or less. Okay. There used to be more of that. I'm sure you know about that too. But there used to be more, you know, clan, clannish behavior where people would get upset about even small moves like one from the URC to the Canadian Reformed or vice versa. And they would get especially upset over moves back to the Christian Reformed from one of the newer federations or, you know, even more so for something like a move from a reform background to Baptist or something like that, right? So, but no, nothing's, there's no problems there. So we basically moved to a different church because of geographical reasons. We moved for, first we moved to Thorold, which is just a small town, a small sub city of St. Catharines. And then we moved to another city further up north. And we moved, when we did that, we moved to another Canadian Reformed Church and then we moved back again to a certain point in a different city. And we moved, I think, five times in four years or something stupid. Oh wow. Yeah. That's nice. But now we're back with, now we're back in the area where I grew up again. So that's kind of nice. Okay. You live with your parents, your college students? I don't know. I'm married and I have two kids. Oh, okay. Yeah. And your wife, was she, grew up the same way you did or? No, she grew up in a different church. Okay. The Christian Missionary Alliance. Yeah. So they're more, they're actually, they seem like American evangelical style. They don't really have a theology to speak of, not explicit anyways. Yeah. Their implicit theology seems to be evangelical. So before that, her parents went to the Pentecostal Church. And then they moved because the Christian Missionary Alliance Church had great, great programs for their kids. So there's lots of youth events and there's a young church, it's a city church, it marks itself as a city church. So there's lots of, they do huge Christmas services and whatnot. The music is really excellent. That kind of thing. Okay. All the things that stick in the mud Dutch performed people don't like, you know, they Yeah. So I was fairly critical of it when I went the first couple of times, but, you know, I see what, I've started to see what they're doing. I still don't like it that their preaching is rather soft. It's like, you know, the message, but you don't hear the reason why you need the message. You don't hear the reason for the gospel. You just hear the gospel. It is, you know, to me, that's, that's the message. You know, to me, that's a problem. But the fact that they are truly ministering ministering to the city as a whole, it definitely has its upsides. So, but anyways, that's her background. And then she came back to Southern Ontario area. For school, she went to a university down here and we met through friends. So that was four years ago. Okay. And yeah, so now we're living here in Southern Ontario and I work as a carpenter. Okay. So my master's degree a few months ago and went back to work philosophy. Okay. Which doesn't make you any money. I was wondering a carpenter with a master's degree in philosophy. Yeah, it's not, it's not a profitable degree necessarily. So the market is swamped and the pay isn't high even for those who do get a job. So I'm tossing things around to figure out what I could do with it. But it was never, I never did it because, you know, I was thinking I was going to get a job at the end. It wasn't, that wasn't the goal. It was just, I loved philosophy. I still do love philosophy. So I did it for that reason. Okay. Yeah. Well, I was, you certainly, you certainly write well and I think you think clearly. I mean, that was evident from the paper. And so are you going to go on to get an even less profitable, more expensive PhD or are you going to have to ask? That's the question, isn't it? Of course, I can't afford a PhD. No one really can. But if it would come up with some sort of opportunity where there was a lot of funding involved and it wouldn't, it wouldn't conflict with my family life, I guess, because that's also very important to me. Then I might consider it, you know, maybe one day I'll write a book or something instead. We'll see. Yeah, you can start a YouTube channel. There you go. That works. Yeah, it is an option actually. My wife keeps telling me to do it. But I don't know. We'll see. Well, this is, you know, it's, I was a number of years ago, you know, you pastor for a while. And at that point, a lot of pastors go and get a, it's a demon in ministerial talk, a doctor of ministries. And I don't want to do a doctor. I want to do a doctorate. My father did one and some of my friends here worked on theirs. And I was like, I don't know. And, you know, PhD. And I looked at it all and it's like, I'm going to spend, you know, tens of thousands of dollars on these programs. And so then I always sort of contented myself. Maybe it was right or wrong to just continue to do self-education, which is read books, listen to things. And then, of course, at some point. And that's, you know, part of how I got into Tim Keller, because I wanted to sort of do deep dives into individuals and then lost interest in Tim Keller. And then Jordan Peterson caught my attention and of course started a YouTube channel and all this craziness happens. So, but you're, you know, you're not married that long. You get some kids, you know, now's now's the time to take care of them. And, you know, I keep keep reading philosophy and I look for outlets like this, you know, exactly. And it's it's amazing that I think before the Internet wouldn't have these kinds of opportunities. So I was actually so when I when I was nearing the end of my master's degree, you know, you have all these conversations in the in the in the lounge. And the grad grad lounge with all these students and everything. And that's great. There's a guy there who was he he was still he was slowly getting out of a sort of, you know, atheistic scientific materialist type mindset. He loved his his stuff and stuff, that kind of thing. And I really enjoyed talking to him because once you got past the bombastic, you know, debunking of Christianity, you could actually have a good discussion. He was also very dismissive and then you could kind of, you know, ask questions and, you know, push push push push out him a little bit and see what happens. That was nice. But so I was already thinking then, like, what do I do after this is done? I've done five years of philosophy and I've always had opportunities to talk to people, you know, philosophy professors and students. And now what will I do when I'm done? Right. How am I going to how am I going to keep your habit? Exactly. So even just I don't necessarily need to talk all the time. I really like to listen to these conversations as well. So when I when I discovered the discord, that was that was great for me. I didn't have the same people, you know, they have this thing where they they pick up on Jordan Peterson because they needed that father figure. I didn't have that need. I had a family is excellent. I have no complaints. And so, you know, and Christianity has always been every every flavor of Christianity has its has its upsides and downsides. But it's always it's always been a strong presence. So I've never had ever felt like I was completely lost or anything like that. So I had no need. I had no psychological need for that kind of thing. But I did find Jordan Pearson very interesting because he was talking he was seriously talking about all these topical problems. And there's a lot of philosophy that's done. That's not serious. It's the stakes are low. Right. They're just talking about something like, I don't know, some ontological problem or something. But, you know, they don't care. Right. You know, there's not a lot of there's not a lot of not a lot of not a lot of hanging off of what they're saying. But Jordan Pearson seem to be taking it seriously. And that's not that's one of the things I like about him and Jirjak to actually, Favoy. He I liked him for the same reasons. Even though he did a lot of joking, he loves his jokes. You can tell that he actually cares. He's thinking and he's thinking seriously. I think that's really important. When these guys, you know, Jordan Pearson, especially when they when he started putting out videos and talking about stuff for me as Canadian, the political stuff was important, too. So that was kind of a good kind of got my foot in the door. But when he started talking about meaning that, you know, that really struck a chord for me. One thing that gave me wary actually was the way it was the way Jordan Pearson is received in university, which is not well, let's put it that way. So the philosophy department is already predisposed to to mock and to put down any thing they see as as that could possibly take the label of pseudo pseudo intellectual. I don't think Jordan Pearson is a pseudo intellectual at all. I'm just saying that the if you could possibly throw that label at someone and make it stick, then they'll do it. So I always fire back. Well, you know, it's probably who a lot of the the grad students and undergrads, especially love because of the nature of the department that I was in. He's he's exactly the same position. He's he's a he's even even in a weirder position potentially because he's a Marxist. Already in Lacanian, he's a weirdo. Right. So is Peterson. But they're both public intellectuals that are weirdos. So I would always say, you know, what's the difference? Really? What are we talking here? What? Just because you don't like different Peterson's ideas doesn't mean he's not, you know, serious. Right. So anyways, the reception for him wasn't good. So that helps make me sort of critical, not in a bad way, critical of Peterson, which was probably a good thing because for a lot of Christians, he presses all the right buttons and they just wish you'd push a couple more. Right. So. Yeah, so that was that was really I really I actually I watched his maps of meaning series when I was working between my two degrees in Kitchener, which is a city. North, I think it's northwest of the GTA, so the Toronto area. So my wife was busy with her schooling placements. She's in health care and I was at home alone, so I just watched these watched all the lectures afterward. So that was that was pretty fun. I enjoyed his. What would you call it? It's not really literary analysis. He did those, you know, the Lion King and Pinocchio and whatnot. And that's another another. Well, between him and him and Svoboda, actually, because they don't do that same sort of thing. Yeah. So, yeah, that was I guess that would be my my experience with Peterson. Peterson, I guess I already said this, but I basically I didn't I didn't dive right in and agree with everything he said right off the bat. He didn't he didn't he wasn't a savior for me. Let's put it that way. He was not a yeah, he wasn't like a Christ figure or something like that. He wasn't a hero for me. I did find it very interesting and he was very I found him very endearing, I guess. Yeah, he's very endearing. Yeah. And so it was probably actually. Yeah. So that's very interesting. I you know, I didn't know anything about Zizek. I didn't I wasn't a YouTube watcher before Peterson and I was a big audiobooks listener. And there were some podcasts that I listened to, but I wasn't really a YouTube watcher at all. YouTube was just a place you go for random videos. And then at some point it was a place I could post the Freddie and Paul show just to just have it out there. So Freddie and his mom and anybody else who wanted to watch could say and maybe share a video, a sermon of a video of a sermon someplace free. That's all I used it for. And then Peterson came along and then I had to figure out how to use how to use YouTube and find out how to listen and not necessarily watch. And I mean, all those kind of things. So. So what do you so then you you eventually made your way to the Escort server and found some more conversation partners basically. Where do you think I mean, I think one of the main first of all, your point about academics is true, partly because René Girard made this statement that basically most most academics are working in their silo of their discipline. So you've got philosophy, you've got psychology, you've got say literature, you've got all these silos and Peterson obviously is someone who wants to sort of bring them together. And you're always going to, you know, if it's a psychologist trying to do this, I mean, just it's just the nature of it's just the nature of academia. I remember when he started out on the Bible and I thought, oh gosh, because I know I know what biblical studies looks like. I mean, there's how many different schools and trains of thought and tiny little distinctions. And if you get one wrong, somebody's going to blast you. And it's just the it's just the nature of the academy. So anybody who's going to try and integrate and bring together a broader picture obviously is going to receive critique and criticism from any field that they touch. But I Peterson, you know, one of the things that Peterson did was that maybe, you know, one of the things that Peterson did for a lot of people like me was just sort of open up a open up a conversation and help a lot of people find each other. And that's, you know, that's essentially what happened. What happened with me and I I didn't expect to get a lot of new conversation partners, frankly, just a handful because, you know, that's that was my whole experience with this sort of thing. I'd make a friend or two and that would be cool. And then, of course, I didn't understand YouTube or or its capacity for growth. I found that totally unnerving. And so then, you know, just took one thing at a time and Joey started the Discord server and have conversations. And that's it's been really good because like you, I like these kinds of conversations and they're hard to have just locally because, you know, I know half, you know, half dozen people in Sacramento like yourself who they've got day jobs, they've got families, you know, would we actually read the same book? Would we actually? Yeah. And and sort of what this has been able to do is bring together a community to talk and, you know, then, you know, Peugeot and Verveke and, you know, a bunch of others that came online. So Benjamin Boyce, Peugeot and Benjamin Boyce had, I thought, a really remarkable conversation today. I pretty much enjoyed that. So now you get to be a carpenter and have have something to listen to during those hours when you're driving in the truck or work on a site or something. Yeah, I did a lot of listening a while back as I was I was mudding. I was, you know, drywall and plaster. That's what I was doing. So this is a lot of alone time and a lot of repetitive work so you can you can let your mind do something else basically. So how do you think this is going to intersect with your church world? Because, you know, I really, you know, I really enjoyed again, I didn't have time to read the whole thing. And it wasn't something that you just kind of skim your paper on Kierkegaard. But, you know, a lot of the distinctions and how you pulled it out, I thought it was really good. How's this going to intersect with your your church life? And your life of faith? So, OK, so I had an experience a couple of years ago, actually. My interest in Kierkegaard was always it was sort of on the margin in my like the margin of my mind that the edge of my brain, I guess, for a while. Because I knew he was a Christian and I had read a couple a little bit of his stuff. And then I read during my last year of my last year of my undergrad and during my master's degree, I read a lot of Nietzsche and I read most of his most of his writings, I would say. Which I really enjoy. Nietzsche is great. So I was going to write my master's thesis on Kierkegaard. And I was like, OK, I'm going to write a lot of these things. Which I really enjoy. Nietzsche is great. So I was going to write my master's thesis on Nietzsche. Then my supervisor suggested that I change that to Kierkegaard. And he said that I could. It would be great for me because I could I could bring my background to bear in what a while I interpreted him. I thought that made a lot of sense. I also had a fairly good idea what I could do if I wrote on Kierkegaard. So I did that instead. So the experience years ago was that talking to a cousin of mine who is he went he's theologically trained somewhat. He's not a pastor, but he went to a school relative of mine. I mentioned Kierkegaard as someone that I liked. And he said that Kierkegaard is not really a Christian. I was like, how is that? I didn't really want to have the conversation at the time. So I didn't. But I was wondering how that could be. How could you think that he's not a Christian? He clearly thinks he's a Christian and he talks like he's a Christian. What makes him not a Christian? I think it was because he's a philosopher. He's not a theologian exactly. He's a weird he's like a C.S. Lewis. He's got he wears a lot of hats and one of the main hats he wears is philosopher. And that puts him on the outside already. So he knows that he's on the outside. He talks a lot about it. I would say that when you study him and when you write about him and when you think about him a lot, you actually put yourself on the outside to some degree as well. That's not really an issue in my mind for me. It doesn't really bother me. But I think it's true. I think it does separate you because what it does is it helps you separate what he wants to talk about exactly what faith is. So in Fear and Trembling, I would say that one of the main themes of the book is the question of what faith is. And if you do that, if you want to talk about what faith really is in any any Christian culture, you know, you pick your you pick your version of Christianity. You're going to run into a lot of resistance because there are things that people think are essential that are definitely not essential. They might be good. It's very likely that they're very good. Are they essential? Not not really. They're just something that historically has developed in a particular strain or particular version of Christianity. So I'd like to say that one of the things that I would say that studying philosophy and specifically what Kierkegaard has done is to put me in a weird marginal space, I would say. And it's not a problem. I'm not saying that it's a problem because it's not. But it is definitely real. I would definitely say that that's what philosophy does for you. A little bit of philosophy makes you into an annoying, you know, baffling fool basically. And a lot of philosophy puts you into this weird place where somebody says something and you you could sit down for an hour and talk about what they just said. But most of the time you just think that you just think what they said is, you know, not nearly well enough said and you move on with your life. Right. All these assumptions that work in a culture that philosophy helps you to see behind or wants you to see behind. Right. I don't know if that makes sense. That makes perfect sense. That makes perfect sense. Well, and because as a pastor, I think you said it well. So, so Kierkegaard is a philosopher and let's say unlike C.S. Lewis, Kierkegaard is in a sense writing from deep within and at the apex of Christendom. And he is positioning himself as a reformer. Lewis was working in a very different space where the Academy was essentially post-Christian and he became an apologist for it. And the, see, that actually been I made a video last week that I didn't publish and I'm really wrestling with I haven't put I haven't made another video for tomorrow yet. And I'm really wrestling with a whole bunch of different issues that are they're just hard to communicate. And a lot of them revolve around what you sort of pointed to now. You're a carpenter. You're a father. You go to church. You're looking to raise your children as Christian. You grew up as part of a church that felt the need for whatever reason. You know, and of course, your parents are down the line here. But because your church leaves a denomination, it's like, what am I going to leave my church to go? You know, it's these are these are things that we flow along with. And, you know, denominations that during that time left over interpretations of Genesis and science questions about the propriety of women in official ecclesiastical roles. And so, OK, those are those that are the things that we're going to be talking about. Those are those that become these dividing lines and these these hard lines, these bright lines that one way or another. And, you know, even just the first few pages of your paper, and you're looking at Kierkegaard, and he's he's he's and of course, Kierkegaard does all these weird things through these pseudonyms and all of these characters mean. I mean, if there's somebody who's hard to read and to figure out what on earth he's trying to do. But if you can sort of get a handle on it, you say, wow, this is this is masterful what he's doing here. You know, it's Kierkegaard and and to and to really ask questions about, you know, what is faith? Is it is it faithful to with your community? You know, stick, you know, hold your allegiance to these particular these particular beliefs, whether or not you, you know, whatever you think of them, you you hold to them as a function. I mean, you read Kierkegaard and all of this stuff that you might experience at one level as being very simple and plain and clear. Which again is not a bad thing. And Kierkegaard knows that you start going down into other levels and it's like, oh, my, what's you know, what's really behind my motivation? Why am I saying I believe this? And and and what sorts of pride and what sorts of instrumentality aren't I using at certain levels of faith? And what sorts of instrumentality aren't I using at certain levels of my psyche in order to achieve these things? And how and how how are those things not actually, especially in a tradition like ours, some brand of self salvationism? And so no philosophers, philosophers might not like Jordan Peterson sticking his nose into their business, but theologians and pastors, you know, might feel pretty uneasy about philosophers because you ask begin to unsettle the projects which we create, which tend to be communities of allegiance under certain principalities that can act as one and accomplish certain things and perpetuate their own existence through time. And a philosopher coming in and asking all kinds of questions about, well, what is faith and what is belief? And Abraham and his son and how does that work? I mean, yeah, you're you're you're poking around in an area that's not going to make everybody happy. No, no. And then like I said before, he's talking specifically about what faith is psychologically. He wants to know what faith is like. And like really what faith is not no real faith is like, you know, he's part of the Christian faith or he's part of the Islamic faith or part of the Jewish faith. And he doesn't mean any of that. No, no, no. He wants to know what faith is. What does it look like? Right. So he talks about in fear and trembling, always under, you know, according to my reading of fear and trembling, he says he divides, he divides the three maximal spiritual states into three. And he says that the one of them is is infinite resignation, which is basically death, putting putting putting the world to death in the sense that, you know, the monastic sense you treat to a monastery, you kill all the earthly desires, et cetera. Extrude cases would involve self-flagellation, that kind of thing. He's thinking more of the austere monkish types. The second one would be the demonic, which is something that isn't that well laid out in fear and trembling, but it comes up in another book called Sickness unto Death. And he talks about it better. He does a better job talking about it there. And I use the guy that wrote Sickness unto Death to the pseudonym that wrote that, to interpret fear and trembling, which works fairly well. And the demonic ends up being willing in despair to be yourself. So despair is a state that comes after consciousness. So after the Christian mythology, again, the Louisiana sense, not a negative. In the Christian mythology, the snake tempts the woman and the man and woman fall into sin, right? There's that, you could say, is the beginning of consciousness, become self-conscious, right? What you get there is they've both fallen into despair. If they continue in despair while willing to be themselves, if they will to be themselves with their sins. So Cain does that, right? Is that right? Yeah, Cain's the guy, yeah. Cain's the murderer. He murders his brother and then he, instead of seeking forgiveness, he doubles down and he remains a murderer, right? He persists in himself as a murderer, you might say. That is the demonic according to Kierkegaard. So to make it more practical, I guess you could think of examples in your own life or my life or whoever's life where one of these two things, either active despair where you will, that you do something evil and you know you've done evil. You know the difference between good and evil since post-lapsing era. You know, but then you do it anyways. You persist in being yourself, what you consider to be yourself. You can also will to not be yourself. The ultimate version of this is, actually I wouldn't say it's suicide, it's more you despair. You despair and you don't will, how would I say this, this is kind of complicated. If willing to be yourself in despair is demonic, then not willing to be yourself is, doesn't have another name for it, but you could call it, he does call it at a certain point the feminine form of despair. People will take issue with that because they would say that the feminine is not actually purely passive, which is probably true. I haven't talked too much about it myself, but that would be the other side. So it's an inaction, type of inaction. A famous form of the demonic is Satan in Paradise Lost. I would say that's almost a perfect representation of what Kipra is trying to get at. Appropriately, of course, Satan, so it better be the demonic. There he is defiant the entire time. Kipra actually mentions this too. You can make a connection actually to untethered rationality. Satan in Paradise Lost builds kingdom in hell. Basically with just pure intellect. He creates this kingdom, this palace, and he says the lines, whether to reign in hell or serve in heaven. He also says something else about, the mind is its own place in itself to make a heaven of hell and a hell of heaven. So he basically instead of seeking reconciliation with God, he says, no, I can do it on my own. I'm an individual. I am strong. That's basically what the demonic looks like. Of course, we know, we can recognize that in ourselves fairly often. That's taking action against God, in defiance of God. The other form of that despair is, that kind of despair is passive, like I already talked about, which is a little harder to define for me anyway because I haven't studied it enough. That's an inactivity rather than an activity. One more thing on that, just to kind of round it out, is G.S. Lewis talks about a very similar state in The Great Divorce. What would be the best example of that in The Great Divorce? There's the guy, there's a little man that has the puppet on a chain. You remember that? The Trajanian, yeah. Yeah, yeah. So that would be a case where the person disappears under the weight of the thing that he thinks is himself. So eventually that little guy just poofs and he's just gone. He just dissipates into thin air. And all that's left is that Trajanian. And the demonic is basically that, it's a doubling down on a thing that isn't you. You consider yourself to be the part of yourself that is truly an individual. That's the part of yourself that's you and separate from God. You think that the bit of yourself that you've created, so to speak, that's the real you and you hold onto that with all your might. And that's what you end up with. An example in The Great Divorce where that doesn't happen is with the lizard on the guy's shoulder. And instead of listening to the lizard in the end, he allows the angel to kill it and he is set free. After receiving the fixed lizard back, the sanctified lizard you might say. All I have to say is that basically Kikor is very Christian. He's very much talking, there's a reason I can do that. I can take Kikor and just paste him directly onto Milton and also onto Lewis because they're all Christians. They're all talking in the same language. And they're all, regardless of their separate denominations, although Milton, I guess, I think Milton was an Anglican as well. Could be wrong about that. I think he had a touch of Calvinism somehow. But anyways, they're living in their own time and place in there. They've all got their own churches, yet they're all talking about basic Christian things, so they're digging right down to what Christianity really is. I don't know where I started with that. Well, you had three spiritual states. You had the infinite resignation, putting the world to death. You had the demonic. And the last one, of course, is faith. Okay. Right? And that's the thing that Kikor is trying to get to, or the synonymous author of The Iron Tram Link is trying to get to. I would argue that Kikor doesn't allow him to get there on purpose, you might say, because he is trying to get there from the outside. He's trying to, he's a philosopher in a sense. He's trying to examine faith as a concept, which doesn't work because faith is not a concept. Faith is trust in God, right? Yep. So I argue in a paper that you can, there's plenty of ways that people try to approach Kikor in Fear and Trembling and to figure out what means what. One thing they do is they try to say, you can learn what faith is by example. You can learn what faith is by watching Abraham, and that's what Johannes, or John the Silo, that's the synonymous author, is trying to do. Hopefully that's wrong. You can't actually learn what faith is by looking at what Abraham did to Isaac because then you would go out and you might kill your son. That's not right, that's not correct. What you can learn is that faith is, it's not one thing. It's not like a, it's not like a, it's not like a concept. It's not like a, how would you say this? It's not a obvious, oh that's wrong too. It's a relationship. Faith is a relationship. So you can't see it. What faith is, faith could be something completely different if God had asked Abraham to do something else, right? There's obviously a reason he asked him to give his, the son that God gave him after all those years of waiting. But the reason is not specific to Isaac. The reason is, or to Isaac and Abraham, the reason is, the reason is the question that it puts it there, which is that God is asking Abraham, what is most important to you? Right? What, do you trust me more than anything else? Like, do you really trust me? That comes up more often in the Bible, right? God will ask certain things of people as tests, you know, temptations is the other word. But we always have negative, we think of those negative connotations. But it's really the same thing. It's a temptation. Do you trust me? Or will you do your own thing? Will you follow human reason? Or will you trust me? Right? And many times people take the follow human reason bit and they do their own thing. But Abraham doesn't. And then so, you'll want to decide on his trying desperately to figure out how that could possibly happen. So he runs through all these different psychological scenarios. And all of them end up with the wrong results. Right? It turns out that you can't understand faith like that. It can only be understood from the inside. Only the faithful understands faith. Now, whether or not that qualifies me as a random Christian to tell you what faith is, that's a hard one to answer. But that isn't me, by the way. That's Kierkegaard saying that, saying implicitly and explicitly elsewhere that faith is ineffable. You can only know it if you're trusting God. If you're the one trusting God, then you know what faith is. Right? You can't point to someone and say that person is currently in a state of mind. In a state of faith. Right? It's not really like that. So I guess I could ask you too, like, you haven't read too much of Kierkegaard, neither have I, actually. I mean, compared to a lot of people I have in many ways. And he wrote a lot of books. He wrote like 30 books or something silly. But do you hear at all about Kierkegaard during your theological training? Or was it just the classic Dutch guys? Theological training was mostly the classic Dutch guys. And especially, you know, in a place like Calvin's Seminary, Berkoff, Hoeksema, so Louis Berkoff, and then Fred Kloster, Neil Planninga. Yeah, I know Planninga. Anthony Hoeksema. I mean, these are the guys. And they followed roughly Kiper and Bovingt. And so, you know, the theological education, at least in terms of systematics, tended to be from that strain, which is, you know, which is credible because why have a CRC seminary and not spend time with Kiper, Bovingt, Hoeksema, Berkoff. That's our tradition. For sure. I think there's a reason. Actually, there's not a lot of places. I was actually doing a bit of research to see if there were any places I could possibly do a PhD or, you know, fish around or something like that. And there are not a lot of places that actually, a lot of scholars that actually tackle him because he's a weirdo. He doesn't. So I would say that one thing he could do for a seminary is provide a sort of a critical point of view. He is critical of everything, right? He's a, he's a, he takes his outside figure status seriously. He calls himself a gadfly. So just like Socrates, he considers himself another Socrates in that sense, right? A couple years ago I read a biography about him and it's a fairly short one. I forget the title. I posted it on other things. Kierkegaard, A Single Life. A strange man. I mean, in terms of how he lived, his relationship with this woman, his relationship with his family, his young death, what he did, you know, and he just, just kept the nation at least while he was writing sort of transfixed. And, you know, especially in a, in a period of, you know, the height of Christendom where everything, you always, it's tempting to know when a tradition is about to collapse because all it can do is congratulate itself. And you know, at that point, it's just going to, it's just going to implode, which is, which is what happened. Yeah, one of the things that he was writing against was the Hegelians. I'm not much of a Hegelian, but the problem wasn't so much Hegelian philosophy itself, which was a problem for Kierkegaard in some ways, but the fact that everyone was talking about it, like literally everyone thought on it and it's in Hegelian, along Hegelian lines, not everyone, but it was something like, what's a good example? So before Marxism got a bad name, Marxism was extremely popular for a while, right? And it was something like that. Everyone was talking about Marxism or, you know, in the science, the scientific philosophy area, Darwinism was, I would say it's starting to get heavily criticized to the extent that a lot of people are now talking about criticisms of Darwin rather than just, you know, being all gung-ho about Darwin. But for a while there, that was the hegemonic point of view. That's the, that was what everyone was thinking. So Kierkegaard was setting himself up against that in order to, you know, get people thinking again, because, you know, when you have one worldview that's completely dominating, you run into problems such as the inability to think. People don't really think anymore. They just repeat what they've heard and they learn the doctrine, so to speak, and they just repeat it. So I know there's a lot to that in my university degree as well. There are some things that just weren't questioned. Chant of the philosophy is in a bit of a weird position because it is obviously a descendant of Christianity, but it doesn't acknowledge that at all, right? My master's research paper was well received. Both of my supervisor and my second reader enjoyed it and had very little criticisms to make of it, even though it's obviously Christianity all the way through from beginning to end. So it wasn't like there was intolerance. It was just, yeah, like I said, it was something that was clearly, if you did a little bit of history, you would realize that, you know, that's what all this comes from, right? But it was unacknowledged, I guess. That's what I would say. It's unacknowledged. It's sort of praising the construction of the life raft, but assuming that such things will never need to be used. Exactly. Exactly. So I really appreciated, I would say that's one of the reasons I really appreciated Nietzsche when I read Nietzsche. He knew what the life raft was. He knew what was underneath there. He didn't like it, but he knew what was down there, right? No one else, well, no one else. Most people didn't. Most people either were sort of, what would I say? They were Christians, like they were, they would call themselves Christians, they would go to church, but they didn't really believe, or they were atheists. They didn't take atheism seriously. They were intellectual atheists, right? That would be their position. That would be their confession. They would confess to be atheists, but they didn't act like it. That was his problem. Now I would say that Nietzsche didn't act like he was an atheist either, but that's a whole other discussion. But he tried, he did his darnedest to try to start a new religion, in a sense. He knew that, not a new religion in the sense of starting a cult or something like that. That's not what I'm talking about. A new religion isn't a bad way to say it. Okay, yeah. But I still want to give the impression that he didn't have congruence or anything. What he was trying to do was, he knew that human beings, I'm not sure this is the right way to say this, some people might have a problem with that, that's okay. Human beings were essentially religious. Now you might not use those words, but you probably wouldn't use those words. We needed a new way to live, to get beyond the deficiencies of Christianity as he saw then, and he did his best to put it forward. Yeah, and he wanted, a good example of that would be Zarathustra, the book Zarathustra, the Spoke Zarathustra. That is what that is, that is an attempt at a religious text. It's full of paradoxes and parables and that kind of thing. It's that kind of teaching style, there's a word for it, I think I remember. Basically, the more you read it, the more you get out of it. It's not straightforwardly put. A lot of the knowledge is implicit. What's trying to be communicated is not the only thing being communicated, it's the parable. Julian Young, my bookshelves are off screen, but they're here and here, so we're all clear. Julian Young is really good on Nietzsche. How do you spell the last name? Young as in being young, and Julian, J-U-L-I-A-N. He's really good on Nietzsche and meaning. He wrote a book called Nietzsche and the Meaning of Life, which I haven't read yet, but he also wrote a really large biography of Nietzsche, which is really excellent. I have read that, it's very good. I think that's a lot about that in there as well. That's helpful. That's helpful. I need a lot of work both on my Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. Having a YouTube channel has helped my ongoing project of self-education tremendously, but it's not helped my ability to get through, do an in-depth study of Nietzsche, or an in-depth study of you, because I've just pulled all over the place. I have to go because I have a four o'clock, at least my time. I have another conversation at the top of the hour. Robert, I very much enjoyed our conversation, and it has been wonderful seeing your face and getting to know you a little bit. Now, obviously, on the Discord when I see Robert V.A. come up, I will have a face and a voice to put to the words. Everybody gets two slots, so if you can find another slot, there might not be a lot of them left in December. I'll have to see if I can open some more up. After I get back, I've got a little vacation planned. After vacation, I can see if I can see some more slots. But this has been wonderful. I've really enjoyed this. Yeah, it was a good talk to you. Thanks for letting me shout about my master's thesis. Do you want me to put a link to it in the notes? Sure, yeah. Well, first of all, I'll send this to you, and then you can give me the high sign whether or not to share it. Yeah, that's probably fine. It'd be fine? Yeah, I think so. Okay, because I don't have a lot of content this week, so it might come up this week. All right, Robert. Sounds good. Good to meet you. Yeah, you too. See you later. Take care. Bye-bye.