https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XFx4BY5f2Wc

 Yeah. So right. Well, I've I've I've, you know, I've seen you now on the discord. I know that you you know, you noted the you noted who you are there by your name. I did obviously from the discord I didn't know notice the Dutch last name, which is that common name. Yeah, I've no yeah, which is of folks with I won't say it right now just in case, you know, but anyway, so it's great to see your face and great to get a chance to talk to you. Yeah, you too. I've been looking forward to this. Yeah, my, my so my grandpa immigrated from Netherlands, or Holland specifically, right after World War Two. So that's where the Dutch name comes from. He used to I'm sure you've heard this he used to tell this little joke, you know, if you ain't Dutch, you ain't much. Yeah. And then the response is, you know, you can tell a Dutchman, but you can't tell him much, you know. Well, what's on your what's on your mind today, john, what do you what do you want to do with our time? Yeah, I mean, I guess I can go into a little bit about who I am in my story, I suppose. Yeah, please do. So, yeah. Um, so my, my mom and dad, my mom grew up in, and she was raised Catholic, my dad grew up in an ag church. And so when they met in college, they kind of got involved in the charismatic stuff. I don't know if you would call it second or third wave, charismatic, whatever. And so a little, an interesting, you know, charismatic story. So before I was born, you know, that, you know, they were having some friends like pray over me, and, you know, whatever. And so, you know, one of my, you know, one of my parents friends, when she was praying had this, like vision of me, you know, being born, like holding a Bible in my hand, which is so it's an interesting little young. Yeah, yeah. Well, I'm not on track to become like, the next NT writer anything. And I don't know if I could. But I just so but I am very one, we don't need to. Yes. No, no, no, that's a good point. Yeah, yeah. But you know, I'm very interested in, you know, the Bible and theology and stuff. And I'll kind of come out as I keep going here. But so I kind of, I grew up in this kind of Bethel adjacent church in the Midwest. And so I had this, I don't know, kind of as a kid at this summer camp, I had this kind of first charismatic conversion experience. And so that was, I think that I don't know, you know, when I, you know, became a Christian or whatever, whatever that means. And so, but I guess kind of as time went on in high school, I was, you know, like I was kind of more nominal at some point. So you know, if you'd asked me if I believe in God, and I was Christian, I would probably say yes. But I wasn't really like pursuing it. And so, you know, I guess you could say like my personal teleology that I kind of constructed for myself was pointing in different directions, like, you know, with sports and academics, you know, specifically, like swimming was, you know, such a big part of my life then. And so that was kind of what I built up. It's like, okay, this is, you know, I didn't like think about it. But it's just what happened, you know, this is like, this is my life. This is kind of what it is. And so basically, there were, you know, a series of kind of really personal and like emotional events that kind of happened to me at the end of senior year of high school. You know, one of which included, you know, like, while swimming is over now, you know, I'm not going to college for it. And like, it's this thing that I poured in so much time to time into. And so there was like, kind of like a little meaning crisis. It's like, okay, what do I do with my life now? Right. And so that kind of shattered this like facade that I had been pursuing. And so there was a lot of like, purposeless and meaningless in my life, I think, at that point. And so right before I started college, like literally the day before I kind of had this experience where I was like, you know, you know, God, I've had enough of this, I want to like, like come back and just, you know, you know, do like, you know, I can see this isn't working, I can see that, you know, this is not providing meaning, whatever this is, so I want to, you know, return and so I guess I kind of did. So and then, you know, it hasn't been like super smooth after that. But after then, it, I, you know, I joined InterVarsity on the campus that I go to. And so I, you know, I was a student leader in that. And I really, you know, tried to participate in that and kind of found community in it. And so kind of at this point, let's see, I'm studying electrical engineering. And so I'm in my senior year. And so I'm going to graduate soon and then go on to I'm going on to a master's. But anyways, Good. So you have time to listen to videos even as a student. Well, yeah, well, the the I think between walking between classes before COVID. That's you know, I forgot about that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then exercising, I'd listen. So I was like, I think I, I like I, so I kind of, you know, right after that kind of conversion experience a few years ago, I, you know, I was starting to kind of delve into the intellectual stuff. And so you know, through that, that's where I discovered Peterson. And then, you know, I was there's a friend of mine, an IV that I was talking to about, like the IDW. And, you know, he's like, Hey, you should check out this guy. He's like the pastor of the IDW. I'm like, Okay, that's interesting. I don't think the IW has a Christian. I'm like, Okay, so I did. And then I've been, you know, listening to I don't know, whenever I started in 2018, I think I've listened to, you know, almost every one of your videos and podcasts and stuff. That's being good shape. Yeah, I mean, yeah, well, one and a half speed helps. So and then, yeah, so I was, I think, I don't know, in the past, you know, I was always about three or four months behind. So I think like, like my rate of listening was about at your rate of production. Oh, wow. So, um, but I'll take a break and you can catch up. Yeah, yeah. Well, that's what I kind of did. I was like, Okay, I like the Bible project. I like the all these other podcasts I'm listening to. But I really want to see if I can kind of, you know, especially once COVID hit, I actually have more time to, you know, listen, you know, Apple, like Apple podcasts, not the YouTube so much. So I can do other things. But and so yeah, and so I got caught up. I don't know, not long ago, maybe a week or two ago to where you currently are. So Wow, congratulations. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So yeah, and I mean, through you, I kind of discovered, you know, for Vakey and Peugeot and Tom Holland, and, you know, I read Dominion and, you know, tried to listen to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. But yeah, it was a little hard sometimes. Yeah, I listened to all 50 of them. But I can't say that I necessarily like understood or retained a lot. So I don't know, I might listen to it at some point and again, but anyways, so I think, you know, recently, I, I think I'm trying to, you know, figure out where I am, you know, theologically and with the faith, because I think I've had a bit of like, you know, disillusionment with kind of evangelicalism and stuff. And I love like all of the charismatic stuff, like, well, most of it, I should say a lot of it, like, you know, like, like, you know, healing people and like speaking in tongues and like, the certain kind of, you know, pursuing of the Holy Spirit and such, you know, and at the same time, like, I'm not convinced that like, the modern iteration is necessarily doing it in the the right way, not like I know the right way. But, you know, there's there's, like, there's like a disconnect to it. And so I've been moving in a more kind of sacramental direction, I think. And so I don't think I don't see myself becoming like Catholic or an Orthodox, I mean, I would be open to it. But it would be you're never gonna get able to get back on the discord now. They're gonna swarm you. Those sacramentalists, they're just taking over. I know, I know. I'm on your side. I'm not. I'm not. I got the beard, but I'm not wearing a robe. Don't have the funny hat. Yeah, it is funny. It's like it's how many of I mean, especially Orthodox, because like, you know, I made it, I may have knew, like knowing that they existed, but I didn't know anything about them. And so I know, I had the same thing. It's like, they're all over the place now, just in this tiny little corner to actually find an Orthodox Church takes them doing but I was I was in a I was traveling someplace, it was here in Northern California, because we don't go far now because of COVID. And, and there was a strip mall. And I noticed like a classic storefront, probably a Pentecostal Church. And right next door, it was some, you know, Eastern European, Orthodox, Catholic, right thing right next door to it looked just as dumpy. And I thought, I guess that's kind of how you got to start out. It's probably 12 people in there going through the going through the liturgy. So it's it's, it's a fascinating development. Oh, it totally is. And like the difference between like, my church as a kid. You know, at one point, we were having services in a high school gym, you know, like, because we didn't have a building. Yeah. And you know, I mean, that, you know, for charismatic, you know, that doesn't make a difference. You know, it's like, if the Holy Spirit's there, you're set, right? You know, that's right. Right. Especially if you got speakers and a good musician, you know, off you go, you're going to be in the you're going to be in the you're going to be in you're going to experiencing the worship of angels before you know it. And then as many of those churches, they'll start out in a gym, and they'll get big, and then they'll have their building campaign. I mean, that's the that's the process that they go through. And there's huge churches around Sacramento, just like that. Hmm. Yeah, I mean, like Bethel is not too far from you guys, obviously. No, no, a couple hours up the road. Yeah. My parents are huge fans of, you know, Bill Johnson and Chris Valston and that like and, you know, and, I mean, I like them too. I guess part of me figuring out where I'm going is, is, is, you know, listening to folks like them and seeing like, okay, I love a lot of what they're saying. And at the same time, I'm trying to tease this stuff out. It's like, okay, so, you know, I like the healings, the healing type stuff. I like a lot of these things, you know, but, you know, some of the, you know, Jesus is my boyfriend songs, not, you know, so much, right? You're not looking for a boyfriend. Nope, that's for sure. And so, you know, I think what I think the direction I'm going in is, like, sort of a high church Anglicanism almost. Yeah, I haven't, like, and this is, I mean, this has kind of been a recent development. So I really haven't been able to pursue it super much with COVID. It's been, you know, you know, it's, it's been difficult to actually, you know, so I actually, I haven't actually had the chance yet to, to go to one of their services and, you know, see what it's like. Your journey, your journey is just starting. You're still in college. I mean, yours, you're gonna, there's gonna be twists and turns in your story that you can't anticipate. And, but that's, that's, that's good. Who knows? Maybe that dream, maybe that dream comes to pass. I mean, dreams are, yeah, there are dreams that people have had about me and dreams that I've had that I still go back to and ponder. And, you know, I, you know, that's why when I listen to a lot of these sort of Miracle-less atheists, and they're sort of disparaging of miracles, I just think, gosh, you just have not been out enough. You haven't lived outside of North America. You haven't hung out with the Bethel crew. You haven't seen stuff. And, you know, if you if you see stuff and say, I just don't know, I have more respect for that, then just always the you need to sort of be a hardcore cynic to just, you know, wave it all away. There's too much weird stuff to wave it all away. Right? No, I totally agree. I mean, like the, it seems to have something to do with like, you know, I mean, it's definitely something to do with, you know, openness versus I can't remember, you know, non openness, whatever the word is, you know, it's like, you know, somebody like Sam Harris and John MacArthur would be in the exact same camp in that because they have, you know, right. It's like this, this fundamentalist, you know, like, somebody should make a meme of that for the discord. Sam Harris and John MacArthur. Yep, our arm and arm just, you know, like, I'm sorry, I don't I don't mean to I don't mean to derail your conversation. So I should shut up. Oh, yeah, it's funny. No, I just I just made that connection now. So it's good. I mean, like, this, they both have this, you know, uber fundamentalist mindset. And you know, it's like, you know, the, the, you know, the, the Bible on one stuff, the Bible of, you know, however we like to interpret it on one side and the Bible of rationalism on the other, you know. And so I think, you know, I mean, like, I've seen a few discussions of, like, in the discord, and I think even in some of your conversations of, like, well, do is there some sort of mapping between these, you know, personality types and denominations? And, you know, it seems like it seems, I mean, anecdotally, like there is, especially, like the charismatic stuff, like, like, totally, like, you know, because I'm like, I know, for me, like, I'm a very introverts in a in a charismatic church that's really getting lit. You know, they're gonna be wanting some liturgy. Please have it on paper. Let me know what's coming next. Yeah. Yeah. Well, and I think that's, that's, that's kind of part of it for me. I mean, I do have a very kind of, you know, Spock like personality in a sense, very introverted, very, you know, but I think what's actually been helpful about the whole charismatic thing is that it has, I think, it's, it's has, I think, helped me get in touch with my emotions to an extent that I would not have in say, like, you know, first Baptist Southern whatever kind of church. And so that actually has been helpful because, you know, I think it's helped me kind of have this, you know, intimate connection with with God and like, you know, personal prayer times and like, you know, I mean, I guess, you know, it seems like some people have have struggles with, you know, quote unquote, feeling God's presence or something. And like, and some people never really had much of a problem with that. That's good. Yeah. Yeah. And which is which is good. And it's like, I can all chalk that up to, you know, the blessings of being raised in that. And so yeah. But I think at the same time, like my brother-in-law, he's very, he's joined an Anglican church with my sister, and they're, you know, he's very into the sacramental theology type thing. And he was he was very much an evangelical as, as you know, in college, he was big in IV and everything. And so he's kind of been pointing me at least in the theological direction of, you know, you know, maybe maybe communion isn't just this thing that we do once a month. And you know, you just take a cup. Okay, now we were good. We're set. You know, we listened to the pastor, you know, our lawn, you know, rousing sermon. Okay, and we'll you know, sip, you know, there's this little thing that we do, if we stop doing it, people get upset. So just do it. Don't ask too many questions. Yeah, exactly. And, you know, I feel like, well, what is the what is what can the church offer that is different than from anything that the world can offer, right? And to me, it's like, like, the world can can give you a Tony Robbins talk, that like any, you know, evangelical pastor, you know, with his chops could could get out there and, you know, do a rousing sermon any, like, a lot of secular music is better than a lot of the CCM Christian music, you know, and it's like, okay, so what what are we as the church making available to people that the world cannot? And to me, it's, it's, you know, increasingly, the answer to that is, you know, you know, the real body and blood in of Christ in the sacraments. And, you know, whether that's transubstantiation or consubstantiation, you know, whatever, I'm not committed to anything real presence. You just go to Calvin had a real real presence. It's just a lot easier than those big words. Just say real presence. Yeah. Well, what is real? Yeah, now you can have to muddle around with some big words. Just use a little four letter one real. I'll get you in plenty of trouble. Yeah, yeah, exactly. And I think, you know, that's actually one of the things my brother in law, you know, I'm, you know, we're not really we're definitely not like Calvinist, but he definitely like, definitely not Calvinist is like, want to be some of those people, right? Those people, right? Well, and this is the weird thing is that whenever like, I hear you talk about, like, oh, so I'm a Calvinist. So I believe x, it's like, whenever you say something that I'm like, I agree with that, you know, you know, it's like, it's a strange thing, because I've had like, you know, discussions with a lot of my friends who are kind of you know, very Baptist, yawn, restless, reformed. Oh, yeah, kind of area. And so I think what I'm kind of piecing together is there's there's a difference between, you know, this traditional performed sort of like, you know, going back 1600 years, and then through, you know, people like Babink and Kiper and etc. And from the difference, then this sort of like mishmash is evangelical Baptist reforms kind of, you know, Frankenstein monster that's, and, and, you know, I, you know, I love those guys, like they're, you know, so excited about the Lord, but it's, you know, I can't sign onto it, right? Yeah, well, reformed. And, you know, if you look at the history, you know, what happens in the Reformation, the Lutheran sort of keep with the Lutheran thing. And John Calvin as a second generation reformer, sort of offers a broader summary, out of which grows, you know, and people pick and choose, of course, our minions grow out of Calvinism. And so even, and so when you say, well, I'm a Calvinist versus an Arminian, you're really talking about a more of a 17th century fight. But almost most evangelicals, including many Pentecostals, it, it sort of grows out of this Calvinism that that was so you've, you know, you've got the Anabaptists, which are the Mennonites, the brethren, some of those folks, you've got the Lutherans, you've got the Roman Catholics, and just about all the other evangelicals, theologically, their roots go back to Calvinism, even if they're pushing back against what the young restless and reformed Calvinists like to emphasize. And so when people hear me, and I'm don't seem sufficiently young, restless and reformed, that's sort of okay. And I do come out of, you know, the, the part of the Dutch Calvinism that is in, you know, fairly tight communion with the Westminster Confession and some of those things, but Calvin sort of Calvin sort of finished out the reformation in a broad way that so many other groups emerged from. So that's, that's, that's why evangelicalism so often has these elements of Calvinism, even if they're not emphasizing divine election or some of these things, but you'll find all this tailstale stuff in in broad evangelicals around the around the around the West. Right, right. And like, I can, you know, still see that kind of thing, like, my, like, my pastor will get up and, you know, the my charismatic church and I was grew up in like an ill, very much like, you know, these kind of, you know, 16th 17th century points and like, kind of, like arguments even and you know, this is this this is like a charismatic church that, you know, even would see itself and kind of, oh, this is it. This is the new thing that just came out, you know, Azusa Street, and then, you know, and then, like, you know, took the Toronto revival and I hop and all these different things, but it's so it's so grounded. And like reading dominion has helped me so much understand that it's like, okay, where's this all coming from? It's like, well, it's, we've been swimming in these waters for, you know, 2000 years, and it's not like it's really, you know, changed substantially, at least in our kind of when I was your age, John Wimber was Bill Johnson, and John Wimber, I mean, you can you can you can your parents probably would have a book or two of his out there, you know, power of evangelism and power healing. And John Wimber launched the, you know, the vineyard movement and the vineyard were sort of Presbyterian charismatics. And, you know, so these, I mean, history, that's why that's why history is so helpful, because you can see, even if you're pushing back against something, you're you're you always take something of what you're pushing back against with you. It's by virtue of the dynamic of the relationship. So yeah, it's, it's, and I, you know, I do, I do, I, I welcome the conversation I just before you was someone who grew up assemblies of God, and, and that'll that'll post, you know, if you want this conversation to be posted, that'll post before this one, because I try to keep them in order if I can, because it makes a little bit more sense. But, you know, it's, we're, you know, I welcome, I welcome the rise of the Orthodox on the American scene, because they, they bring they bring ancient riches from afar that some of us who have mostly only known the Western Church have not had a chance to have not had a chance to look at or enjoy. And so I think this is all part of the Holy Spirit's work in the church. And so it's, and that's, that's part of the reason that this whole, you know, my last three years have been just so much fun to, to, because I'm obviously high in openness, or I wouldn't be where I am today. But no, and I think, and I like, I like that in the discord server and in this estuary of sorts, you know, we've got Nick, have you talked to Nick from from Bethel? I heard him on the, on the discord server. Yeah, I know of him. I heard him on the on the charismatic randos random randos conversation. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I heard some of his story. I haven't talked to him directly. Oh, you should you should hunt him down and talk to him. Because it's, you know, and what's so amazing to me is that, so all the everyone's so excited about the divine liturgy and the sacramental traditions, and you're gonna have, you know, Sacramento is filled with charismatic Ukrainians and Slavs and, you know, people who, last thing I want is that church, I'm gonna come to Sacramento. And you know, we're gonna bust out the electric guitar and sing love songs to Jesus, baby. Because that's, that's the stuff. I think I think God is just doing his thing with us. And it's a beautiful thing. Yeah, and he really is. And I mean, like the bat conversation that, you know, that randos conversation with the charismatic, I mean, that, that really opened my eyes in a way in, in like, like, I'm understanding the the critique about, like, like, some of the, you know, Bethel stuff where, you know, it's, it's kind of like, you know, it's Oprah, it's like, you get healing and you get healing, you get healing, you know, but, you know, like, it's like, you know, it's like, like, but there's some of that to Jesus, and it comes through the Gospels, you know, you know, I love how, you know, Jesus is, is on one hand, not just a quivering, massive availability, I mean, people will come up to him and make demands on him. And it will say something to them that people today look at and say, I wasn't very nice. Well, Jesus, go about being nice. Other times, someone will come up and make the most audacious, you know, request and he'll say, absolutely. Yeah, right, right. Yeah. And that's that is him. That's, that's totally part of it. And and I think, like, that's why part of like, what I like about the healing and the miracles and that sort of thing, because it just seems so, you know, evident to me from the scriptures that that is, you know, part, absolutely part of the church's mission. Now, the angle that I was kind of hearing from that conversation was like, the, the how important the symbolic aspects of it, you know, when, you know, when Jesus heals the blind man who goes into the synagogue and shows himself, you know, it's like the it's, it's, it's a demonstration of showing how blind the, you know, the Pharisees and the Jewish leaders, you know, were in that situation, right. And, and, and that, like, you know, that that opened my eyes to so to speak, right. And so, and trying to think about that. But, you know, obviously, at the same time, it's not like, like God is constrained in any sort of way to say, Oh, well, there's this symbolic way, if there's not a symbolic way of doing it, I can't do it, right? You know, that that's not who he is. I could do no miracles, because there was no symbolism. Right. If only you had, if you had symbolism, this mountain would up and throw itself into the sea. You know, yeah, if if Pajot can't, can't illustrate how this mountain is the cosmic mountain with Eden at the top, then nope, you know, you're, you're, you're done. You're all lost. Sorry. No, and that's, that's right. Because and I really learned something in that conversation. I learned something from every conversation. But it's, it's that's one of the things that you note in, in the Gospels is that these, these enormous miracles of Jesus are deeply symbolic and intentionally. So for example, you know, water to wine, I mean, did that party really need more wine? You know, they ran out, and that's an embarrassment to the host. But and Jesus goes and makes, you know, a fun sermon illustration that people often do is maybe you get the plastic water jugs of, of basically guessing, you know, how many hundreds of gallons of wine Jesus made. And then you look at the population of these communities, you know, how many people were at that wedding, you know, maybe, you know, maybe he puts in maybe he makes a gallon of wine for each man, woman and child at the wedding. But that's the symbolism of it is, you know, is, is, and Jesus does it in a way that, and that's another beautiful thing about that story. Nobody knows it except the servants, the servants who are the ones, you know, nobody else knows it just more wine kept coming. And, and that's, that's how God works so often, at least I've seen. Yeah, I mean, I think so too. I mean, it's not like it's totally indiscriminate in one sense, but also like, I mean, what I've been trying to figure out is like, how, how we can, you know, kind of, I don't know, unite these two things, but like the whole all these, you know, really beautiful, charismatic things, and then also the, the sacramental stuff and like church tradition. I mean, I just, I just read, I read most of confessions, I got to the philosophical part. And yeah, and it's the philosophical part, I'm kind of like, okay, let's have to go a little more slowly through that. Once he gets into like time and eternity and stuff. But like, I guess the point is that like the, the, the, like, I'm reading some of the some of the Church Fathers a little bit more. I have a lot to read yet, but like, and I'm seeing the immense, like, you know, the wisdom and like, you know, the fact that they were so much closer to the biblical authors, the fact that they, like, you know, that they devised the canon of Scripture with, you know, with the, I think, inspiration of the Holy Spirit, you know, but, you know, it was they who kind of put that together in the councils and all this. And, and then of course, the whole sacramental theology, where, you know, the real presence, like, you know, when you partake of communion, like it's, like, every time you go to church, you're getting Christ, right? Whether you think so, whether you feel it or not, you are getting him, right? And so like, and, and, and to me, like, I haven't investigated it super much, but it seems like the Anglican Church in particular has, like, it's incorporated a lot of the charismatic stuff, and it also with retaining the sacramental stuff, and the emphasis on tradition, and, and, you know, the at the same time, the high placement of Scripture, you know, and so all of these, you know, because like, I don't want to want it to become like, oh, it's a church of me, it's a church of whatever I, you know, my my personal, you know, creed, like, that's never going to happen. But I think once, you know, once this whole COVID situation kind of passes, it's something I'm, you know, really looking forward to pursuing, you know, actually in person, because I think I'm relatively convinced of it, from a theological perspective. But it's that's, you know, that's just one of the P's, like I have to integrate the other three. That's right. That's right. You'll have to see if it fits and, and fits now. And, you know, it's not it. It's like I like I say, your, your journey is your journey is just beginning. And it, it can take you strange places. And but God is good. And he's trustworthy. And we hold on to him through the journey. So absolutely. Yeah. Um, I guess I wanted to, I'm not really sure which to go with a few things, but just briefly. So I've been I grew up playing a lot of like video games, right. And so I think the so your your discord is that from your video game stuff? Because it's yeah, so that, yeah, that that avatar is actually is a character called Captain Falcon. Okay. So he's he's in this game called Super Smash Bros. And he's very he's like a very kind of beloved character. I am in a few gaming discards. So that's the main reason that I have right avatar there. Right. Just to kind of, you know, show my, yeah, bear my flag or whatever. So like games like that, and then like, have been I think, the more I think about it, it's like, you know, as as most of the time as a kid, it's like I either didn't pay attention to or I didn't necessarily understand, like the biblical stories or what was being taught in church. And so there's a there's a there's a sense in which the first instance I encountered like, oh, this narrative or like, say, the hero's journey, or these kind of these kind of meta narratives that that I think, you know, compel people. It was in video games, like, you know, story based to have like these, these, you know, these kind of immersive stories and these whatever. And so I definitely don't play, play video games much at all now. Because like it, that one of the things that's been conflicting in me is like, like the extent to which video games are a, because there's a there's a spectrum, there's kind of two poles, it's like video games are a total waste of time, you know, they're not even like, there's nothing there, like, go read a book, right. And then the other side is, you know, video games, like, like, I have friends who, you know, are, you know, in their 20s, and they're like, their life is video games. And they are like, you know, it seems like they're content with that. And they're, I don't like it's not like they're, you know, trying to figure, you know, poke around and like the meaning crisis or necessarily figure it out. But and it's not even like, like they're necessarily addicted to it. And it's like they're playing World of Warcraft 60 hours a week or something like that. Yeah, it's just they that's what they only 60 part of their hobby and they really enjoy it. Only 60 hours? I know. Yeah. Every waking moment. Yeah. Yes, exactly. Yeah. Um, and so I've tried to, you know, and I've tried to, I mean, the best the best way that I found my to organize my thoughts is writing. And so I've tried to write about this stuff and try to process it about like, can video games be a sort of conduit for for for meaning and art? I mean, I certainly think there are video games out there that you could call works of art. Oh, absolutely. Yeah. And so, you know, if if if if literature and, you know, great paintings or whatever have can can convey meaning in some way. And you know, we classify them as art and video games are, are art, if they can be art, then I could see it's like, well, maybe video games can be some sort of meeting making structure. Now, you know, literature and art has been with us for thousands of years, video games have been with us for a few decades. So this may be on time. Barely a few decades, you know, right barely only gotten good within 3020 years, you know, yeah, first video games are pretty Spartan, not terribly addictive. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so, I mean, and part of the problem is that the they've been the whole idea has been polluted so much by by the addictive part, you know, you know, sparking people's dopamine receptors, you know, spend more money, play more, you know, have your life revolve around this thing. Yeah. But I think there is is room for like, video games as some sort of meaning making structure. And I like, I'm not like a developer, so I don't know what that would actually look like. But I think, I don't know, I just feel like there's room for it. Like, I mean, one example, it's like, like Minecraft, right? You know, most popular game, maybe ever. Is it really? I because I'm that not of that generation, and my children weren't either. So mine, so Minecraft, I know it's popular, but yeah, I've never played it. Yeah, but I think best selling, it's like, you know, over 100 million copies or something like that. Wow. Yeah, it's like, I think, like Tetris might have more or something. But Tetris is everywhere. Right? Yeah. Tetris is simple. Yeah, yeah, no, it is. And Minecraft isn't is, is isn't. And like, part of the very interesting thing about it is like, it's not just another video game where you're interfacing with a simulation. It's also like, it's where the the the agent within the game is themselves generating, like can generate art, right? Like you could create, I mean, there's limitations, but you know, you could create, you know, you know, castles and you know, whatever you want to create. And like some of the stuff that's out there is just insane. Yeah. And so I've tried to think about how, how does this work out? Like, like, like, how can I understand this in a way that it's not like video games are a waste of time? But they're also, you know, a potential forum for a lot of meaning making. And I think, I don't know, I could ramble on about it more. But I don't think it's a good question. And I, and I think your comparisons, I mean, film is the same way film. I was thinking about this the other day, how, you know, film, film, you get in in film, you integrate story, and visuals, and music, and dialogue, and narrative. I mean, there's a compounding. And of course, video games, I mean, photorealism is coming, you know, I've watched, you know, Call of Duty, and, you know, I, my, you know, I've seen, I've, I only play civilization, that's about the only computer game I play much of. But the, you know, I watch my kids play sometimes. And so you take all of these elements of film, and then you add interactivity to it. And you're right that we are only at the beginning of the potentiality of that medium. And just like with every other powerful thing, you know, there it can be it can go different ways. But with all of the power comes all that responsibility. And video games can be used to, to distract, to avoid, or they can, they can, you know, we don't even, I don't think, just like with all this other new stuff, we're just, it's in its infancy now. And we'll see. But I, I think you're right that there's, there's power there, and there's art there, and there's potential there. And, and we'll see. But, and, you know, depending on, you know, what people develop, it's just like developing literature. I mean, that story, I mean, when you think about you go all the way back, what did we have, you know, first language, and then story, you know, comes online, and then, and then you try to write story down. And, but in its written form, it's different than its spoken form. And, and I mean, all that, all that continues. So yeah, no, it's true. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's reminded me of another book I'm reading technopoly right now, which, you know, good. So, I know you've mentioned amusing ourselves to death. Yeah, I've got technopoly, but I've I've started it, but I haven't gotten anywhere near far enough in it. Yeah, postman is postman is a sharp guy. Yeah, yeah. It's a very astute observer. And yeah, very helpful. So whatever. So what how far are you in the book? What are you learning? I'm let's see, not that far. Yeah, 40 page 42 or something. But, you know, he's kind of outlining his, his, his, his, his, his kind of structure of, you know, toolmaking, you know, technocracy, and then technopoly are the three, right. And so, you know, it's, it's helped me kind of balance out, like, maybe, like, when I've been thinking about video games, you know, reflecting on this is kind of helped me balance out some of maybe some of my over optimism, it's like, okay, you know, he's even saying that, that, well, you know, technology can be used for immense good, but like, look at all these transformations, you know, it's done. And like, you know, he says all of these things about television, and you could put social media, replace social media with television, and it would be the same thing. And it would just be so like, he's a really prescient guy. So I've tried to been work that out. So that just made me think of that book. Because, yeah, I don't know. I mean, I like, part of the thing is, too, I'm I'm an engineer, like I work in, I'm, I mean, I'm still in college, but I'm, you know, I'm into machine learning area. Right. So like, you know, reading this technopoly book is kind of like, you know, it's, it's, you know, it's a good smack upside the head in a sense. Yeah. And so I've been trying to like, okay, so how does this fit? How do I integrate this stuff? And, you know, you know, work it out so that like, instead of instead of the culture, and you know, religion and everything surrendering to technology, as you know, there's a sense in which we have during COVID, instead of that, you know, we are we are creating it, and we are framing it within this religious meaning making frame. And, I mean, I think the way that, like, the way that the church and has tended to do that is through art and through like, you know, the great cathedrals and like, you know, like, going into like some of these cathedrals after growing up in high school gym church, you know, big, big shift, right. And so church. That's that's what it was. I mean, I mean, we they have an actual building now. Um, so I know, believe me, when I came to Sacramento, I was doing a lot of church planting with people. And so I did that's exactly high school. Yeah, that's exactly what it is. Yes. Yes. Yeah. And so I think that the, you know, I mean, if we can seize on it, I think the church has a unique opportunity to kind of frame this like thing with video games that so many people are into. And, you know, not use it as some kitschy, you know, evangelism, you know, let's go convert people thing, but as let's, let's create a conduit for meaning and let's, let's do it well. And, you know, I don't necessarily have the answers to do that. Yeah, myself, but I think there's potential there. So yeah. Well, and you know, the it's so Sally Jo. Sally Jo has been knocking on my door from her second conversation. And, you know, she's engaged me about Protestants and art. And, and so evangelicals have not always done well with, with movies with music. But it is it is sort of the Protestant way to, to, and again, this gets back into some of this, this Calvinism, the sphere sovereignty way. But it's it's, it's figuring out, figuring out the way the gospel intersects with the medium. Yeah, because there's, there's Christian video games out there that none of us ever want to play. You just see them in the store, just like a lot of the Christian movies that none of us ever wants to see. It's like, yeah, okay, I don't need to see that movie. I know exactly what's gonna happen in that movie. I could I could these movies write themselves. And yeah, but when, when Christians do learn the craft, and learn the art, and that's where, you know, in some ways, that's where the symbolism and the, and the the miracles come together. When because, because again, back to that theme that the symbolism, Jesus miracles were deeply symbolic. And that's, that's the way to understand them. That's, that's, he was in some ways, the miracles of Jesus are analogous to video game creation, only Jesus was, you know, Jesus, Jesus had the Jesus, how can I say it? Jesus had administrator rights to the, the embedded world we're living in. And so when the storm comes up, and the disciples are losing their stuff, Jesus says to the storm, you know, peace, be still, go over there, looks to the disciples, don't you know, don't you know, who and what I am by now? Come on, you know, you're you're that that's, you're more afraid of that storm than you are of me. And of course, by stilling the storm, that ended. Yeah. Yeah, they were freaked out of them pretty fast. You know, yeah, storm is one thing, someone who can tell the storm to shut up is an entirely different thing, which is exactly why in this contemporary frame, we are deeply anxious about God and then but the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. So it's yeah, that's true. Yeah, absolutely. That's a good point. That's a good point. And yeah, yeah, we'll see. Well, it'll be interesting to you're studying electrical engineering, machine learning. Again, careers, careers are interesting things too, because you leave. So my one of my sons left college with a degree in engineering wanted to do mechanical, but, you know, eventually found a job doing more civil type things in office engineering. And so, you know, that's what he's spending his time doing. And so often you go through college and you think I'm gonna do this. And sometimes that happens. But sometimes I think you're just kind of in the middle of a whole lot of crazy things that happen to you. And you end up living in a university and you're like, oh, I'm gonna get married. And then the job opens up over here or you fall in love and you get married and you wind up living over there. And, and, you know, lots of crazy things happen in life. And that's part of the adventure. Yeah, well, that's one of the things that I like, you know, I love the mountains and I love that kind of outdoors. But some part of me is afraid it's like, what if I find, you know, some girl that I want to marry and then, you know, then if I get stuck here, you know, I don't know. It's all speculative. Well, I was gonna, I wasn't gonna go to Calvin seminary in Grand Rapids. I was gonna go to Fuller in Southern California, because, you know, who wouldn't want to go to Southern California go to Fuller seminary where class and signs and wonders and all kinds of exciting things were happening. And some of my some, some of my classmates did, but I met a girl in Grand Rapids. And I knew if I went to California, it would be California or her. So I wound up marrying her and I got both. So not a bad thing. Hey, yeah. Absolutely. You never know. Yeah. Yeah. Any other any other last things on your list, John? Yeah, I mean, just briefly, like, I know, I asked a question one point in the q&a about like, my brother is a very spiritual, but not religious type. And, and so he gave me he just sent me this book. I don't know if you've heard of this book. Yeah, apparently, apparently, it's very popular. Okay, yeah, it was. And so it was popular. So when my one of the things that my father did in Patterson was heroin sort of went through the grimy East Coast cities in this in the 60s and 70s, which set up AIDS, but heroin went through and a lot of the guys who were working, you know, doing their doing their work to get off heroin, they really liked that book. I have the book, I have a long history of being given books that I don't read a warning to anyone who sends me books. And so in fact, I probably I paged through it time and again, and I've still got it on one of my shelves. But did you look at it? What did you think? I haven't read it yet. I just got it last night. I mean, it's very short. But like, you know, it kind of, you know, shows, like, you know, because he's he's he's evangelical in his own sort of way, his own sort of, you know, non spiritual, but not religious, right away. He's evangelistic, any books like that. Right. And so like, I mean, what I'm trying to figure out, it's like, okay, what book can I send him, you know, not like we're having like a little book fight or anything. But like, I sent him Augustine's confessions. Then I'm a church father. You'll look at it like, like, oh, let's I was expecting Larry crab. Send him Jordan Peterson. Yeah, yeah. Um, I mean, I don't know if you had any like, particular recommendations, like, like, if there's one book that you would send him. That's it's not like to I don't know, to over confrontational or what he was raised, your brother, so he's raised in your household with the same raised charismatic, had a deconstruction, and now is like, spiritual. What's been what have been some of the issues that has sort of have so you've got one brother who's gone, you know, has gone Anglican and your other brother has doesn't doesn't find church worthwhile. I mean, what's his just just not relevant? Yeah, yeah. I mean, I think he had some. I mean, part of it is certain experiences he had in church that I think kind of disillusioned him a bit. And then, you know, his, he's kind of, you know, going to college and being exposed to a lot of different people and traditions, he kind of has become this kind of pluralistic, very much like he's a really smart guy. He's going to PhD school right now. But he's very much like, you know, spiritual, but not religious, you know, what kind of things like study. He reads a lot of I don't know, kind of books like, like the prophet, he'll read books like that. He likes, you know, a lot of the entrepreneur, entrepreneurial kind of like, like, you know, how to, you know, how to, you know, succeed, get, you know, get wealth and happiness, not like he's a prosperity type guy, like he's, he I think he's there's more to him than that. But like, he's very, he's very driven and very like engaged. And he wants to like, he's earnestly seeking, like, he's not, he's not just sitting there. Right. So, you know, I don't know. I don't know. It's book book recommendations are hard. Yeah, and and I, I am a very patient. I am a very patient evangelist. Yes, as you can tell, I'm a very patient evangelist, because it was interesting here, James Lindsay, on the on the Christmas party of the unsafe space channel, basically say, Yeah, there are Calvinists out there that don't believe you can actually convert people themselves. That's the work of the Holy Spirit. And I thought, yeah, that's me. It's, it's the Holy Spirit. So I think I tend to be reticent about the direct assault, because I don't I especially for someone who has been raised in the church, most evangelical direct assaults, you are sort of like Christian movies, you see him coming from across the way, you're like, I know this. And usually the powerful stuff sneaks up on you. And, oh, it's, you know, God, God works in our lives in lots of different ways. And when, when when he really gets his, when he really gets his hands on us, it's, it's usually, you know, I used to have this thought that don't, you know, don't try to shut God out, because he's he's got the kind of power that he can destroy the house around you, if you're using the house to avoid him. So I don't know, I'd say, I'd say, I'd say send him whatever book you're enjoying. So if there's a book that you really enjoyed, Christian or not, share that book with him. Or, you know, you could you could do, I mean, you could do some Dostoevsky, because Dostoevsky, even something short, like Notes from the Underground, that's a that that book is, it's a, it's not a big book, but boy, it'll, it'll work your noodle, especially if, if, and it'll work your noodle, if we think we are sufficient to ourselves, to provide for ourselves, what we think we need, because often, if we think we're sufficient to ourselves, it's because we don't really understand how deep our needs list goes. So I would, I would gift him with a book that you enjoyed, whether, whether it would be easily identifiable as overtly Christian or not. That's what I would do. Because, yeah, chances are, if you're enjoying it, there's something in that book that is connecting with you deeply. Yeah, okay, thanks. I've meant to read some of Dostoevsky at some point. If you're reading Augustine, you can handle Dostoevsky. Augustine's Yeah, Confessions is, you know, it's a popular book, because it's shorter than something like City of God. But it's, it's, you know, it's not an easy book. And if you start playing around with, you know, very quickly, I mean, you can pick up the Penguin Classic. And then then if you start digging into that book, you realize people have been continuing to try to translate that book, because it's, it's a deeply psychological book. And any, any, any translator worth their salt will understand that when you're trying to communicate this kind of thing, it's really hard to try to, you know, what, what exactly is he talking about? Yeah, there's the pairs and, you know, but, but, but, but how, how, how, how to really convey these ideas in translation? It's, it's a, it's an amazing thing. So, yeah, yeah. Well, I will, I will send this video to you. And you can decide if it's something that you'd be happy with me sharing. I'm sure the the folks on the I've been trying to think of a shorter name for the people on the bridges of meaning Discord and someone, I heard someone say something like bridges. So that's probably a good one. I'll, I know that bridges would like to see it and see your face and, and, and get a get a clearer picture of you. That's good for the community. So yeah, well, I'm yeah, I mean, you can totally share this. Yeah, good. Good. And this actually will be a nice pair for the video. The conversation that I just had before you, which, which is his name is Mick, and he's he was also raised assemblies of God. And, and now he's in a in a liturgical church and told the story well, and I'd actually he's from Fresno. So I actually met him at a couple of meetups. So but this will be a this will be a lovely conversation to add to the collection. So I'm glad you found a spot a spot. Well, thank you. Yeah, yeah, no is a bit fortuitous. I just like, reloaded the page one day and there was you know, for literally, like literally yesterday, I set the slot and I was like, Okay, let's go. So I'm glad you found it. Well, I will see you I will see you on the bridge. Yeah. Take care. Yeah, thanks for everything you do. It's been such a blessing. So good. Good. Bye bye. Bye bye.