https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=BEn8RqYubmY

 Hi, this is Paul. Working on the net here. Didn't make a powerpoint. It's usually a bad sign. But yesterday I did a conversation with Julian. Two hour conversation. I know a lot of you don't watch the conversations. Can't blame you. I wouldn't blame you for not watching the channel. But it was an awesome conversation with Julian. It really went well. And we were all over the place. A lot of fun to have. Don't know if it's as much fun to listen to. But there it is. Julian had sent me this conversation between Robert Wright and John Caputo. Now Wright is a very interesting guy. He's got bloggingheads.tv. And he's also got meetingoflife.tv. And he's over in the Buddhist camp. But there's a lot of interesting things on his channel. And I think he really does a good job with a lot of these conversations. And here is a conversation with John Caputo. I first heard John Caputo years ago when a friend of mine, a friend who's been on the channel, Pete Vanderbeek, pointed me to a bunch of CBC podcasts basically after God post-theism. And Caputo was on there. And Caputo is, as Wright will have him describe, post-modern Christianity. What's really good about this video, this conversation, and boy I'd love to go through the whole thing and see if there's time for that today for me. But Caputo does a really nice job just kind of laying things out in a pretty simple way. And of course, so one of the comments on my conversation with Julian is, you know, I should address post-modernity more directly. I'm not a philosopher. I'm a pastor. And Julian and I got a bit into James K. Smith, who is a philosopher. He teaches at my alma mater, Calvin College. And as Julian's been reading quite a bit of James K. Smith, Smith in many ways has sort of been doing what I've been doing in terms of trying to engage where theology goes in terms of the way that we think. In terms of post-modernity. And so Smith winds up with a lot of Augustine. Vervecky knows Augustine quite well. And after Smith talked at Rebel Wisdom, I think of Vervecky, James K. Smith conversation would be good if James would have a good understanding of what Vervecky is doing. Part of the problem of so many academic or celebrity, especially celebrity academic conversations on the internet is that when the two parties don't know each other's work, it's usually just kind of like these political debates. It's a side-by-side lecture where there's some tangential meeting and they can't really get into the issues. But I wanted to play some of this conversation. Actually, the whole conversation is really very good and I've got a lot of comments on the whole thing. So we'll see what I can get through. But first, Wright starts out just with some basic stuff. Tell me what post-modernity is about. Now, Caputo doesn't have any good sound equipment in his office. And so his voice is not in good shape in this recording, which is a shame. So you might really struggle to hear it and understand it. And my experience has been that it's often worse for the people listening on the podcast-only side of things. But let's see what happens. Yeah, it did. So for starters, people probably heard, I mean, lately post-modernism has been in the news because people like Jordan Peterson condemn it as being what's wrong with America. I should do a sound check. World. For starters, do you want to... The Church and the King. Test, test, test, test. You know... Test, test, test, test, test. Hi, this is Paul. I want to do a video on some commentary on this Robert Wright-John Caputo video. Robert Wright has his bloggingheads.tv where you can find Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter and their outstanding conversations. I really appreciate a lot of the way Robert Wright goes about these interviews and these conversations on his channel. I'm always surprised his channel doesn't get more attention than it does. But John Caputo, I first heard about John Caputo a number of years ago when Peter Van de Beek, who's been on the channel, he's a pastor up in Edmonton, a CRC pastor, he posted on CRC Voices a bunch of CBC, really outstanding CBC podcasts, they were a radio program I'm sure, first, After God or Post Theism. And that was a really helpful introduction to me about a bunch of contemporary thinkers. If you're a minister in a conservative denomination, moderate denomination like the Christian Reformed Church, you don't read a lot of contemporary theology often, especially if you're a pastor, because contemporary theology may or may not be helping people the way a lot of people, especially in churches, want to be helped. But Caputo is an interesting case. So Caputo, at least according to Robert Wright's interview of him, is going to talk about postmodern Christianity. And as Robert Wright's about to introduce, he says, you know, a lot of people don't know what postmodernity means. Somebody, Julian was the one who sent me this video, and the commenter said, you should treat some of this postmodernity stuff more directly. And the commenter had a point, and so perhaps this video is a good place to start. This video is actually quite excellent because it's very clear. Caputo's very articulate. He's very he puts his ideas out there clearly. And I listened to this conversation. And when Julian sent it to me, you know, Julian was right. Julian's a very careful listener. He was right that a lot of this stuff touches on a lot of what I've done with my channel. So let's jump into it and hear some of it. So for starters, people probably heard, I mean, lately, postmodernism has been in the news because people like Jordan Peterson condemn it as being what's wrong with the America and the world. For starters, do you want to tell us if there are any like major misconceptions about it? I mean, I think a lot of people think of postmodernism as something that's like opposed to the idea of objective truth and if not like anti-science, kind of spending a certain amount of time undermining the credibility of science and so on. These are the kinds of things people think about postmodernism. Is that is that way off track? Now, Robert Wright's point here is interesting in terms of anti-science. And that's that's where some of the celebrity atheists and IDW members and people who are pushing back against the social justice critical theory tribes, you know, are have been have been pushing. So, yeah, it's a fair question. And I think, again, Caputo's Caputo's very competent here and he's very articulate and he's very clear. So he's very helpful. Yeah, that's exactly right. And most of my books are directed to that kind of argument. The only problem is he doesn't have a good mic for this. And if his sound quality were better, there'd be a better video. Okay. I'd be budding that kind of argument. Okay. It's yeah. I mean, if you think of modernity, it's one thing that postmodern and you've got to start out with what you mean by modern. And the sort of paradigm of modernity is an ideal of pure objectivity, absolute certitude, overarching, a historical truth with a capital T. Now, that actually served a purpose at one point, and that is back at the beginning of the. Now, again, I really like the way he lays this out in terms of modernity. And so if you look at the conversation I had with Julian, if when you heard Caputo talk like this, you thought primarily about stuff you hear in church. It's because you were listening to a very modernist church or you were raised in a very modernist church. And so this is the truth of the capital T very much gets into what Alvin Plantiga, Nicholas Waltersdorf would talk about in terms of foundationalism that here it's very much the kind of mode of reason that Sam Harris argues for that here we can we can have certainty and certitude by constructing things up from first principles and arriving at knowledge. Now, this gets into what I call the monarchical vision of you from nowhere. This is universal, certain knowledge, truth of the capital T. Now, one of the interesting things about postmodernists is that for all of their deconstruction of narratives, they certainly tell them almost all the time in terms of justifying the arise of post modernity. And what he talks about here, I talked to a little bit with Julian about it in the conversation that I've talked about this quite a bit in my earlier videos when I was going through a bunch of Jordan Peterson stuff that the Protestant Reformation begins to undermine the kind of cozy monopoly of power that certain regimes in conjunction with the Roman Catholic Church had in Western Europe. There's there's no question about that. And people went looking for a new certainty and a new basis for unity. This story is often told in a rather abstract way about knowledge as an abstract thing, but it's also as much a story about society in terms of how to have a unified society and the institution of the Roman Catholic Church in Western Europe was providing that was was attempting to provide that kind of uniformity in terms of an authority structure. Now, looking back on it, it might look terrifically monolithic. If you actually read history from the time, it's a whole, whole lot messier at the time. And so the Enlightenment comes and basically begins in a very, in a very significant way to challenge the thought assumptions and authority structures that had been prevailing in Europe. As I mentioned to Julian, if you read, there's really a, there's really an excellent in the Great Courses series, there's an excellent course on thoughts on capitalism. And one of the things that I picked up in there is you look at someone like Voltaire, who begins to notice that the Muslim merchant and the Calvinist merchant and the Roman Catholic merchant and the Jewish merchant, you know, all of these groups might have their and the Lutheran might have their wars. But when they're when they're conducting commerce on the dock, they can all get along. And this is where you have the rise of the secular space and and partly because it's it arises in this space, its deep connection with Christianity, which is what Tom Holland has been noticing in his books. And I hopefully I'll remember to include a link to a an article that recently is out in mere orthodoxy by Peter Lightheart on the work of John Milbank and radical orthodoxy against something that Julian and I talked about in our conversation. That that's that secularity became an alternate became an alternate church, as it were, but not so much an institutional church, but an organic church. There grew a society and some institutional societies of reason and thought based not on revealed text and scriptures. Remember, in the in the Renaissance, you had this this turn towards the text and all the excitement about rediscovering Greek and Latin. Of course, Aristotle had been had been worked into theology by Thomas Aquinas. Well, there's this this term from the text after the Reformation as Luther clearly demonstrated that the Protestants were not going to create a new monolithic structure to rival the Roman Catholic Church and its ability to create a coherent organic and institutional home for the people of Europe. And so now on the basis of the Enlightenment is always split between the empiricists and the rationalists. That these two sources of empiricism and rationalism now perhaps could be the basis of a new unity. And we might argue that this this unity doesn't really come about. These things take hundreds of years to develop. But but the new institution that that we find in our in our contemporary period, the new institution that would arise would likely be the the university untethered from its Christian the umbilical cord to the church being severed in the 19th century, a la Darwin and many others. So the it isn't until really the 19th and the really the 20th century until the the the university as institution replaces the church as the source of the kind of let's say competent secular. I want to say wisdom, but if I say wisdom, I mean it in the Hebrew sense by which the nation can be run by which life can be put together. Okay, so this is where when I just kind of go freestyling here without without a plan or a PowerPoint, things can things can tend to wander. But the story that John Caputo starts talking about here really culminates in and especially after the Cold War. George Marsden wrote a really fine book. I guess it run at Bancroft Award or something. I don't know that award, but really fine book, The Twilight of the American Enlightenment. And if you combine that with this other book about the basically the the secularization of the American universities, you get a pretty clear picture of what Caputo was saying here about. Well, the Enlightenment sort of replaces the the dominant agreement and institutions of the church based on the written word and the the Enlightenment and and a scientific approach to the world takes to heads to the front of the line. And paved the way for modern, emancipated thinking. Emancipated thinking emancipated from what exactly? Well, emancipated from the doctrines and dogmas and institutions of the church. Now, you didn't need to look at a book. You could look at nature and apply reason as opposed to say Luther's imaginings, which would be applying reason to the Bible. And and you can discern now you can discern truth. Now, Luther isn't going to go away. And in some senses, the the fundamentalist the fundamentalist institutions and approach will continue to try to rival the secular approach. But as we've seen in the latter part of the 20th century in the beginning of the 21st century doesn't really hold its own in the in the popular political spheres of power in the West. And marring democratic life because it it shattered the the the old absolutism of the church and the king. But it ended up installing the new absolutism of pure reason. And what postmodernists say is I like to say that postmodernism is a continuation of what was started in modernity, which is, let's say, emancipation. But again, it I mean, it just it's so you just throw that out as emancipation emancipation from what exactly? Well, it's emancipation from all of the things that, let's say, Sam Harris keeps complaining about emancipation from imagining we are getting truth from an ancient book. See, this is where, again, I think Jordan Peterson is important in a response to postmodernity. And I know Carl took issue with the assertion that Julian and I made, which is that and I think Julian in the comments section addressed it rightly that that that Peterson, it's important to understand Peterson in a postmodern context. And in that sense, Peterson is situated in postmodernity. And I would argue that by virtue of Peterson's, the success in irritating. The postmodernists, Peterson was able to understand and assimilate sufficiently a lot of the thinking and tricks to to really engage it in a critical way. So it's important to continue to think this through here. I'm never going to get through this video. That much is clear by now. But emancipation from what again? Again, emancipation from what was in the Renaissance period and late medieval period. You find truth in a text. Now we're emancipated from the text and we're going to find truth out there in the natural order. And this is where again, Jordan Peterson's conversation with Sam Harris is vitally important because Sam Harris is a thorough going modernist and says, well, I just see the natural order and I engage it directly. And Peterson says, no, there's an a priori structure that you are viewing it through. So you might imagine you are emancipated from the text, but postmodernity comes along and says you're not emancipated from the filters through which you view the world. You don't see the world directly. You are viewing the world through a structure. Now, what is that structure? Now, again, back through all of the Peterson and Verbeke stuff, the structure. Why is there a structure between myself and the world? Why can I only see the world through eyes and not directly? Why don't I have access to this monarchical vision? Well, I don't because there is too much world out there and I myself am too limited. And so minimally, there is a filtering structure and I have to select elements of that world with which to see and engage. And the selection of those elements is pre-conscious and pre-rational. So we might be emancipated from the text, but we are not emancipated from the self, which is of which my conscious chooser is just a tiny part. There are parts of me that are doing all sorts of choosing and sorting and pre-filtering. And then all of that choosing and sorting and pre-filtering is going to get worked into the ways that I now exert power and control and narratives into the world. Eventually, at a certain point, we got to see that truth doesn't drop out of the sky either sent either by God or by pure reason. Okay, so truth doesn't drop out of the sky. Now, quite literally, this is where I've often engaged people with respect to Sam Harris is simply not being fair to huge parts of the church that imagine something like organic inspiration as opposed to mechanical inspiration, where you've got ideas of, in Mormonism, for example, the translation of the Book of Mormon, or you've got ideas of Muhammad and the Koran. Whereas in Christianity, the Word of God are all written by human beings. And God works through the culture and the times and the person to arrive at the Bible. Okay, that's a way of understanding the text from an inspiration from a posture of organic inspiration. Truth is something that we discover in the concrete, in ambiguous situations in which what we mean by truth is the best interpretation available at the moment, keeping our fingers crossed, hoping it gets us through the day, knowing that tomorrow morning things may change. Okay, truth now, and there's a slight thing, instead of truth being these things that drop out of the sky, capital T, they're completely apart from context, and they speak to everything and anything apart from context. Now, if you notice the subtleness in what he's talking about, truth is contextual and it helps to get us through the day, and we can already see some pragmatism coming in here. And truth is instrumental, and again, what often gets forgotten and postmodernity is trying to include it, is that truth is being seen and used and manipulated by wanters and people with agendas in order to get outcomes they desire. Now, I think that part is compatible with science, as a lot of people see science, right? All you ever know is that you've got the most effective theory for the time being. That's right. I mean, in no small part, postmodern theory developed out of people working in the philosophy of science who saw that real science in practice is not the absolutistic illusion that we think it is. It is very much bound by instincts, by intuitions. Now, what he's saying here is really important because he seems later in the video to forget what he's saying here. When scientific ideas break through, they are at that moment unlikely. They're implausible, they're held in suspicion, they're doubted, they're ridiculed, and all the weight of evidence is on the old idea, what Kuhn called, Thomas Kuhn, called the old paradigm. So what happens is this expression, paradigm shifts, is that frameworks change, and they, at the moment of change, at the moment of crisis, they look highly implausible. And it's only because of the resolute-ness and the ingenuity and the creativity of the authors of the new paradigm that they succeed. So one of the more important predecessor figures of postmodernism is Thomas Kuhn, who wrote the Structure of Scientific Revolutions. He said, look, instead of philosophizing about science, study the actual history of science, and you'll discover that it is a lot of very concrete work on the ground, a lot of seat-of-the-pants thinking, which is very unique, and he compared it to a political revolution. Right. And now seat-of-the-pants thinking is a very interesting turn of phrase in this, because again, and this will get into some of the verveky stuff, that there's insight, and so then you've got flow states and process, and you're trying to get at all of that. I want to put in a plug for this video. This is on Karen's channel, The Meaning Code. Karen's channel is a small channel, and I've had a couple of conversations with Karen. I've had a couple of conversations with Michael here, too. And this conversation, I think, actually bears quite a bit in common. It touches on some of the same issues. And part of what the point that Michael made in this video at one point is that this kind of skepticism is really at the heart of science. And in fact, scientists practice this kind of skepticism. It's part and parcel of what science is about. And so, you know, I just want to emphasize the point that Caputo was making that Thomas Kuhn comes along with the structures of scientific revolutions and demonstrates that science is not just this thing out there, but is actually a human activity. And human beings have their fingerprints all over science. And he also said, I mean, to further kind of undermine the most naive narrative about science, he noted that very often the new paradigm doesn't convince many people that the adherence to the old paradigm go to their graves believing in it. What has to happen is that new people are born who aren't in the thrall of the old worldview, right? So now let me ask you a big term. You know, I've listened to some of your lectures. A big term for you and I gather in postmodern theory is deconstruction. Now, isn't the case that postmodernists would see the decline of a paradigm, the blowing up of a paradigm as part of an historical process of deconstruction? Yeah, sure you would. And you see this in other realms too. Now, the word deconstruction is again one of these words that we just kind of throw out there and is used and we don't pause and ask ourselves, what do you mean by deconstruction? Sort of like emancipation. Well, we're emancipated and nobody bothers, few people bother to pause and say, from what and to what? Well deconstructed. Well, from what and to what? Well deconstructed, you are basically saying that here's this narrative or here's this vision that you have that seems enchanted and magical. But what you're doing is that you're taking, you're looking at it with new eyes and you're looking at the pieces of it and you're finding all of the mechanisms within it. And what you've discovered is that when you've looked at the mechanisms, someone has an agenda. Now this is really interesting because you're going from an enchanted perspective where this is truth with a capital T, this thing has dropped down from heaven. This is not only the way things are, these are the way things are on purpose. These are the way things are supposed to be. And now you've said, well, let's deconstruct it. Now there's all these little operations beneath that we can say, oh, the end piece looks enchanted, sort of like a piece of technology, like an iPhone, let's say. But underneath it's really little bits. And then you take another note, you take another move that says, not only is it, not only can we deconstruct it and see that it's not magical or enchanted or the product of some great universal mind, but it's a product of lots of lesser agents who have a plan for your life where they are going to profit at your expense. And so that's, that has become all part of this deconstruction motif that figures prominently in postmodernity. To write you in, in art, a prevailing art paradigm will get deconstructed and give way to something else. And that's one of the market, that's exactly right. And one of the things that happens in postmodern theory is instead of dividing things into the humanities and the sciences, you replace that distinction with a distinction between normal science or the reigning paradigm and the revolutionary one. And see, it's right here at this move where before we were talking about the history of science and suddenly we're talking about politics. Now suddenly, and this is brings us back to Robert Wright's initial point, is postmodernity anti-scientific? Well, right here at this point you can see why that happens because in a sense, sciences are consumed by humanity. You've deconstructed this enchanted process or this enchanted worldview or this enchanted narrative and you've now seen the underworking constituent parts of it and you've noted the grubby little, the grubby little fingerprints of people who wish to exploit the, those who are used by the grand narrative. And they're used to live for their own selfish ends and this is part of the reason why the term hermeneutic of suspicion comes in because it's not just suspicion that there is no God and the ancient vision can be deconstructed into mechanistic elements, but that sub-agents who have wittingly or unwittingly created these sub-elements are responsible and even and culpable. For basically victimizing the former tools of the enchanted image. And that distinction cuts across both science and humanity. So you see things, you see people, figures in theology like Lisa, in painting like Picasso, in science like Einstein. It's a little muddy to hear in theology like Luther, in painting like Picasso, in science like Einstein. You see exactly the same kind of paradigm. You see an established paradigm, a moment of crisis, a revolutionary change. So there's an established paradigm, a moment of crisis, and a revolutionary change. And again, ironically, this then becomes the dominant narrative of post-modernity that had been deconstructing all the narratives. But this narrative itself won't get deconstructed or can't get deconstructed and Caputo is going to talk about that. And that's actually a very, very interesting point. And that turns out to be a characteristic of human intelligence, which weakens the division between natural sciences and humanity. When Kuhn spoke of scientific revolutions, that was very scandalous because he was comparing it to a political revolution. So Thomas Kuhn comes into here and before in the modernist worldview, well, so modernism, I've spoken about this before too in again videos that I've made a year or two ago. What happens in modernity is that, at least especially in the United States during the Cold War, I mean, this stuff gets very recent, that science can tell us what is, religion will tell us what ought. Okay, there you see again a mapping of the scientific image and the manifest image. Okay, and so then science will tell us what is and we can learn what we can do through technology via science. Religion revealed in a book tells us what ought to be. Okay, so that was one way of having a compromise from, so that the complete ancient world wasn't deconstructed because just because you know what is and what can doesn't mean you know what should. So you rely on the Bible and revealed truth and God for what should be and you rely on science for what is, but now Thomas Kuhn comes along and says, yeah, but all your is stuff is politics too. Now Kuhn doesn't take that turn, but once Thomas Kuhn exposes that, oh, science isn't just purely something out there apart from us, we have all of our grubby little fingerprints all over science too. Now it gets pulled into politics. And so his critics said, well, he's turning science over to mob rule. But in fact he was saying. Mob rule or democratic or committees. Human intelligence is very similar, whether it's doing science or it's doing poetry or painting. There's a movement between normal and revolutionary paradigms get established and once they're established, they hold on and they should hold on. They should hold on as long as they can because otherwise there'll be chaos. If everything were revolutionary, there would just be chaos. Actually, James Joyce had a wonderful expression for this. He uses the expression chaosmas. So you have a moment, a moment of chaos, but it's only a moment. It's a moment in disruption of the order of the cosmos. And that chaosmas moment is what's created. If there were only order, there would never be any progress. If there were only chaos, there would be only chaos. It's like, you know, non-gazim likes to think like that. It likes to weaken these oppositional categories. It likes to think in terms of insight. It weakens the notion of method and strengthens the notion of insight and creative breakthrough. And so there's always a certain amount of questioning. So deconstruction is just one version of this. There are various versions of it. But what I like is deconstruction. It's the one that's most convenient to me. I mean, it's saying, whatever has been constructed is deconstructible. To be deconstructible is not to simply destroy something or to denounce its value, but it's to claim its reformability. Okay, that's a crucial thing. It's deconstruction claims its reformability, but there's also a revelatory moment of insight in there that, oh, I thought that the way things were and the processes that yield out, I thought this was God's will. Now I see that this is only the product of human beings, of plastic moldable human beings. And so with the critical theory promoters out there, well, if this is only the product of human beings, if human beings made it, then we as human beings can remake it according to, and I'm jumping ahead in his conversation, a more just situation. Now anybody who's looked at this long enough can anticipate the next move to say, now wait a minute, we've learned the deconstruction process and we've learned that this supposedly magical, enchanted vision of the world was just constructed by human beings and so therefore can be reconstructed by human beings, and the human beings that constructed this had grubby little dirty hands that were contaminated by their own desires for their own advantages and the maintenance of their own power as compared to other persons. What makes you so pure that you can reconstruct a world that is more just? Won't the reconstruction of the world that you promote have all of the same dirty little fingerprints of your individual agendas, known or unknown? What makes you a safe person? And people will, there's often an insinuation, it's seldom articulated that, well, I'm a safe person because I have been a victim. Oh, well that sounds lovely. But what that's premised on is the assumption that people are basically good and that the people who have victimized others have done so in ignorance, that they didn't know they were going to hurt anyone. And so now, since I have been the victim of someone else and because people don't willingly hurt other people, then I will then be able to be in charge and I will be the benevolent system creator that will create a system which will finally bring justice. Now, anybody who's actually worked with human beings should be aware of the fact that this too is a story and it's a story that doesn't really work very well and there's all kinds of saying such as hurt people hurt people that people who have been constructed, people who have been victims by certain things often have, wittingly or unwittingly, within them the means to do so. And so, in order to get even and try and undo that, the parent, the child of a controlling parent sometimes is overindulgent and then the child of the overindulgent parent sometimes becomes controlling. And what you see with human beings is usually a back and forth between, you know, between poles of a whole variety of areas trying to get things right. First, they weren't controlling enough, now they're too controlling and generation by generation, back and forth, back and forth, each time victimizing another generation, never actually finding justice in the midst, it's just the repetition of new and different things. But his point now is once we see that the world that we have is not just floated down from the sky, is not the product of some god, is not the product of some whole, that some omnipresent, omniscient, benevolent monarch, but is just the product of accident and chance and people with grubby little interests. Well, we of course will do better than our ancestors, there's a lot of chronological snobbery that gets loaded into this thing too. We will do better than our ancestors and we will now suddenly get the system right because all situations have been constructed. Laws, it's one of the better examples actually of it. A law, if a law is not appealable and repealable, it becomes a monster. And that's true in art, it's true in science, it's true in religion, it's true in jurisprudence, it's true, period. If a law is not repealable, and again, let's watch the subtext, repealable by us, then that law becomes a monster. Now what about the laws of physics? Does that law, because what, you know, if you're paying attention, he's just set a law. Is that law true of itself? Will this law become a monster? If something is not dynamic, if it's not reformable, if it's not able to reinvent itself, it becomes a monster. Now again, if you listen to Sam Harris, Sam Harris will say almost this identical thing to Jordan Peterson in the debates. And Matt Dillahunty actually makes the point more clearly and more often that our hope is that all of these things are, see, it's in this way that even modernists like Sam Harris and Matt Dillahunty, these ideas, once they get into us, we can't help but wield them. And so you find modernists implementing these postmodern arguments in the cause of their modernism, because it's a powerful argument. The difficulty is that there's an assumption deep in the argument that people mean well and people will do the right thing. It's like, well, sometimes people mean well and sometimes people do the right thing, but don't forget that built into this whole thing is already a hermeneutic of suspicion that says, I'm not so sure. And there's chronological snobbery that says, well, ancient people were ignorant. Modern people know more so, will do better. Can you really demonstrate that one or give an argument for that one? Well, they say, sure, look at the technology that we have. The difficulty, of course, that you have is what yardstick for better will you employ to make the argument against whether life is better today or yesterday? The theory of deconstruction is a theory of protecting us against monsters. And the other thing to remember about this word deconstruction is that the notion of the deconstructible implies by definition really the notion of what's undeconstructible. So there's always a certain kind of aspiration or hope for what we're trying to do, what we're trying to get done. The notion of what's undeconstructible implies by definition really the notion of what's undeconstructible. And that, well, this world that we've been born into and inherited, we learn that this is deconstructible. That implies that there might be out there something which is undeconstructible because, well, modernism doesn't fully go away. It gets subsumed. And what happens with subsumption is that, I know it sounds terribly Hegelian here, but what happens with subsumption is that modernism doesn't really completely go away. It just gets built on. Another layer comes up on it. There's always a certain kind of aspiration or hurt. And both of them are vitally important because people, these are the motivations within people that move them to action. And there's an aspiration. You see a goal out there, a little while later they're going to talk about Telos. There's a goal out there. There's something out there desired that they wish to attain or at least have the community to attain. Or there's a hurt that needs to be addressed. There's redress that needs to come into the system. And so you have the deconstructible and you have the undeconstructible. And, well, if you're paying attention now, the aspiration or the hurt are going to become the undeconstructible. For what we're trying to do, what we're trying to get done, what's going on. Go it on. It can't be held captive by the press. Right. And can I say, as I understand your theology, this is an important part of it. I mean, maybe we should back up and say, as I understand your theology, one thing, it involves focusing on the question of like, what drives, guides, drives, energizes, whatever you want to say. The ongoing process of deconstruction. Right. What is the... And ultimately you start putting emphasis on a term, the unconditional and so on. And we'll get to all that. I want to... And it ultimately has to do with our aspirations and our dreams and so on in a certain sense. But I want to pause and make sure we understand kind of the process itself, this process of ongoing historical change. Now, I gather that deconstructionists, well, postmodernists put tremendous emphasis on language as a system and on the importance of language as a system. And one question I have is, am I to understand that in your world, in your view, language is in some sense fundamental? And by that, I mean to provide... Now, this is a place of the video I can skip. Again, it's not a bad conversation, not a bad part of the conversation, but it's not highlighting the part of the narrative that I want to focus on. Now, when you get to the question of the undeconstructible, this immediately brings to my mind this conversation between Benjamin Boyce and James Lindsay, where they talk about this. I'll just let it play because I remember watching this and thinking, yeah, that's the older crew. So this is actually really interesting. Our contention, so this is where Thaddeus and I would hit our disagreement. Our contention is that yes, indeed, social justice is postmodern, but it has, in the sense of using postmodern methods, but it's taken up a meta-narrative, which is what postmodernism is supposed to be wholly skeptical of. And that meta-narrative started, I mean, it came from the leftist politics and views that were always buried within, say, the original French philosophers and sociologists. But it took on a new character in the 1980s. Because again, I mean, here's the problem with the hermeneutic of suspicion. It applies to everything. And so you have this vision by the French philosophers who say, oh, wait a minute, there are dirty fingerprints all over this thing too. In the 1980s and 1990s, under the two most prominent figures in this regard would have been Judith Butler working in queer theory, but more importantly, Kimberly Crenshaw working in critical race theology. Critical race theory. Oh, it is theology. And we'll get to that in a few minutes. Critical race legal theory. Yeah, she is the progenitor of intersectionality. She came up with that term in a paper in 1989 and then pretty much went to town defining and clarifying its need in 1991. And at that point, what happened was, and this is the birth of the meta-narrative, like I said, though, that it came out of previous existing political roots. They said that you can't do political work. And Kimberly Crenshaw is explicit about what kind of political work, identity political work. You can't do identity politics unless if you're willing to deconstruct everything, including identity. So she said, we're going to start by saying that the postmodern thinkers went too far. So in other words, again, there's if you've got the deconstructible, there has to be the undeconstructible, because if you deconstruct everything, then you're in this chaos. So there must be something you don't deconstruct. The valuable tools that we will employ, they had valuable insights that we should draw upon, but ultimately they were operating from a place of privilege that allowed them to deconstruct even oppression, oppression based on identity in particular. And it's a mark of their privilege that prevented them from being able to realize that they were acting in privilege. So you could almost say that Kimberly Crenshaw's big idea would be where you have Descartes trying to drill down. I don't want to maybe blow her up to this big of a stature like Descartes, but who knows where you have Descartes drilling down to what's one thing I know I can say is true. And he comes out with Cogito ergo sum. I think therefore I am here. You have Kimberly Crenshaw drilling down saying, what can I know is true? And now, again, Descartes is not a bad guy to point to in this, because I think therefore I am. Well, I have the experience of thinking. I'm experiencing thinkingness, therefore I am. It's not a big jump to the next thing. So I'm experiencing thinkingness, therefore I am. There must be a subject to that. Now, I'm experiencing oppression, therefore I am. And that then can become the basis. This is the undeconstructible. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. And so she, following Bell Hooks, a black event, she's going to be able to deconstruct the truth. Okay. So that am-ness then provides you an anchor in this postmodern world. So that am-ness then provides you an anchor in this postmodern world. So the postmodern world is everything is constantly being deconstructed. We're in a sea of chaos, and everything that we assemble out of that is tentative at best. We're in a sea of chaos, and everything that we assemble out of that is tentative at best. Whereas this is trying to say, or reserve one space, or one access to objective reality, Whereas this is trying to say, or reserve one space, or one access to objective reality, Whereas this is trying to say, or reserve one space, or one access to objective reality, which is, I guess, the cornerstone of all this. But what I'm trying to say is that the objective one access to that which can't be deconstructed, But what I'm trying to say is that the objective one access to that which can't be deconstructed, whether you can find it as an object. I'm going to find the experience of depression as an object. I can bear witness to it. But I'm looking around for my experience of oppression. Did I leave it in a drawer someplace? It's not an object. Also a subjective experience, being one's identity. As far as one's identity is oppressed, that magnifies that identity, as far as one's identity is oppressed, that magnifies that identity, that makes that identity more real than other identities? Would you say that that's fair? Yeah, that's fair. That's correct. It also makes it more salient, and something that people need to pay more attention to and focus upon. Okay, so they talked about language a bit there, and I skipped some of that just for the sake of not having to have Carl freak out too much over Wittgenstein. and I skipped some of that just for the sake of not having to have Carl freak out too much over Wittgenstein. Back to history here, and some other topics that we've been playing around with on our channel. Back to the religious aspect of your worldview, Back to the religious aspect of your worldview, this idea of postmodern Christianity. this idea of postmodern Christianity. So a question arises again. So a question arises again. Well, let's look at the question that arises in traditional Christianity and biblical Christianity. Well, let's look at the question that arises in traditional Christianity and biblical Christianity. You know, history is happening. These stuff happens. What is guiding it? What is the point? Is it being drawn teleologically to some future? Is it being drawn teleologically to some future? Was there a prime mover that set it in motion? And Christianity, and traditional Christianity, both are yes. There was a prime mover who set it in motion with an end in mind. So there is a purpose to history. It's heading somewhere intelligible. And there's a reason. So it seems to me that there is something that your inquiry has in common with that. I mean, you're looking at history as postmodernist might depict it I mean, you're looking at history as postmodernist might depict it as you have these systems that seem stable and then they change. New systems arise in these various realms, art, science, religion itself. That's history, social structure, presumably. That collectively, that's history. And I think you're asking the question, well, what is guiding or drawing or inspiring Well, what is guiding or drawing or inspiring the process of deconstruction? Because deconstruction is the process of history as you see it. It's systems continue to get deconstructed, new ones arise, then they get deconstructed. And then you... We're getting very Hegelian here. You want to ask the question, what is the, what's beneath the deconstruction more fundamentally? What guides, inspires, whatever energizes? Is that much true about what you're doing? That's quite right, yeah, that's good. My answer is... I like this expression which you used earlier on, the notion of something unconditional. So, the way I like to divide things up or to articulate them is to distinguish between something of unconditional value or importance or worth or desirability. or worth or desirability. or worth or desirability. Okay, so the unconditional, the basic, something of, something that is unconditional, this is actually, if you've born with me this far, this is actually going to connect up with a lot of the stuff we've been talking about. And the conditional forms in which it's enacted. So there's something unconditional beneath, and then there's conditional forms in which it's enacted, okay? The presence of the unconditional is fundamental here. The presence of the unconditional is fundamental here. Or constructed. So the conditional is always deconstructible. It's always constructed and therefore deconstructible in virtue of some kind of unconditional aspiration in virtue of some kind of unconditional aspiration or desire. So going back to the James Lindsay, Benjamin Boyce, the aspiration that would be the elimination of oppression, let's say, or the aspiration towards justice, let's say. And that then becomes the, if you're not paying attention, that then becomes the reason for being, alright? Or dream. The mythological form that takes is a sort of mythological theology of history which began with a story which began with a story of our first parents. Now notice the mythological is part of the deconstructible. That there's an undeconstructible, an unconditional thing beneath that manifests itself and that we see that manifests itself and that we see mythologically, the mythology can of course be deconstructed, that's the process here. In the Garden of Eden and news to a climax in the culmination of world history where God will establish his reign. All of that I take to be a symbolic way of saying something that's important. Now it's interesting, so okay, we have the undeconstructible and then we have the mythos up here and here. That's a mythological way and up here in the mythology we'll find the telos. Alright, because that was Robert Wright's question. Is there a telos? Is it a pulling history? That seems to be what biblical Christianity is about, that things were made for a purpose and as a Calvinist minister I would say that purpose is the glory of God. And so history is then pulled by the gravity of the telos towards its purpose and it will get there inexorably, it will get there eventually, it cannot help but get there at some point. And myself being a traditional Christian I would say that's how Christianity works. But now we've got sort of a new story about how this happens, that they've got the unconditional down here and manifests in the mythos and here in the mythos that's where you'll find the telos. But something that would be diminished if you literalized it. Ah, here's this word literal. If you literalized it, what do you mean? Well, what do you mean by that word literal? Because the problem, you know, it's so funny because in many of these conversations you've got the word literal and you've got the word metaphorical or mythological. And the problem is on the mythological sign everyone asserts. The literal sign we all know what we mean. And I would assert it's completely the opposite. That the mythological is actually based on the arguments that you've been creating about human beings work. So let's use the manifest scientific image dualism here. You've got the manifest image you've got the scientific image. Which one is literal? Well, you'd say the scientific image is literal and the manifest image is mythological. Mythology belongs in the manifest image. That's where we have desire and telos and all of these things. That all belongs in the manifest image. The literal belongs in the scientific image. Well, here's our problem. There's no clean room, okay? And there's no accessing the scientific image in and of itself. And this is where again once we see these postmodern arguments we're all a little bit postmodern. We've got dirty fingerprints on our postmodernity too. And so they talk like, well, they take their mythology literally. And the problem is that they're confusing the two. And yeah, that is a problem sometimes. That is a problem. I think the bigger problem is that you don't really understand what science is. And this is the point postmodernity has been making. And if you're going to be a postmodern Christian you can't really go back and say oh, they're taking it literal because there is no literal. Thomas Kuhn's been here. Your science is politics. All you have is metaphorical truth. That's what you've got. Except for this, this thing that won't be deconstructed. And guess we're going to have a three-letter word that's going to be very useful for talking about this thing that can't be deconstructed. That will be your it's kind of like dog but with the letters switched. I know people get afraid of dogs, but that's where we're going. You would have turned it into a kind of thing or fairy tale or superstitious bit of magic. So much pejorative stuff in there for a postmodernist. See, this is where some postmoderns aren't postmodern enough or too modern in their postmodernism. Interesting and important if you read it well, if you interpret it properly. Interesting and important, but kind of like, I don't know, is it interesting and important in the way that, oh, well here's a here's a nice little not enough, here's a nice little fictional story about I don't know I can't think of a single fictional book here in my mind. Here's a nice little fictional story about a little girl and her brother or something like that where I can learn truths of the universe in it or is a sign on the beach saying that there's a great white shark eating people. Is that a little fictional? No, that one's literal. Oh. Well, what do you mean by that? What isn't, is that, see by the way, these things don't quite hold together. And don't literalize it. So, I'm trying to say there's something Don't literalize it. Something important going on in religion that we sort of have to protect religion from itself, you know, we have to protect religion from literalizing and absolutizing. See, but here's the thing, modernity came along and did that. And this was modernity's trick. So you have to protect religion from modernity? That's kind of what you're saying. And confusing its unconditional aspiration with the conditional form in which it takes shape. The way in a particular book or a particular tradition or a particular story. And now if we were to flesh this out I would say Caputo would probably say well, and now we're back to the boogie man of the fundamentalist. That, oh, the fundamentalist. The fundamentalist imagines that they if they act within this mythological story they can they can realize outcomes and achievements within the mythological story. But that's unwarranted because it's only the expression of that which can't be deconstructed. Okay, two problems. Number one, can you see that that which can't be deconstructed without the story up here? Can you see this thing itself? Two, what is this thing up here for if not to live within in some kind of correspondence to the thing below? See, in a sense what they're saying is this thing up here, this mythos up here that can't be lived into to you can't imagine this is reality up here because it's from down here. But you human being can't touch the down here and so this is the only place you can live in up here. And in other words, you leave no place for a human being to live. Because human beings you've been deconstructing so we're up here. I mean it's very similar to the manifest image versus scientific image dilemma. Oh, I want to live in the scientific world. Okay, what's you? You're going to have one heck of a meaning crisis along the way, buddy. Because you're up here something that can be deconstructable and what can't be deconstructed you can't know or touch. You're completely disconnected from it. All those fundamentalists, they're taking this stuff too literally. Okay, what world do you leave for them to live in? Which is exactly the point that Jordan Peterson makes. That, okay, so you're beating up on the fundamentalists. What world do you want them to live in? And the truth is you just have a different world that's just like their world. You don't have the world that can't be deconstructed. Because you're deconstructing everything. And you're asserting that we look around and we find justice and we can deconstruct that and reconstruct it. Okay, again, back to my Brett Weinstein. Who's we? Because we're all up in here. We're not down here. And this is okay, let me deconstruct this move. It's just cruel. And that's exactly the point Jordan Peterson made about the fundamentalists over at Lafayette College when he said, you know, okay, fair enough. Science has been deconstructing this for the fundamentalists and you're taking away their worldview and you're not giving them anything else. No, we're going to give them justice. Really? Because you're not seeing their oppression and suffering in the moves you've just made. And you can't argue against their oppression because they're feeling it just as much as all these other special groups that you sanction their oppression. And the system itself that differentiates them, they are, I am because I'm feeling oppressive, oppression now. There's no framework with which to differentiate them. So what, so I mean, I know you wind up saying that like if you ask, you know, the unconditional I think is your answer to what what kind of motivates or draws this process of deconstruction. And so I think immediately people are going to ask before we ask you to elaborate a little on what you mean by the unconditional and here I think things will get challenging probably because you're getting to a pretty fundamental metaphysical level. But I think people will ask, so are you equating the unconditional with God, with the divine? Does this correspond to what in biblical, traditional Christianity is just called God? In religion, the unconditional goes under the name of God. Okay, so that So God is the unconditional, but the unconditional is not God because the unconditional is operative wherever human beings are trying to be human, wherever they are, wherever they have desires and aspirations. And even when they're not, I'd add, but go on. Which may or may not include the notion of God. The notion of God is the way the word, the way the what I call the unconditional shows up in religion. Now again, you get back to the James Lindsay piece and well, your experience of oppression is your God. That's the unconditional and the unconditional which has to be manifest then in a myth of God, in the manifest image, and therefore this will shape the structures with which you will inhabit and pursue justice, okay? I'm zipping ahead to further on the conversation, but that's where we're going. Is God. And in the monotheistic, even then you have to restrict it to the monotheistic religions. Because there are traditions that we call religion in our Christian Latin word religion. We call them religion. They don't even have that word. They don't have any good translation for that word and they don't use the notion of God. Like Buddhism, for example, or they have many gods. So things could be in the study of religion today, the word religion is put in scare quotes because it's a western Latin Christian. The word itself is a western Latin. So you better not use it. What words are you going to use? If you had a better word, wouldn't you trot it out right now? Christian. So you've used the word aspiration or dream and you're putting a lot of emphasis on our, as I understand it, our aspirations. What are the things humans aspire to? What are the things they dream and you seem to be associated? And again, I can't now listen to a remark like that and not hear John Gray in my ear. You know, humans? This collective? Where does that idea come from? With the unconditional and I guess I have a couple of questions. One are you saying that that is a manifestation of the unconditional? In other words, is that to switch the terminology, would you say that's a manifestation of the divine? If I have an aspiration, a dream, if I think about the future and want it to be a certain way, is that a manifestation of the unconditional or that's what drives the unconditional or it's the other way around the unconditional drives that? What is the relationship between the unconditional and human aspiration? Well, on the side of the subject, on the side of the desire itself, they're the same thing. My deepest, most profound concerns as a person? They're my god. I'm not sure I'm going to be able to answer that. They're my god. It is a matter of unconditional interest or concern or importance or value to me. Just like the person who's now their identity is their oppression, that becomes their god and then motivates the cloud, the mythology, the mythological cloud, the social expression and all of these things. But that's not to say that it's all something subjective because I'm in fact responding to something that is on the objective side, is on the side of the reality itself. So there's an unconditional quality in reality itself. There's an unconditional quality beyond my individual self in the social whole, the social good. And there's an unconditional quality about the universe. Which gives it... The unconditional and the objective side is a lot of times people use the expression, there's something bigger than us. Well, that's the unconditional. That's this thing which was there before us and will be there long after us, which is absolutely primordial. One philosopher back in the 19th century, a German philosopher named Schelling, used a wonderful expression, he called it the un-pre-thinkable. The thing that thought can never get behind, it can never get there, it got there first. And thinking is always sort of trying to catch up to it. This argument in some ways reminds me of the ontological argument. To get there. So on the objective side, there's something that is an unconditional reality that we'll never quite catch up to. Which preceded thought. And if the scientists are right about the future of the universe just expanding into oblivion, it'll be there long after thought disappears. So there's an unconditional being or reality that precedes us. On the objective side, and on the subjective side, there's our own unconditional. What we hold to be of unconditional importance. Now that little speech right there got pretty esoteric. So the unconditional is unconditional because its existence and nature are not conditioned on anything we do, or even on anything that happens in the world we observe. It's sort of like the kids when the kids are growing up that keep asking why, why, why, why, why. Ultimately there's this thing which is without why. Which is the point. It's turtles all the way down until the unconditional is the old... Sure. You hit a presupposition that there's no answer. The mark of education, this is the word paideia, we get pedagon from that word. The mark of an educated person is to know when to stop asking questions. Because you hit that point which is... So is this related to what the theologian Paul Tillich called the ground of being? As I said at the beginning, I'm interested I never quite could make up my mind whether I wanted to do theology or philosophy. The theologian makes the most sense to me is Paul Tillich, yes. The philosopher who makes the most sense to me is this man Jacques Derrida who formulated what got to be known as deconstruction. And what's interesting about both of them is that their focus ultimately settles on the same word, unconditional. The difference being that in Tillich, this really is theology. He really thinks it's the ground of being, the unconditional is God. Whereas for Derrida, Derrida, you know, as a postmodern philosopher, he's not so sure that we know anything metaphysical, but he thinks that the unconditional is something that draws us, something that lures us. But he's not prepared to say that it's God or the universe or anything else. He doesn't know. That's an interesting point. Whereas from that point of view, Tillich would be more like a modern thinker because he really thinks there's an ontological foundation for all this. Derrida, as a postmodern who is more of a wary of coming up with the big answers, doesn't know. But he thinks that we can, he thinks the notion of the unconditional is inescapable. Whether it's God or the universe or biology or whatever it is, he doesn't know. He can't say. But he does think that it's a feature of our, an indelible feature of our experience. In front of the world. Okay. So to get back to this question of the connection between the unconditional and our own aspiration, and to frame it in the context of the notion of teleology, in other words, the idea that there is a larger purpose to the kind of historical process in which we're embedded, which is a... Well, you may not think that. You would still have the notion of the unconditional and not think that at all. No, but you may. But I gather that in, well, my question is, in postmodern Christianity, is the idea that that what, you know, aspiration, I mean, when you think of, you know, telos, the idea of something moving toward a purpose can exist at different levels. In a certain sense, it uncontroversial exists at a human level in the sense that we conceive of goals and we pursue them. So we imagine, you know, I imagine that I want to eat... Now, James K. Smith has been coming up more and more in my stuff and I had a conversation with Jewish people, with Julian yesterday, and Julian's been reading a lot of James K. Smith. James K. Smith would fit very well into this conversation right here. Currently, I just... If you follow me on Twitter, you know that I tweeted some pretty high praise for James' most recent, the chapter in his most recent book on the... Here I forget. The third chapter in his most recent book, basically, on the journey and on Augustine. Because what James K. Smith sees is that these postmodernists are actually working, you know, they're actually engaging Augustine because Augustine, this gets into the Tours versus Pilgrims too, and the Rodriere piece, Pilgrims have a destination. They have a telos. They're going somewhere. They're being drawn to a home. Without this, this non-deconstructible, which... What is it? The id? Is it our angst? At least the little ones that reside inside all of us, these... They just... They're simply wanters. Now, I've been, in my Sunday series, I've been working through the book of 1 Peter, and 1 Peter, along with Paul and others in the New Testament, very much work on this Greek word epithumia, which is over desires, and part of the framing of a lot of arguments in the New Testament is that what destroys human beings, and again, Stoics will... This won't be unfamiliar to people who are familiar with Stoicism, that we have these epithumias that destroy our lives, and that what Christ does is now the Holy Spirit displaces these over desires that we have. And so obviously this is where Augustine comes in, and Augustine talks about our hearts are restless until they find their rest in God. And so we... All of the manifestations, the mythos, the manifest image that we are participating in here, this is all restless until it finally comes into perfect communion with that which can't be reduced. And you'll have this a little bit later, and I might jump through some of this here because where John Caputo's postmodern Christianity will then focus on justice. Fair enough. And the vision of justice is that justice is a longing thing. We long for justice, and that's the rest we are looking for. Here's the chapter in his book, A Refugee Spirituality. And as I said with... If you're... Julian's a pretty sharp guy. And what's particularly impressive about Julian is he's not going to college. And I remember when I first met Julian a couple years ago, James, who is our local meetup here and teaches at a junior college, basically said college doesn't deserve him. And not that...there's a few things Julian couldn't learn at college, but... Julian's been reading a lot of James K. Smith. And James K. Smith, when he was on Rebel Wisdom, didn't have some very nice things to say about Jordan Peterson, who of course is a pretty important piece in the story of the development of Rebel Wisdom and what they're doing. But for Smith, he's...Smith just did actually an article in World Magazine. Maybe I'll pick that up. Those of you who know something about conservative evangelical Christianity know that World Magazine is a conservative magazine in Reformed circles, evangelical circles, did a major piece on James K. Smith, interviewed by Martin Olaski, who is the editor there, and James actually is using this image for his Twitter feed. Very interesting article talking about James fairly transparent in terms of his own personal life and his... you know, Augustine's father, his...James's father. It's very interesting that James is working...James is working the post-modernity, I mean one of his earlier books, Who's Afraid of Post-Modernity. He's really sort of seeing some of these Derrida Foucault in the light of Augustine. And Heidegger as well. Heidegger...James K. Smith did quite a bit of work in Heidegger. And it's very interesting how he is sort of taking these and, you know, coming around with Augustine with them. And this is with John Vervecky's background in Neoplatonism. I would like to see John and Jamie Smith have a conversation again, but I hope they have... they would know enough of each other's work to have a productive conversation. But it's very interesting to me listening to Caputo do this. And again, as a reformed Christian, Luther of course was an Augustinian monk. John Calvin, if there was a guiding light that John Calvin was trying to follow, it was Augustine. There's some good memes about Calvinism and Augustine out there on the internet. You can look them up yourself. So, Post-Modernity, part of what James is doing in his book On the Road with Augustine is connecting the existentialists and the postmodern together with Augustine. And again, I think this chapter in his book On the Road with Augustine, Refugee Spirituality, I think it's a tremendous chapter going through his book on audiobook. And again, I haven't... I've been a fan of a lot of his ideas. I haven't necessarily been a fan of a lot of his writing. But I thought this chapter in this book was... I thought it was outstanding. It's been helping me well and it's been helping me sort of put some things together here. Okay, back to the video. So, my aspiration has an uncontroversial kind of micro- kilos. But then some religions raise the question of whether there's a larger kilos at work and all of history is subordinate to some goal. And I guess I'm asking with postmodern Christianity, is the answer yes and the key mechanism somewhere in this connection between the unconditional and individual human aspiration? No, I don't... See, that's why I said that I didn't think that you're bound to any kind of eschatological notion of history. Did you want to say eschatological? Because he's a theologian too. He knows that word. As far as we can tell, the best information we have available, the civilization of ours and this Earth and this solar system and this galaxy are headed for oblivion. This move! There's a reason Robert Wright, especially if you do some Googling with Robert Wright and some of his own personal stuff, his pushing on this point here, I found fascinating. And then this move by Caputo, I found... It was predictable? Because this is one of these areas where if you're an academic, so there's these... I've been watching some of the Peter Thiel stuff. And there are certain things that you say, certain areas that if you... These boundary markers here, and one of them there, is their purpose to the universe. And he says, no, by all purpose we can tell that there's no... The universe is heading to oblivion. And it's like, I want to just pull in C.S. Lewis's Life in an Atomic Age. Pull in N.T. Wright talking to Peter Thiel. And that's part of the reason I didn't get a video out this Tuesday was too many videos in my head and I can't... When I have too many videos I want to do at the one time, they kind of keep jostling and nothing gets born. But... And so Caputo here... No, there's no purpose. And so then you're like, well, okay. We're left here. We're left here. We're adrift. And the purpose that... You know, Robert Wright noted, well, we have purpose individually and we... And you know, Christianity has long asserted that there's this purpose up here. And, well, purpose is part of this manifest image. We know by science that that isn't there. And it's like, well, who is taking what literally now? That's an astronomy that was unavailable to antiquity. St. Paul thought that the world consisted mostly in the Middle East and Asia Minor. And then way out on the limits of the universe was this place that we call Spain. Well, I would assume that is true, but now he's about to make the argument that I think N.T. Wright pretty ably handles in his Gifford lectures about the immanentism, which itself came up in the 19th century. That, oh, this is what they all believed. And, you know, and so, okay, well, there is no purpose. It's like, well, how do you know? I mean, suddenly skeptics start pulling out cards. Well, we don't have this card, we don't have that card, we don't have these cards, because, well, we can't know these things. Well, you just said a pretty big thing that I'd find it more respectable if you say, well, we can't tell if there's purpose to the universe or not. See, and again, Peterson at least was more honest in being an open agnostic about these things, but no, there's no purpose. Well, how do you know? Maybe that's another part of this. That is deconstructable. I think I can deconstruct it. And then you're left with, well, I don't know if there's purpose or not. And if you don't know if there's purpose or not, well, then it's legitimate to act as if there is. So now we're going to get to Boltmann, and again, go watch N.T. Wright's Gifford lectures. Completely different world. And then there was this man, Boltmann, who came along in the 20th century and said, look, if you want to understand the scriptures, you've got to get rid of the old astronomy that they had and understand that after your gun died, that there's still something there. A lot of people say there isn't anything there. And again, okay, so now Boltmann comes along and says, oh, well, but I think Boltmann is an interesting person to bring into this, because a little bit later, what we're going to again get to is, you know, when Christopher Mastropietro says, you know, we see the sun, you know, we see the sun receding into the distance, and what you have by a group of philosophers and theologians for the last couple of hundred years is a frantic attempt to, can we keep it from going too far? And so now Caputo is deconstructing all of this stuff. So the notion of an end of history when God would come and establish his rule on Earth forever, you see, the Earth is going to be here forever. The Earth has got about 500 million years in it left or so, and then that will be that. So I don't think that there is any such thing as historical teleology, that history has some terrace that is by which it is divinely, towards which it is divinely guided. Okay, so no telos. But then how should we live? What should we do? Towards which it is divinely guided. I don't think that's the case at all. I think that's the mythical form which is found in the scriptures, but I don't think that that's true. That's the husk. So, but now you have the problem that, okay, so we've got the stuff in the scriptures that's true, and this just lends itself back into the modernist fundamentalist view. We have the stuff in the scriptures that, well, we can get rid of these things, but then what do you think is the true stuff you can pull out of there? Because again, we're going to get to that. What I think is the scriptures are telling us stories about something important in our lives, and they're to be read the way you would read literature. When you read What kind of literature is all literature the same? A great novel. It's telling you something important, deeply true, but it's in the fiction section of the library. See, and then here, lying right out of Sam Harris here. And I think that the scriptures are like that. You'd have to put them in the literature section of the library, in the religious literature section, but they're literature. And they're saying something important. But what they're not doing is giving us a picture of the universe. The people who wrote them They're not giving us a picture of the universe. I would argue literature gives us a picture of the universe. What kinds of pictures are we talking about? They're not cosmologists. They didn't know anything about the nature of the universe. They were not historians. They don't know anything about the nature of the universe? They didn't know anything about the history of the human race. Don't know anything about the history of the human race? Now, the problem with this approach is people who are enormous skeptics now suddenly know all these things. And it's like, well, I would say they knew some things, they didn't know other things. We know some things, we don't know other things. There's going to be a lot of knowing and unknowing all over the place, but to just sweep it away And they had no basis whatsoever to talk about the end and the purpose of the universe. Had no basis at all to talk about that. Well, do you have basis to dismiss it? But they were still saying something that's important. How do you know? How could they get these other things completely wrong and these other things right? Well, maybe we can get bunches of things wrong and some things right. So I don't subscribe to any theological mention of history. What's the most concise formulation of what they were saying that's important? Well, depending. I think you did an excellent job at this interview. Depending on who you were talking about, the prophets, the most important thing the prophets were talking about was justice, the rule of justice. In some of the older books of the scriptures, the most important thing they were interested in was establishing the rule of the people of God, of Israel, of Yahweh, and making sure that nobody messed with Yahweh. And now, okay, but again, there's not justice in the Mosaic law? That isn't an attempt at justice? That there's not expression of justice in the prophets? And so, well now, we're going to pick the prophets. Well, why? Is it, can we deconstruct your selection of the prophets? Because all of this selecting we're doing is deconstructable, right? So, what is the rule of justice? What is that? Well, it's bizarre. They have a very nationalistic idea of what... The prophets weren't nationalistic? ...we call their religion. But it evolved, and by the time you get to the prophets... And again, it evolved, or what does that mean? Well, it meant it got better. Okay, well, is it going to keep getting better? Well, it's hard to think in terms of universal justice, the Messianic age, peace, and... in the New Testament, you see that it's the prophetic stream of the Jewish scriptures which shows up in the New Testament under the notion of the Kingdom of God. And the Kingdom of God is an amazing place, right? It's a place where hatred is greeted with love, hostility with forgiveness. And if there's the Kingdom of God, there's the outside the Kingdom of God, where there's weeping and gnashing of teeth, too. The weak are...the meek inherit the earth. The vert...everything's upside down. It's a topsy-turvy world. So, it's a poetic vision of life that philosophers themselves would be less inclined...would not come up with. Philosophers would think in terms of an order established by rational agreement and national consensus. Whereas what you see in the scriptures is a much more poetic vision of life, a much crazier vision of life. It's a vision of an Alice in Wonderland topsy-turvy life, where the last are first and the outsiders are invited in and the insiders are invited out. And the first shall be last and the last shall be first. It's a radical vision of...a revolutionary vision of life. Okay. A revolutionary...wherever I heard this before in this conversation. Wait a minute. There's the...there's the status quo and then there's the revolution and then there's the new. So, again, I mean, again, that's not a...it's not a bad thing, but this whole thing has, in fact, telos because the purpose of the revolution is what? Well, this aspirational better world. Well, where does that come from? Well, there can't be any telos over there. So, you know, at C.S. Lewis's, you cast straight the whore...you cast straight the horse and bid it produce. It's telos all over the place now. Is this just... Is this just what you want? I mean, that's, I think, the story it's telling. That's its vision and its impossible vision, right? You can't run a railroad like that, but it's a vision that interrupts the way we do tend to run our railroads. Now, let me tell you why I asked the question about teleology. I was listening to one of your lectures. You were talking about this process of kind of repeated deconstruction that, in a way, constitutes a lot of what we mean by history. And you asked the question...these are not...I was taking notes. These aren't quite direct quotes, but you were asking... When you asked what drives the process, you were asking questions like, what is calling to us? What are we called by? Right? You put things in terms of calling, beckoning. Is it being...as if you're being beckoned into the future. And, of course, if you look at the prevailing non-teleological view of history in the world today, which is basically science, maybe scientific materialism, adherence of that view would say, why are you even asking questions like what is calling to us? They would say, look, it's...everything that happens is a result of prior causes. So that, you know, things are just being pushed into the future. They're not being pulled anywhere. That's kind of the standard non-teleological framework, but you're using clearly different language than a scientist would use when you ask what is driving the process. And the language seems to be about... I mean, first of all, the word calling is itself suggestive in a religious context because of this notion that we all have some role to play, right? That's the idea that is divinely...that originates in the divine in some sense. But also it's just...there is this idea of being called into the future, right? So...and that to me is suggestive of teleology, right? You can see where I'm coming from. Yeah, but without some notion of an ultimate telos that's drawing everything, both nature and humanity forward. Science is goal driven. It's driven by scientific... And again, science is goal driven. I'd say scientists are goal driven. But what is science? And again, you see how this just doesn't cohere. ...projects and right now it's driven, it's driven and driven by the goal of a unified series. Why? Because the math is better, right? Because it's cleaner, because it coheres. Scientific work would not happen were they not puzzled by conflicts and anomalies and difficulties and problems which they're trying to resolve. That's not to say... Suddenly scientists got back in it. Human science is the goal of the universe. It's to say that our life is... in denying some... that we could in any way know or posit some ultimate telos, I'm not denying something that's very important to me and that is the notion of our futuristicity, of the futural nature of human existence. So here we bump into again one of these... you know, not doing this for a couple of years, one of these lines of demarcation in the secular frame. That human beings are the only things that we are affording purpose, that there's no... that any purposes we see above us or beyond us are things that we project up into it. They're not there actually. They're just there because there's nothing to put them there. And so, well, sometimes I get caught talking like this, but... don't really mean it. So, purposive activities and goals and calling and mission, these are all things that in poetic moments I'll talk about because I enjoy them and they feel good to me, but finally, every project that I make... oh, what do we know by science? That the universe 500 million years ago, it all goes poof. You just... you're just begging people to not have a purpose in life. Oh, here's a little purpose you can have. Just play around with it. Anything will do. Well, that's a good one. Okay. What about making myself happy, pleasuring my way in any way I would want? That gives a lot of purpose and aim and goals. Well, that one doesn't go as far as justice. Why not? Well, maybe there's something built into the world that is actually pointing in a way, and maybe the stuff up here is actually connected to that which can't be deconstructed down here. And maybe my little experience of oppression is insufficient to even build one measly human life upon. Maybe even there's something within a human life that has more majesty that my experience is insufficient to justify. We are unfinished beings. We are open-ended beings. And deconstruction is the theory of keeping us unfinished, keeping us open and not letting things freeze over or encrusted. It's a theory of de-crustation. So we're tourists. We're not pilgrims. We're not heading anywhere. We're just wandering. And when we get to a place, it's like, oh well, good enough for me. So again, I woke up early this morning. And if I wake up early, I don't want to bother my wife. And so I'll often just put in an audiobook and listen to something or a video or something early on so I don't, you know, get out of bed and disturb her and ruin the rest that she needs. And I read this chapter and we cultivate indifference as a cocoon. We make irony a habit because the safety of maintaining a knowing distance works as a defense. If you can't find what matters, conclude that nothing matters. If the hunger for home is always and only frustrated, decide the road is life. Such a consensus is cultivated, is the cultivated posture of Merceau. I don't speak French. The antihero at the center of Albert Camus' breakout novel, The Stranger. He exhibits an odd aloofness from the very beginning. He can't remember which day his mother died. The day after receiving the telegram, he's laughing and frolicking with Marie and the Mediterranean Sea. Puzzled when he puts on a black tie, Marie asks in jest whether he's Heiotepka- he said he didn't think he was dead. He's basically lacking foresight in his own mark. slammed into his earim Narrator Institute. This isn't NEXT Chapter. A rep www new you always feel a little guilty and are. Later in the novel his guilt well, his guilt well established, Mirceau is imprisoned, but this is only an intensification of how he has always experienced the burden of life. Like Socrates practicing to die, Mirceau has unwittingly spent a life learning to be guilty, denied his freedom. When I was first in prison the hardest thing was that my thoughts were still those of a free man. I still had these silly ideas of Telos pulling me into the future. I was still living in the mythologies instead of the one thing that can't be deconstructed. For example, I would suddenly have the urge to be on a beach and walk down to the water. I imagined the sound of the first waves under my feet, my body entering the water and the sense of relief it would give me. All of a sudden I would feel just how closed, how closed in I was by the walls of my cell, but that was only lasted a few months. Afterwards my only thoughts were those of a prisoner. When all you'll see is the walled yard, decide that walking around within it is the only journey that could ever make you happy. I think in many ways that's where, that's where this postmodern Christianity, there's no Telos up there but I can talk about calling and passion down here. I'm in the prison. When your only visitor is your lawyer, convince yourself hell is other people. When happiness alludes you, believe that eschewing happiness makes you happy. You can learn to stifle the stubborn suggestions otherwise, as Merceau learned during the, during the incessant drone of his trial. Through all the interminable days and hours that people had spent talking about my soul, he said, I could hear through the expanse of chambers and courtrooms an ice cream vendor blowing his tin trumpet out in the street. I was assailed by memories of a life that wasn't mine anymore, but one in which I'd found the simplest and most lasting joys, the smell of summer, the part of the town I loved, in a certain evening sky, Marie's dresses and the way she laughed, the utter pointlessness of whatever I was doing seized my throat and all I wanted to get over with, and all I wanted was to get it over with and to get back to my cell and sleep. The journey is one of our oldest tropes for the adventure of being human. In many cases the template was Odyssean, departure and return, adventure and homecoming, from Bon voyage to welcome home, even the lament you can't go home again by Thomas Wolfe rehearses the the Odyssean itinerary by trying to get back. But the adventure of Camus' exile was not Odyssean, it is Sisyphean. Joy is, joy is predicated on the impossibility of arrival. In the myth of Sisyphus, Camus describes the experience of one for whom the illusion of rationality has been peeled back, in a universe suddenly divested of illusions and lights, a man feels an alien, a stranger, his exile is without remedy since he is deprived of the memory of a lost home or the hope of a promised land. The world is inhuman, indifferent to us and there are days, moment, season when it's aloof strangeness swells to encompass our vision and we experience a vertigo like looking at the Mediterranean on a cloudy day and the horizon vanishes in a bright gray. If man realized that the universe like him can love and suffer, Camus remarks, he would be reconciled but the world refuses. Caputo says, we can't believe that world because science tells us in 500 million years it will be gone. Good thing I'll be dead before that. The strange disaffection bleeds into me if I sit still long enough. Likewise, the stranger who at certain seconds comes to meet us in a mirror, the familiar and yet alarming brother we encounter in our own photographs is also the absurd. A stranger to myself and to the world armed solely with a thought that negates itself as soon as it asserts, what is the condition in which I can have peace only by refusing to know and to live, in which the appetite for conquest bumps into walls that defies its assaults? The condition is exile and happiness is embracing it, relinquishing any nostalgia for home and any hope for arrival. The absurd one is the one who manages to make exile what he always wanted. The feat, the trick is to learn how to live without appeal. Exile is the kingdom. The hell of the present is his kingdom at last. Imagine Sisyphus as a pilgrim caught in a loop, arrival always eluding him, accomplishments perpetually undermined. Sisyphus is the absurd hero for Camus because he embraces this perpetual pilgrimage of futility. It is during that return, that pause, that Sisyphus interests me, Camus admits. When the stone has rolled away again, Sisyphus prays, Camus praises Sisyphus for his trudge back down the mountain, left at the foot of the mountain, the rock rolling back every time. Sisyphus manufactures joy in the effort. All Sisyphus' silent joy is contained therein. His fate belongs to him. His rock is his thing. He's never going to arrive, never reaching the other shore, never getting to stay on the top of the mountain, but the struggle itself towards the height is enough to find a man's heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy. Must? I'm right there with James K. Smith there. Must? Must one imagine Sisyphus happy? In my tweets this morning about this, when I was lauding the chapter on Twitter, I went back to Jordan Peterson's conversation with David Fuller at Rebel Wisdom in that interview he gave where at the end of it, David Fuller, I had mentioned to David Fuller, there's a stoic quality to Peterson because you're dragging that cross up the hill. Well, where are you taking that cross, Jordan? Jordan says, well, as Paul hasn't heard the places I've talked, it's the kingdom of God. Ah, we are back with Augustine. But Jordan, do you ever reach the kingdom of God? Because after all, if you listen to Jordan, he'll tell you, well, it's in the, the meaning is the pulling of the cross up the hill. Yes, there's meaning there, but the meaning is knowing that there is a destination. And for Jordan, who tells the story of the Nazi camp where it's dragging the, the sack of sawdust or sand back and forth across the flat factory floor just to make the point that there is no point. Because of course, Augustine says, there is another city. But imagine Camus' philosophy as a message to actual migrants, to those who risk their lives today in boats submerged to the gun whales, ferrying. See, he plays on, so Camus was Algerian, goes to Paris, finds himself a stranger. Augustine, of course, another North African in Hippo, Carthage, that area goes to Rome, finds himself an alien. So Smith is playing on that. But imagine Camus' philosophy as a message to an actual migrant, refugees across Camus' prized Mediterranean, all too often failing to arrive. Or imagine young parents, toddlers in tow, harrowing a journey, harrowing journey from murderous Honduras to the southern border of the United States, parched and depleted by the desert journey, trying to cross its fabled line to apply for asylum, only to be refused and returned again over and over. Is that bearing the cross? Surely you have a sense of meaning as you're making your way to, to the promised land, but Hebrews 11, surely there must be a home whose builder is from God. No, we can't believe that. All we can have is, if you tell me that, well I'll stay in my mom's basement covered with Cheetos dust sitting playing computer games because there's no point to going forward. And okay, fair enough, it's, it's, it's meaningful to clean your room, but a la Augustine, the ordered room is, gives us a sacramental connection to the final ordering. Or do, or do such Sisyphean philosophies that the road is life turn out to be bourgeois luxuries, um, indulged by those safe enough to pretend that this is all there is? Miroslav Volf, the expend of, of, oh forget, exclusion and embrace. I know we're, can think of the, I can think of the book when I can locate it in my, in my, in my office. Does the hunger and hope of the migrant show us something more fundamentally human? Maybe our craving for rest, refuge, arrival, home is a hunger that can't be edited. The heart and obstinate, obstinate palimple, palimpsest, that, that's, that's a document that's been bleached and rewritten, but sometimes we want to find the, so we want to find the original document that someone thought they'd reuse the, they'd reuse the papyrus or they'd, they'd reuse the skin to put it on top. If there's a map inscribed in the human heart that shows where home is, in fact, that we, that we haven't yet arrived doesn't make it a fiction. It might just mean that there's a way that we haven't tried. Maybe Camus gave up too soon. Augustine, his fellow African, might be a better guide. The alienation is real, the sense of frustration, futility of never arriving, never feeling settled with ourselves. These are not figments of the imagination to be papered over with pious assertions of homecoming. The way out of the experience of being fractured and fragmented and ill at ease in our own skin is neither Sisyphean redescription nor some born-again leapfrog out of the vagaries of the human condition. Now he's dealing with the evangelicals, or at least certain reductionistic evangelicals. If there's a way out, our way home, a way to oneself, it has to be a way through what Camus confronts. If Camus is honest about what Heidegger calls angst, the anxiety that emerges in such moments, calling into question everything that we consider to be homey, faux comfort from our absorption in the world, in fact, Heidegger himself, echoing Freud, describes this principle productive unveiling anxiety as, I can't speak German either, as uncanny, but even more literally not at home-ness. When we're fooled ourselves into thinking we're at home with distraction, tricked ourselves into feeling settled only because we've sold our home hunger for entertainments, then the eruption of the uncanny, a sense of not at home-ness, becomes a gift that creates an opening to once again face the question of who we are. Angst's disturbing disclosure of meaninglessness is a door to walk through. It opens onto the possibility of finding yourself. Not at home-ness could be the place from which you finally hear the call to be yourself. If Camus arrives, now notice the secret sacred self, well what happens, so if you follow, if you follow post-modernity through this and if you go to where Caputo goes, there's no there there, and so all you're left with is this secret sacred self because there's no purpose and so now what the apostle Paul and what Augustine would wind up saying is, well then you're just left at the mercies of either the spirits abroad or the the epithumia that the over-desires inside and we're still alienated from ourselves, a la the existentialist, from the world, we're still, well, finding ourselves in the prison walls. Like Camus, Augustine was an African who ventured to Europe looking to make a name for himself, to arrive in both senses of the world, therefore securing his identity and like Camus, he found there was only a new sense of alienation. A provincial in the centers of cultural influence, first Rome then Milan, he realized the limits of his welcome in the upper echelons of power. As the biographer Peter Brown reminds us, even the fully Latinized African in the fourth century remained somewhat alien. The opinion of the outside world was unanimous. Africa, in their opinion, was wasted on the Africans. His accent is suspicious, a stubborn hayseed halo around his eloquence. Even when he achieves employment in the emperor's court, he surrounds himself with old friends from Africa who provide him with an outpost of Tagaste, and that was his hometown, amid the busyness of Milan. He'll never be at home there, but when he returns to Africa, he finds himself suspect there now too. I had a conversation with Shelley today. Those of you on the Discord server know her and we talked about third culture kids. Very much the same thing. His meteoric rise through the Roman channels of power is assigned to some African compatriots, Burgers and Donatists, that he's gone over to the other side. He is tainted with foreignness even at home now. So he is caught between worlds, between classes, falling through the cracks of belonging by virtue of his emigration and return. Indeed, one can describe him the ways Zwieg, that was an earlier story in this chapter that I skipped over, describes the fellow traveler as amphibian between two worlds. For Augustine, this experience turns out to be a hermeneutic key to the human condition, a place from which he read the Bible, understood himself, and grasped something about humanity's cosmic sojourn. In a provocative, creative, and anachronistic proposal, historian Justo Gonzales sees in Augustine the makings of a mestizo and suggests that this experience of tenuous hybridity was both a burden and a fund for theological creativity. Gonzales summarizes the concept, to be a mestizo is to belong to two realities and at the same time to not belong to either of them. A Mexican-American reared in Texas among people of Euro-American culture is repeatedly told that he is a Mexican, same with many Asians in California. That is, what he does not really belong in Texas, but if that mestizo, or he's got Dutch immigrant Canadians in the 1950s, if that mestizo American crosses the border hoping to find there his own land and his people, he's soon disappointed by being rejected or at least criticized as somewhat Americanized or as Mexicans would say for being pocho. Augustine's restlessness, Gonzales observes, was not due only to his distance from God, as he tells us in his confessions, but also to the inner struggles of a person in whom the two cultures, two legacies, two world visions clashed and mingled in short of a mestizo. Even Augustine's home was a hybrid, which prepared him for his later experiences as emigration and return, all informing a theology of Christian life that is as one of migration, a quest for a home no one has ever seen. Joy is arriving at the home you've never been to. And you can hear C.S. Lewis's, further up, further in, the joy of discovering in the last battle, the Narnia they've always known and longed for. And you find there haunted C.S. Lewis's argument by desire. We seem to have tastes for another place that we've never been before. Well, of course, C.S. Lewis also gets it from Augustine and Augustine, of course, also gets it from the book of Hebrews. How much more will I read? It's a long chapter, but it's again, this was probably my favorite chapter I've ever read from his book. I know some of you who like certain of my series are always worried I'll abandon them and your fears are well founded, but the end of The Good Place is very much connected to this as well. And I don't necessarily want to spoil it because I'm, I kind of don't want to finish up talking about The Good Place until season four is on Netflix, the final season, because I know some of you in other places have trouble seeing it and kind of holding off for then. But what so, this kind of draws into Peter Thiel and progress in the future because if you look at what Robert Wright is saying to, is saying to Caputo, okay, there's the push, but is there the pull of the future? And in a sense, any notion of progress, which Caputo continues to defer to, is in many ways premised on the pull of the future that history isn't just a piling up upon, but history is a journey. And it's not just a walk around, you're not a tourist, you're a pilgrim. And so the end of Smith's chapter, but if the road has beat you down, if the sights have become predictable and tired, and there are nights that you look at your friends in the car and wonder, what the hell are we doing? Please let me out. If you're weary from the chase, broken by the journey, tired of the disappointment, unsettled by a sense that you'd like to find some rest, not an accomplishment, but in welcome, then Augustine might be the stranger you could travel with for a while. Not because he's going to blow sunshine and tell you feel-good stories, not because he's going to fast-track you to rest. Beware of any religious types who roll up in a DeLorean promising time travel to either a nostalgic past or a pristine future. Augustine is the perfect guy for the road because he's been on and it is sympathetic to all of our angst on the way. There's almost nothing you're going to tell him that he hasn't already heard. You'd be surprised by what a patient listener he is. He was born on the road and he's seen right through the road is life philosophy. He knows who he is, whose he is, and where he's heading, and almost everything he writes is an effort to help fellow migrants on the way to find an orientation that feels like peace. You might think of Augustine as offering a hitchhiker's guide to the cosmos for wandering hearts, and what's more, Augustine will tell you to take up your cross and pull it up that hill, but Augustine will also say, I have seen, I have been to the mountaintop, and I have a taste of the city of God, and that city has been haunting and driving us not to simply wander, not all those who wander are lost, a la Strider, but that there is a destination, and although we can't produce it here and now, because it's not a thing that we can wield or an outcome we achieve, it is something that we in fact participate in and affords us as pilgrims a destination and a home of rest, and that's where I'm decidedly un-postmodern or post-postmodern, because if I listen to the postmoderns, just as if I listen to the atheist modernists, they don't give me a reason not to imagine this and not to follow Augustine. So there we are. I didn't have a roadmap for this, but wound up in the book that I was reading when I woke up this morning. I hope it was helpful.