https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=r35leGkcBns

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to make a video about the Karl Lentz affair might even be more videos because there's so much to talk about and It's not really about Karl Lentz This is just yet another incident into The church in North America the church in the West modernity post modernity celebrity money sex sexual standards what religion is it's all in there and it's Obviously something that captures attention. I mean this is This is an article about a pastor that gets in People magazine. Well, why is that? Aloysia or W Nelson on Twitter Made the comment about About Jonathan Peugeot and I thought it was exactly right You know this Jonathan Peugeot offers a breakdown of how religion is less private belief and more description of reality What was it that caught my attention? What was it about Jordan Peterson that caught my attention? It was the question that I was working on with my incessant reading of CS Lewis's miracles It was the issue of how does our contemporary conception of history map on to The Bible's retelling of history. It's this division that opened up in the enlightenment, it's the collapse of the of the discarded image as CS Lewis called it and There was a moment in that Conversation with Peugeot and vervecchia and rebel wisdom when Jonathan said something that I thought yeah this guy's this guy's world is one thing here and It's not it's not a simplistic monism but it's it's this duality that we live in terms of private belief and a description of reality and Aloysia just that was the first even though just the first half of the tweet and it was I think this was in the conversation with You know whether Babylon B should have Jonathan Peugeot on their podcast and they definitely should But it's bringing the worlds together and in many ways. That's What my whole quest has been? how can those of us who In terms of our imaginary sit atop a globe spinning around a Sun read the Bible Genesis 1 for example where you have a flat table some pillars beneath a firmament above and the Sun moon and stars Within the firmament that the waters above are not the clouds How can we bring the worlds together? and in some ways this this story about Carl Lentz and his affair is a story about Two worlds coming together calamitously But it's about two worlds within him and Well, we all have two worlds within us. We're all duplicitous fraught Sinful a Quick catch up on the situation for those of you who don't follow this sort of thing Carl Lentz He'll song pastor and spiritual advisor to Justin Bieber Justin Bieber comes up in all this all the time in this and we'll see a little bit later why Fired over moral failure and if you go back and look at my video I did on Celebrity pastors and their sex lives. Well, this is the only realm in which in many ways Discipline is allowed to function in America anymore. It's only has to do with employment a Jonathan Peugeot and Rod Dreher did a video together and and Dreher's book makes the important argument that any an overly politicized reality will naturally lead to tyranny and Jordan Peterson's new book Beyond Order It's you know the chapter that he talks about that. I mean, that's this is this is what this This is what the IDW tree and what our conversations have been pointing to for a long time Even if we didn't recognize it But then the question is what is the other space? When you arrive at a certain monism in your world and it's simply political Well, will it devolve into tyranny? So the skinny on this is that Carl Lentz celebrity pastor skinny jeans pastor Was caught in an affair and Fired that's the protocol and there was a boilerplate corporate evangelical press release and Another one of the channels read it and I thought yeah, that's exactly these things write themselves But part of the purpose of those documents are they write themselves. There's actually a liturgy That is enacted for something like this He'll song the mother church and we're gonna get into that them a little bit too You're gonna lots an independent investigation probably what they're going to find is that this was not the first time Now the fact that Carl Lentz had this affair with a woman who was not in his church actually speaks to his integrity in some ways because There's a whole lot that gets bundled into this and like I said I could do multiple videos on this situation because there's so many angles that come into this The pastoral identity the privilege the power and again, those are all charged political words right now And they're gonna see how widespread this was chances are this was not his first affair chances are there are women in the church that he had relationships with and Again, there's this is boilerplate upon boilerplate and so certain other Shaddy non-player characters are gonna say he's a monster is he probably not he's a Vulnerable human being like you and I he's got weaknesses. He's got temptations and He's got something in him that now will be addressed and actually this Ironically, this is probably the worst thing that's ever happened to him It could be one of the best things that ever happened to him in a really cruciform painful devastating destructive way It could be a you catastrophe of sorts, but but life is like that And so the pastor and the family are in intense marital therapy That is so interesting That's this again. That's the protocol. That's the standard. That's the boil boilerplate and the girlfriends on GMA. Oh What a world we live in Before I say anything more I want to say this so this picture on the left is the picture that a lot of the media is Promoting and it's probably the picture from the church website and you know, he's kind of a He's kind of a fashionable guy and his wife is beautiful and his children are adorable and The there's a lot going into this in terms of Protestant churches Sacramentality in a sense In a very protestant way he and his family all dressed up here are an ideal an idealized version That's in a sense How the pastor functions now, this is very different from a priest and Why are priests celibate? I mean again, there are so many angles that Go into this thing so many angles And it's well he's I can talk about him because everybody's talking about him But even though I'm not friends with celebrity pastors of his stature In many ways every pastor of a protestant church is a sort of celebrity in a minor way And the pastor's family has looked upon him in a very very very very very very very very very very very Unin a certain way and and and and and so I included this other picture which Was just in the images google search. It's probably something scraped from instagram But I preferred it because if you look at this picture you find kind of a goofy dad holding up the camera taking a family selfie And here's his family probably at the beach on a vacation or a day off just having some fun being a family But there's layers there's layers and layers and layers and In a sense everyone in the picture on the right at the beach sort of being themselves, but they're being themselves in different ways and so Yeah as a pastor you sort of offer your life up to the world As a as a As a mirror as a prism as a reflection of all of these things as an icon Of all of these things we're talking about and all of these things we're trying to look through I'm seeing things scatting scooting around in my office and gonna have to get the mousetraps up again out again It's that time of year when the weather turns cold that the mice come in from the fields and start to try to inhabit the church and They love my office. So Anyway, sorry for the this this video brought to you by decon kills him dead Yeah, i've got a lot of Got a lot of feeling for this situation I really feel for him and his wife and his kids This is not a story you want to have happen, but as I said a few minutes ago Ironically in a you catastrophe cruciform way it may or may not Become a kind of story that five ten fifteen twenty years later They look back on very differently than what they're feeling now And this will shape those kids those kids will never be the same because of this and It's all in the news and on people magazine and good morning america because of his success and in some ways Again the way the protestant evangelical church is constructed. This is what you look for you know but we're gonna get into this because it's very easy to start pointing fingers at the smoke machines and the lights and the big sound and the guitars and And the and the the tucks and the good clothes and all of these things and say aha. They're worldly Look at the pageantry of rome or an orthodox church and zip back Hundred centuries after centuries and look at royal courts back then Those church those churches in some ways are reflecting the high status that well notice how political campaigns Basically follow the same entertainment script all of the all of this symbolism is rolling out And it's it's in a way convenient to simply duck and cover into this symbolism of the fourth century or the 11th century or the 16th century Or the 19th century or now the 20th century and and you know Church trots out all of the status markers of those whether it's a robe or a suit or a miter or a beard The thing is those those those symbolic forms have had time to to to take on velcro and and add other things to them and form and And and what we're seeing right here with evangelicals and and instagram and social media and celebrity and rock stars You know I said to david fuller You know he talked about That that pang burn sam harris jordan peterson moment You know they uh, you know jordan peterson was a rock star and yeah, you know a year later He's in rehab not for drug and alcohol, but you know the benzo and all of the layers to that but Are there not layers to the uh to this sort of thing too This story is This story is important Why do we gawk Why are we attracted to it? Why are we why are we fascinated by it? Why why do we? project ourselves and um Unto these narratives and and embody them and you know Why do why do pastors want to be like carl not right now? But why do pastors want to be like carl why do women want to sleep with him? Joe rogan He's got joe rogan's attention a couple of videos. You can just a little youtube search you can find him one video where he's talking to uh bill burr and most of their conversation was about celebrity pastors and then this picture of Of of carl lenson as dickroot. I didn't know what a dickroot was Um, but you know, it's uh, yeah shorts are down too low but a more recent video where he's talking to gary ladderman who's a University professor who writes about drugs and religion and his background is in american religious history, which I thought was interesting It wasn't a particularly good conversation. I thought joe rogan had to carry too much of that Ladderman wasn't really in his element But there's a little section on carl lenz there that I thought joe rogan really nailed There's there's a lot in that video about religion and What religion is how we see religion all the different definitions of religion? but when when rogan is talking about um Carl lenz. He says well, you've got the guru drug the celebrity drug and the sex drug Yeah, what do we mean by drug? Drug and religion isn't that far which is ladderman's point but in some ways it is quite far because in some ways Oh, there's so much there There's so there's so so this is one of these points that there are so many connections to and that's why it draws our attention and that's why You know, what other pastors are we paying attention to when you know bill hybels? When there was the scandal around bill hybels did it get this kind of attention? No the uh, The the post-mortem scandal around ravie zackariah, did it get this much attention? No And and there are you know Pastors we you know again, we have liturgy but moral failure pastors have moral failure a lot And and the churches have developed liturgies around it, but the liturgies now are are sort of corporate employment And and in many ways In the many ways in the protestant church we do it poorly because well we're gonna fire carl lenz Oh, this is how churches deal with people we fire them and it'll probably get a decent Severance You know, he's got plenty of money. He'll be well taken care of he has access He can start a podcast and you know Someone mentioned a church and then there was a a porn site that reportedly offered him 77 million dollars It's probably a great way to get publicity to have him preach on their porn site Oh boy this this whole story There are so many angles and aspects and so much Of our culture just simply comes together in on it Now if you do again another youtube search you can find some other smaller channels That are giving the rather repetitive christian responses. Um, this one guy Seems to be an ex pastor was a worship pastor and he's got a podcast something about dads and You know celebrity pastors have to stop it. Yeah, but then he touches on this in some ways, but it's it's not That it's a function of the entire Ecclesiology there's a there's a fancy vander clay word, which is a theological word Ecclesiology, which is the study of the ecclesia the church. It's the it's the way that we do ministry and A lot of people are like well, this is no surprise. I mean joe rogan can see it these two christians can see it this woman apparently has a little youtube vlog and She became a christian at carl lenz's church. And why did she go to the church because he was just like me What a man no, what what what aspect did you pick up on that? You noticed? He was just like her She's german and and well he was he was he was what I aspire to become Now you see this in, you know forever has been a dynamic in the black church in america and and the the religion and politics haven't been quite so separated in the black church for a whole bunch of for a whole bunch of of really good reasons, but You know in the In all kinds of churches in the neighborhood Um The the size well, this is sort of true Not in the christian forum church We sort of have a socialist system most crc pastors are sort of paid within this spectrum in evangelical churches Including black churches the size of the pastors the size of the pastor's salary is directly related to the size of the pastor's church So little church little salary big church big salary The church is a celebrity Christian forum church kind of sort of standardized the crc pastors have a better than average union in some ways and crc Givers tend to be better than average givers, too That's part of our subculture and it's part of a subculture that we're losing But you know celebrity pastors should stop it Well, it's not just a function of the pastor the church the church needs the pastor to function as a celebrity And the church needs him and in fact, that's how the pastor is recruited and paid and promoted And and this is not a new thing. I remember I've got this i've got this. Um I can't pull it up right now. I don't feel like digging for it, but When I first came to this church They put my name on the sign That was weird. It was like who on earth in sacramento knows who I am Nobody but that my name is on the sign why Well, that's not a very crc thing But it's an evangelical thing because the pastor is the draw and the sermon is the draw and the pastor's life and the pastor's wife You know search, you know Type in carl lenz into your google search and wife will come up quickly type in joel osteen and wife will come up quickly There's there's a lot going on here And it's you're not going to find that obviously bishop baron wife. No Why not? Well, what's going on? How's a priest and a minister different even the two words? Why are these two words different? What what is it? How does a minister function in a protestant church different from a priest in an orthodox? Or a roman catholic church is one better or another are they living in two different worlds? How do these worlds connect? Why why did the protestant reformation make these changes now what this woman will keep saying are things like well Yeah, this is what he did was horrible what he did was horrible. Okay. What was horrible about it? Well, well he betrayed well, what is in what isn't what is the betrayal that that that is That is that is manifest here Is it is it a bigger crime that he committed adultery to the church or to his wife? Because part of what happens in in protestantism is that the the nuclear family sort of ascends in a way that Well doesn't happen with celibate priests, but then the celibate priests, you know, you have the pedophile priest scandal If you look back in roman catholic church history that priests had families and mistresses on the side There's so much here there's so much here And I want to get into it I want to dig into it with this gq article on hillsong that came out a number of years ago And even in the title, you know inside hillsong the church of choice for justin bieber and kevin durant Okay. Now why justin bieber and kevin durant? Well, they're celebrities. Well, what are celebrities? How do they function in our culture in many ways the celebrities are the priests? Celebrities are the priests Of American culture they're the stars by which we navigate we project onto them We insist that they play a role and we see ourselves through them. This is why people magazine just check out If you're still going to the grocery store and not getting your food delivered, you know Just and if the men they still have magazines instead of just candy and everything at the grocery store check out check out What's going on on those tabloids what is the fascination and and now you know, I want to bring I want to mention chris are are are naughty here because There's a lot of back row america in this conversation But back row america is in many ways a better tell undistorted by A lot of the status stuff that's being played out in front row america So so there's there's lots and lots and lots going on here All right, just look at the picture here Look at the picture Now he's kind of got a fist. Is this a protest or is it an open hand? Is this jewish way of praying He's lost in Individual Mystical psychological psychic rapture one of the most interesting statements that came out of Jordan peterson's visit to liberty university was it was quite moved by what he saw. Well, why? Well, what is the evangelical church doing? well if you go into an orthodox church and you have jesus of course up there in the dome and the icons on the wall and you walk in it's supposed to elicit a A gasp it's supposed to we we've just left Secular space and entered into sacred space. Well, how do we achieve that sacred space, you know this? Gary ladderman was that his name on joe rogan? Well, if we take a drug and joe rogan says well There's the sex drug and there's the there's the guru drug like if you're a guru and people are people are taking your influence That's a hit and there's the celebrity drug if everybody's paying attention to you. There's a hit Well the smoke machine and the lighting and the and the sound and the One of the very interesting comments in the gary ladderman conversation was and I think it was quite right ladderman says we don't pay We're not paying careful attention enough to music and its power Just like with drugs with music we play with things that That we don't all know where this thing goes And and so here they're you know, the people are lost in the rapture and what's amazing about the joe rogan I better make sure i've got that name, right? Just back to the slide. Yeah, gary ladderman what's amazing about the joe rogan gary ladderman conversation is that Well, they're talking about drugs. Well, well, this is this is Evangelical worship services is if you're using drug loosely like that. It's the same thing it's you can have you know the reason that you go to the the church with the with the The music or something a christianized version of the music that wasn't imprinted on you when you were between 16 and 21 The reason you go there and and the reason it invokes ecstasy and you you first invoke the ecstasy before you Hear the message and well, you know I mentioned before campus life scream in the dark haunted house in new jersey when we were growing up It was one of these youth things where you'd go there and there'd be this haunted house type thing and they do a really good job They'd have makeup and everything and you people would be terrified and after they're terrified then they come out and they hear this gospel message What's going on with us Well the music and the worship and the the looks of the pastor All of this is relevant to what's going on just as relevant as the dark robe and the beard in the orthodox church or the the vestments, you know, I I almost can't You know, I almost can't look at that roman catholic sometime and not think about liberace. Well, why well what's going on? well It's the symbolism. Well, absolutely Well, well this author here is is picking up on this If I were to tell if if I told you I had a justin bieber story That would break your heart or at least put an asterisk on On what would you think? No, listen about five years ago. Pastor. Carl got a phone call Carl is one of the lead pastors of hillsong new york city now hillsong started in australia And I don't know a lot about its origins. Some of you know a lot about its origins Early on in my jordan peterson thing. I had a conversation with a woman in australia And and you know, she talked about the hillsongification Of the church there. Yeah in some ways hillsong is sort of a a knockoff or an upgrade to What you know? Rick warren had done bill hybels had done but before them Robert schuller had done. I mean, this is all part of the same thing And Hillsong So one of the guys one of the other videos that I mentioned already It was a you worship pastor. So he knows the reality that ccli ccli is the patreon of christian music and If you write a top christian music song and it goes out into all of these thousands and thousands of churches and these churches Well, how do we you know? Because used to be back in the day we'd get the salt or hymnal in the christian reform church and we'd Have enough copies for everybody to sing out and that was how the licensing worked But when everything went up on screens, they had to have a new way So you had ccli and ccli then well you report to ccli you license You license the music From the creator and I think it's absolutely legitimate the creator has a right to get paid but but this is a huge business And hillsong owns the rights to all sorts of music and it makes millions and millions of dollars and so Again frontline did a video if you've never watched the merchants of cool well, it's all evolved since the merchants of cool days, but The merchants of evangelical cool. Well, you're well, what are you doing? Well people are walking around and they've already been imprinted by this music and Well church is very smart and savvy we come in and we sort of do this music and most of the time we do It worse, but sometimes if you can sort of do it up to snuff, but if you can add jesus bang Ecstasy Oh, no pastor. I don't I don't I don't like those evangelicals. I prefer a more mystical religion You don't you've never been to an evangelical service and seen the mysticism going on. They're lost in jesus They're getting slain in the spirit This is this is how human beings are coded and worked. Oh now that we know they're coded. We think that it's all bs No, it's not bs It's just how we operate So justin bieber Justin bieber justin bieber Well, he's part of that same world, right? We're bringing the worlds together justin bieber and carl lenson You're gonna find their names together and you know justin bieber unsubscribe from carl's instagram feed Yeah, like he doesn't have his phone number. Give me a break And I'm not saying there probably isn't this isn't rough on justin because why because because well justin bieber moved in because justin bieber Go back and do some googling about justin bieber's story You can find plenty of bio pieces on justin bieber on youtube and you know his mom making him famous And you know joe rogan's exactly right that childhood star thing doesn't usually work out in the long term Well for the kid and so give a kid millions of dollars and all of those drugs the sex drug and the You know and the celebrity drug and then you know everybody hangs on what justin says and just what he writes the guru drug And then the my wife and I are watching the crown right now and we're in the part of the lady die story and oh gosh You see this with basketball players and football players and Rockstars You want to curse someone make them a rock star? Well, but we can't help it. Can't we? they're doing something that's attracting our attention and we have these all of these mechanisms now that can distribute the status hierarchy and Yeah, and i'm on that i'm on that thing same thing too aren't i vander clay? Yeah, point the finger at others. How about you? Yeah Scares me to death this stuff Not enough to make me stop talking at you That scares me even more i'm not beyond this I'm just fortunate. I'm dramatically unsuccessful That's a good thing again jordan peterson status rocket ride I don't know if i'd wish that on too many people and he took it in his 50s Already knowing a fair amount do this to a 16 year old an 18 year old. That's how to ruin a human being So justin bieber about five years ago pastor carl got a phone call carl is one of the lead pastors of hillsong new york city All of that cool all of that all of that Electronic mysticism a megachurch so reputedly mystifying. There's the word mystifyingly cool It's heaven and earth are being joined right there In the crowd Mystifyingly cool that cable news outlets covers its service like there's a kardashian birthday bash is that one oak in some ways Kanye's sunday services, you know Is a continued evolution of this and you know, you you have joe rogan the same joe rogan. Well, well, you know He's made church cool. Well, you know, you're beating up on carl lenz. Kanye west. They're They're working the same angle joe They're working the same angle and so are you and here's the thing joe rogan has some credibility about this because he knows it because he's you know, maybe not a list he's not justin bieber status, but Joe rogan's been around a lot of status and seen plenty of drugs and seen plenty of sex etc, etc And you know, we have to talk about some of that stuff On the other end of the line is one of carl's best friends juda smith another mega church pastor Who also happens to be a chaplain for the seattle seahawks? Well, look at that I need you to help me with the young man pastor juda says and pastor carl rushes to agree Because helping is carl's thing and the young man was yes Justin bieber In general people are critical of justin bieber for as many alleged human rights abuses Is that what we call them We used to just call them sin Now there are human rights abuse. Remember rod dreer and and jonathan peugeot the politic the politicization of all of this I heard he once used a wheelchair to cut in line at disneyland Disability appropriation And this upsets pastor carl because justin lives his life on the front street. Yeah, this is this is real front row america Which is a southern way of saying that he can see all that he that we can see all that he does While he can get to conduct our sins in relative when we get to conduct our sins in relative anonymity Ouch Front street But no christian no person Could live under the scrutiny that justin faces says pastor carl This boy is 21. He's in a horribly toxic world. He's trying to do his best to figure this out Carl is 42. He lives in a horribly toxic world. He's trying to do the best to figure this out Principalities and powers sin it's beyond us. It's beyond us all I think about gandalf hanging on at at um Okay, why can't I think of that my tolkien cred is just i've just lost my tolkien status um I can't think of that. I can't think of that stupid bridge that you know the the the balrog and the Um kaza doom There we go Fly you fools swords will not avail you Oh, that's right. We are dealing with things far larger than us Although this world with devils filled threatens to undo us martin luther He is trying to do his best to figure this out and so is carl He has never been anybody He has never been anybody but who he has professed to be Which is a work in progress same for carl Last year justin moved in with carl and his family for a month Yeah Justin this is a tough thing for justin. Why because carl was his star. He was his guiding light Carl was the guy that's supposed to help justin deal with the the money and the drugs and the girls and the paparazzi and and and And and and carl navigating it successfully was instrumental to justin's ability to mark the path forward Yeah, they're facing a balrog And they worked through stuff during that time carl says he saw tabloid reporters Reports about horrible things justin was supposedly doing when meanwhile justin had been sitting there in his kitchen the whole time It was helpful to think of justin here at this point in his life as a biblical character At the very bottom of the story At the very bottom of a jobian well of his own making Of his own making Really? We put this kid we've done that we do this to children and to young people and it's of his own making Yes, partly That's the thing. It's not just him. It's him and us and it's the same with carl lenz He had been caught being monstrous to just about everyone around him who could blame him with everybody trying to get a piece Of him in year 16 again. Look at the lady die stuff He seems to be spending more time with drugs than with jesus. His music was bad First we they have a little bit of talent and we and we motivate them to take that talent and develop it And then we give them all the tools to destroy it. Yeah a rock star. He's a rock star He's going to be in rehab by his 28, right? I mean, it's it's It's stereotypical There was a petition circulating online to deport him back to canada It may have i may have signed it but one day that's a good author here Um, she wrote a bunch of other interesting pieces in gq. I noticed I may have signed it but one day according to carl justin looked in the mirror and he was ravaged by feelings of loss That's where carl's is today He got he got on his knees and he cried I want to know jesus and kanya has been there too You go up the status hierarchy hierarchy who you're gonna find It's not just going up into orbit and looking around for god because you're the first man in space You climb the status hierarchy and you and you and you look at how you're being treated and yeah in rehab You'll find jesus happens all the time I Just want to know jesus justin bieber sobbed to pastor carl and so together they prayed Suddenly justin was overcome by the gospel and he said baptize me and pastor carl said yes bucko buckaroo He really does call bieber buckaroo And now you should too. Let's do this. Let's schedule a time But justin bieber couldn't be justin bieber for one minute longer. No, I want to do it now Justin bieber needs a new life and justin bieber believes jesus can give it to him And many of you have been down this road At that moment of release of forgiveness of starting a new life only to come up out of the water and realize Yeah martin luther The waters we back we we drown adam but adam is a strong swimmer Pastor carl saw salvation in justin's eyes and knew that his baptism couldn't come quick enough So if it's pastor carl baptizing justin then then certainly pastor carl must have the genuine article must have the answers must have the solution Must have the guru juice and the higher the status of his disciples the more Guru juice he must have the more validity the more credibility that the truer it all must be Hillsong which began in australia has outposts all over the globe from kiev to paris to buenos aides The church landed in new york city in 2010 with a branch at manhattan nightclub irving plaza a branch at a theater in times square They had the money to do it baby. I like to talk to church planters. You know what i'm talking about They had the backing They had the juice And on any given sunday hillsong new york city savs souls of 8 000 people and what souls? The stars these are these are the stars to the stars This is the hierarchy baby Justin bieber yes, but also kendall jenner and selena gomez and kevin durant and bono People say we we cater to celebrities pastor carl tells them and I say yes we do celebrities deserve a relationship with god Celebrities deserve a place to pray carl is not wrong But principalities and powers fly you fools This swords will not avail you this foe is beyond any of you So to all god's children he says And so they save seats at a special selection for celebrities because well It's only fair that if we make these people do this thing and we shower them with money and we destroy their lives They get a few vip seats Because you know if they don't poor justin could never hear the service It's sort of the ronald reagan why he doesn't go to church thing, right? So they save seats in a special section So they save seats in a special section for celebrities But also for people in wheelchairs and single moms who are running late. What about that wheelchair thing at disneyland? But it's easier for god's children to find a peaceful house in which to pray which is Than it is for say damon dash. I don't know who that is Anyway, I wasn't done with justin bieber story So justin wanted needed a baptism post haste and pastor carl and pastor juda and justin bieber got into a car And one of the church's body men What's a body man is that is that like if I gain status is that is that I don't know what? Rick is my Rick. Rick. Will you be my body man? Rick will be my body man I don't know what that means rick will tell me i'm sure rick knows what it means Now where were we Body man, I guess little aids or something that helps them with stuff is just always handy if you get to a certain status Gosh I got homeless body men Anyway drove them on one of the church's suburbans to the manhattan hotel where hillsong rents a pool for baptism See, this is very evangelical Well, you know, hey Deacon um deacon philip didn't wait to baptize the ethiopian eunuch for a for easter sunday, did he But when they got there hundreds of people stood waiting someone had tipped off the tabloids Pastor carl called a friend whose apartment complex has a pool, but when they arrived dozens of people were waiting there, too That's tough to be him So I called my boy carl said carl has many boys But in this case his boy was tyson chandler who was then on the new york nix It was 2 a.m By now the nix had beaten the miami heat earlier that night and he knew that tyson lived in a fancy upper west side building With a pool. I said bro. I'm in a jam here. I have jb here and he wants to get baptized He's like done easy I ain't that cool But when they arrived there was no access to the pool it's too late what Tyson chandler doesn't have a key to the pool in his own apartment building. Come on What's the point of status if you can't get in get in the pool when it's late after hours It's like you're at the homewood suites and the pool closes at 10 and I just drove in with the family and got in at 9 30 I know what it's like He reminded carl that he's seven feet tall and that his bathtub was built to spec Justin bieber was slightly tinier than that and so they go upstairs to tyson's place And tyson's wife made some food and lays down some towels And justin gets into the tub and down justin bieber goes and he comes out of the water. He is Reborn Let's not get cynical here I'm serious He is with his rebirth Read roman 6 We're baptized into his death And that is an image that will stick with you Let me tell you justin bieber on his knees in tyson chandler's bathtub wet and sobbing against pastor carl's chest So unable to cope with being himself that he was born that he has to be born anew look at kanye And many of you have been there. I know you have You just you need a new person because you're sick of the one that you are Is there hope can you become an adult? Is there hope can you become a new person? Yes, you can Some people it's sort of one and done for a lot of us. It's becoming a new person every day So unable to cope with being himself he was born anew He has to be declared someone entirely different in order to make it through the night What's that augustin story when his old lover? Tries to get his attention a woman that he had spent weeks with before augustin it is I and he turns and says But it's not I anymore augustin had changed So there's this hat If you show up on sunday service at hillsong new york city I'm sure this has changed by now because these things change fast because once everybody's wearing the hat then you need a different thing It'll be the first thing you notice about the audience or at least it was the first thing I noticed which I noticed which is They're all wearing this hat Consider how and you can go to the site and get the picture of it I just take the ads and the pictures out so it's easier for me to read There's all they're all wearing this hat consider how unusual it is for people to wear the same hat if they aren't say Working at wendy's or on a baseball team the style of hat is hard to describe There's a hint of cowboy hat a dose of a dose of pork pie in some angles It looks like an a plain old mall fedora But normally you have to have more oval brim that should blah blah blah the hat the hat the hat the hat they're all wearing It's like a badge or a uniform. Why? It's how we are we're human beings What's with the hat? I asked someone in the audience near me during my first visit. What do you mean? They can't see it anymore. They all wear it Answered the man who was wearing the hat. I looked I looked at his eyes hard and waited According to the results of my exhaustive investigation the hat first appeared five or six years ago when pastor joel wore it Not joel osteen joel houston In his american press clippings which began in 2010 the year pastor joel houston and pastor carl lenz established Hillsong's first american branch right into the city right to the center of american culture They know how to work the cool kid thing. They really do Pastor joel was basically never not Pastor joel was basically never not with the hat And at some point you have to acknowledge that a large group of people in new york city Adopting the fashiony choices of their spiritual leaders is a peculiar thing It's not strange at all This is how fashion works. It's why fashion works. It's it's how human beings work She can't recognize it as religion just like the greeks couldn't recognize it Just like the greeks couldn't recognize the temple and the sacrifices as religion Here we are We just have secularity that that helps christianity, you know and helps western society not become too tyrannical They are leading they are influencing. Oh, yes, they are. Oh, there's the hat I don't know who she is. Oh, we're getting all the getting all the pictures together. Oh, is that the hat? Oh god, I guess I got all the pictures together I guess these are the peeps they're young they're cool That's I mean sometimes people dye their hair gray and it's like If you wait long enough, it'll get there or shave their head bald and it's like if you wait long enough It might get there itself Then it's real easy Yeah, like her she she doesn't have enough years to have gray hair. What's with that? Oh well lots of pictures Cool pictures though anyway On stage the music began and a unisex band of christian generic marvels Materialized buoyant and shiny with salvation and i've noticed because after sunday sometimes after We see if we messed up the recording and how bad the lighting was and the sound was you know rick and I rickle rickle rickle want to check out some other sunday services on youtube and We have a good time with that, but i've noticed that well, you know Now they've got to have you know They've got to represent on stage got to have appropriate diversity in terms of body size and yada yada yada Some had guitars and man buns some had side cocked beanies all with microphones all with very shiny hair all with expressions of Serenity as they swayed and sang the songs of hill song music Which is sold through its various arms of tens of millions of of cds CDs About salvation and shame and bathing in the mercy of jesus blood and whose music is the only music you will hear inside a A hill song church keep all the many in the family None of that ccli taken there. I don't know how much they take When they moved they raised their hands to the heavens which also they stood with their palms open wrist side up a rhythmic um Patient explaining as if you say what are you gonna do? You now again if you're part of a liturgical ancient church you look at say say ah But what's happening in your church isn't that sort of what happened in the roman court Now other things happen in the roman court that's not happening in your church, but the the colors and the symbols and the and the names pontus What is pontus look it up Who had that who had that title before? The bishop of rome And i'm not i'm not I'm, not complaining i'm just saying this is how we work as human beings okay The music of hill song is a catalog of selena gomez grade ballads with melodies that all resemble one another pleasingly like spa music they call to mind deeply sincere love songs as if Were appropriate to put phrases like my jesus on that cursed tree and furious love laid Waste to my sin and suffered violence healed my blindness and facedown when mercy finds me Uh finds me first in a love song. That's right That's right. That's what we're doing, right? and You know after the jordan peterson thing and the jonathan peugeot thing I can't worship anymore and not pay attention to all of the symbolism in the songs and it's not just the new songs find the 19th century hymns and the 18th century hymns and the ancient songs that have been adapted and We wouldn't have half of christian hymnody without the book of revelation It's what songs are Tonally and tunefully it's a jonah's brothers. They went to christian. They went to eastern christian. Look it up It's a Famous famous school in in in northern new jersey famous celebrity alums When you're gonna put my name on that on that on that wikipedia page, huh? Huh? What what's what what's the good of having mooks if you're not going to put your night on wikipedia? I'm kidding about the wikipedia, please. I don't need any more information out me out there about me Okay Lyrically it's a hymn and yet the singing is hot breathed and sexy close into microphones It made my body feel confused Why Because sex and god How do we work out these things? Ask peter craved about sex in heaven. He's got a great answer. He says I don't like thinking about sex in heaven because it makes me think about sex on earth It gets them into trouble just like all of us I was witnessing the logical conclusion of an evolutionary convergence between coolness and christianity That's what kanya is doing, right? That began at the dawn of the millennium When progressive minded christians terrified of a faithless future desperately rendered their got rendered their garments And replaced them with skinny jeans and flannel shirts and piercings and the cartilage of their ears in a very ostentatious In a very ostentatious effect to be more modern and more relatable That woman that made the video about carl enchi says he was just like me Which is why today you can find ironically bespeckled Evangelicals in seattle and graphic designers soliciting tithes with hand-drawn helvetica flyers in san diego and and again Hillsong just does it better Come and see how we do it at living stones You can walk into mega churches all over the country where the pastor will slap on a pair of leather pants You don't want to see me in leather pants And leather pants and drop the f-bond boom, how do you like me now Jesus christ superstar Pastor carl is spreading the gospel of jesus the way the church has always intended one selfie with a celebrity at a time But it doesn't always feel like they're trying too hard that's the way it feels in most churches I Think of star man where jeff bridges is trying to say yo, what's up to carren allen? But he says I send greetings instead why because I send greetings is what you would say in the 19th century The book on hillsong however, the other book the lowercase b is that they're the real article the world's first genuinely cool church Oh author of this piece have you not been around And We'll get to find out a little later why she doesn't know these things a lot of you know very well The music the lights the crowd Begins an incredulous woman narrating a cnn segment on hillsong New york city in a smarmy cn es It looks like a rock concert and the lines around the block are enough to make any nightclub envious This is good writer The chyron reads hipster preacher smashes stereotypes and this is it's always so funny because every now and then it was well into the 1990s that you'd see newspaper articles that say things like this church has drums and a guitar and it's like yeah Reporters don't go to church. They haven't been to church for 20 years because Well, what about the jesus people? What about calvary chapel? I mean this this has been rolling for a long long time and the press now 20 years later get wind of it And are all shocked Come on They call pastor carl a hipster abc actually said hipster heartthrob That's part of it That is part of it. He's the ideal and well, we've had president heartthrob with barack obama Now I know some of you are going to pull faces But I know a lot of women who look at how he looks at his wife and they want him But they're wanting him Would undermine the image they're having and you say well, that's that's confused. Well, that's what human beings are Like everyone else at hillsong pastor joel is unwilling to acknowledge that there's something going on here vis-a-vis the hat vis-a-vis The entire fashion ford disney channel teen aggressively accessorized aesthetic Of the place it is a non-issue to him. He is telling me sure he likes clothes I went to a i went to a korean ordination service once because i'm an old pastor with status in the christian reform church and And so they invited me there and I got there on a sunday afternoon and when I walked in wearing what I was wearing There's this this panicked look on many faces and um, so they found the A black robe that the pastor owned. The only problem is that i'm 6 4 and the pastor was about 5 10 And uh, yeah, it looked hilarious Gotta put robes on the dude Yes, he tells me sure he likes clothes but that's the end of it What he means to say is that a lot of people like clothes and anyway, why am I asking him? I should ask pastor carl about the clothes. He tells me what pastor carl does. He says that's intentional Then he laughs so I did I asked pastor carl and he said he really doesn't think about it Okay, maybe he does sometimes that dick root thing. Is that intentional or just the waves kind of You know carry him carry the trunks down a little bit and the paparazzi snapped the picture. I don't know But spend that time in the gym Make sure you keep that six pack This is not disconnected Aren't I thinking about it when I show up in an interview and my whole head Head to toe gap thing my whole neutrally attired thing. That was a decision too. Carl pointed out wasn't it? Carl's not dumb Before the service had begun that day a woman in her early 20s who had been saving the entire row for late coming friends told me she had been coming to hillsong for two years and that every week she brings more and more friends because Where else in new york? Can you find such a spiritual place? She used to go to a greek orthodox church. Oh She's one of those Every single person I met at hillsong was a churchgoer somewhere else before He or she began going to church at hillsong is hillsong not a rescuer from deconstruction but part of the deconstruction Boy But it was long and boring there and she was doing it out of family obligation. Oh, she's a cradle greek orthodox Okay, well now we're making sense So don't worry. You'll find jordan peterson and go back to that church or at least your kids Well, maybe or whoever's beyond jordan peterson I told her I could relate. She told me she liked that the pastors here sounded like her only better She told me she liked that the pastors here sounded like her and they encouraged me to be better I asked her what that meant and she told me that I had to understand that it wasn't easy out there That her job was stressful and that holding these seats for her friends who are always late was stressful Let the friends come to church on time. Don't save them seats if they want to come they'll get there No, but i've got to do my thing to get my friends here Like I've told this story before I was at a church that went from 250 to a thousand within a couple of years And you know, then you're saving seats and it's not much fun. It's Plenty of seats at living stones I promise I won't wear leather pants or skinny jeans When her gang showed up three songs in five of them were wearing the hat And all around the church that is the story of the congregation tells from beneath their hats that finally There are clergymen who look familiar who offer a message that relates to their actual lives. They're bringing the worlds together right There and you notice in the joe rogan conversation too and with um with ladder men So christianity, there's just way too judgmental and hypocritical when it comes to sex But apparently the sin that carl lenz has now violated cheating on his wife. Well that that one's still Well dogma seems to be dogma for everyone well molesting a child that one's dogma All of this openness. Well, the openness isn't quite as open as you imagine. There's plenty of dogmas around it There's plenty of rules around it And it's just just the rules that I believe in are obvious and the other rules aren't obvious who could believe in them Because we understand pluralism, right? Joel was just a teenager when that happened and he'll answer any question about his grandfather He tells me that he considered changing his name that he wanted nothing to do with him or any of it Also that he believes that jesus probably eventually forgave old frank because that's what jesus does What is striking about this is how admiral admirable it is to answer questions about something so ugly But it's also inherent to joel's christianity people sin we all sin But as time went on joel found his calling writing most of hillsong's music and shepherding into a shepherding it into global success One day joel was in manhattan and there was a rainstorm. He sought refuge under a canopy that happened to be at a salvation army headquarters Do a little research on salvation army and look into their history very interesting organization, uh, by the way, they're a church Which was maybe a sign he was struck by the idea that hillsong might make a go of it in a city like this That a city like this picture him surveying the miscreants walking by under their umbrellas might really need hillsong And he walked around for the next few days and all he saw were signs confirming his sign He called up carl who was now living in virginia with laura now his wife and said what if we were to start hillsong in new york What if we were to start hillsong in new york and now they're five years later and they're surrounded by 8 000 congregants every sunday size validates, right There in the green room. We talked about faith that for a few minutes about how the media Made fun of people who have faith You see now we're back to the cold war that that christians are like everybody else just prudish Well things have changed now christians are unlike everybody else because they're evil Well in some states more than others Are certain kinds of christians I told them I wouldn't make fun of them at least not for having faith I told them I was in fact now running late to get home to for a time of of of sucot Which is beginning that evening She's jewish You know carl said We had taken off his he had taken off his t-shirt and was now just wearing a tank top and a gold chain and drinking water And every tattoo on his arm saluted me people always forget that jesus was jewish joel joel and laura nodded Jews don't I told them Laughed but I was the only one I came back the next week and the week after and one sunday morning after that I thought would be my last time in church. I woke up and felt strange and unexpectedly Bodily need to put my hands in the air This needs to be in a room where people fanatically wouldn't worry about a soul To hear from carl that he most definitely had answers to all of the questions I told my husband I was short some reporting and headed out to montclair The first time I went to church I was 14 and I went with my father Who had begun accompanying his girlfriend who was who um, it was a catholic service So we were asked to kneel which I knew from attending an actual orthodox yeshiva On weekends was not a thing that jews were ready really supposed to do My father whispered to me that he eased his guilt by saying the I can't say it because i'm raised dutch calvinist, but jacob knows Under his breath and maybe I should try this too. It's sort of like namon, you know kneeling when he goes in with the king but dad has a new girlfriend and she's catholic so Years later I mentioned this in casual conversation with a hasidic rabbi I knew and he told me that this was the easiest explanation for why I had continued to resist religion I had let my soul become infected by a place I was not supposed to go and which had made it so that I would not submit to laws that alternatively bored and appalled me Make sense. I nodded Ah, so what's going on in her? What's going on in her why is she suddenly attracted to this church of cool what's in her wiring? What that rabbi didn't know was that my soul had already been Infiltrated prior to that day in a church with my father Just a year before i'd been in the parking lot of big bobs of bobs big boy on saturday night after a movie About six of us waiting for one of our parents to pick up pick us up in a minivan. We sat on the road Tertariers in the in the empty lot a woman in her 20s approached us She crouched down at our level and I remember not a single detail of her appearance Only that she had squarely appropriated She had squarely appropriate. She was squarely appropriate for 1988 in a long island parking lot She told us that she had a good time She told us she saw what a good time we were having and that it made her feel so good to see us having a good time she told us hey It might be that we don't always feel this way. She wanted us to know That when that happens there was a god and we could reach out to him and he would be there We nodded the polite nod of eighth graders and we tried to smile and laugh until she left Which she did as soon as she told us this message that was There was no pan that was it. There was no pamphlet. No address. No follow-up. No hat by now in my memory I recognized her warm guileless Guileless in that hillsong way. She was evangelical Only years later did I realize she was a christian but there in the dark once she finally walked away We laughed at what a loser she was I had been to an ultra-orthodox camp I attended a Hasidic high school for a year before everyone agreed that it was a terrible idea I did the remainder of my sentence at a modern orthodox high school I had immersed in I was immersed in a mikvah I had she's already I won't say it that way I have climbed massada more than once I have stuck notes in the cracks of the western wall I have fasted on yam kapoor in the throes of post-modern a post-partum depression I sat on a bathroom floor and begged god for peace not quietly But loudly my husband on the other side of the door holding our baby and asking If he should call someone if maybe we needed to get help I didn't realize it at the time But in that parking lot, I was having the most religious experience I would ever have in my life I think about that woman all the time So what is religion again? Pastor carl and I met at the corner a cafe in montclair, new jersey Montclair is not in new york. It's in new jersey. New jersey is a very important state I want you all to know that important people have been born there including me Cafe in montclair where his irregular presence carl wore a black tank top a gray sweatshirt worn flashdance style collar chopped Tanktop straps exposed the gold chain some silver wrist cuffs a gold rolex passed down by his grandfather His sweatpants were pushed up to just below the knee it was raining but it wasn't cold He walked in and spent a few minutes talking to the servers about their lives Over the course of my time with carl. What was most striking to witness was how grateful people were simply to have Asked how um how a struggle is going how good it feels to have someone to share in the pain of an answer So let's get to it abortion breaks his heart, uh-oh, uh-oh We're into the evangelical propositions the evangelical statements. We're into We're gonna have to talk about abortion and he's gonna have answers Is the gay thing gonna come up? Well, we're still on abortion Ah, there it is And everyone but with footnotes Earlier in the evening it came out that a male leader of the new york choir was in a committed christian relationship with a male singer in the choir I like how she but I could a committed christian relationship Why did you use that word Whether or not this was an open secret within the church it was not it was not completely clear But when it came out publicly joel's father pastor brian was forced to clarify out loud that yes The church is against two men in a relationship A particular kind of relationship These two men in particular are amazing human beings carl continued and he starts to cry at this at how painful this was For everyone involved. He's an easy crier and the memories are hard for him Which is probably why he's a really effective pastor He is able to connect emotionally with people And we got a picture of justin Anyway, i've read a good bit of this. I don't want to Read the whole thing for you, but it goes all the normal places and it hits all the normal points Okay, so what's the job of a pastor well of an evangelical pastor It's to embody and deliver the life you've always wanted And we see all these things going going back and forth transference counter transference. You can put it into psychological terms He's like me No, he's the ideal You're pursuing his family is sort of roped into the project. Maybe happily maybe not happily laura his wife Certainly knew what she was getting into if they met at well getting into to a degree Who of us when we're young really know what we're getting into? He has his she's the first lady and some of the same dynamics happen. She Leads the bible study, but of course in a church that size. It's all different But again all of the dynamics, you know He's he's the he's the man the men want to be and he's the man that the women want to be with and the The better he is with respect to his marriage the more attractive he is and you see all of these cross currents happening again and again and And and in a sense it's him doing this means that this can happen to me if if carl can establish new life Then he can deliver it to justin in the bathtub of of a of a nix basketball player Now they'd really be something if he could deliver a championship to the nix when's the last time the nix won a championship But this isn't only about religion, right Look at jordan. I mean why what the similar things happened with jordan and jordan's rise and this doesn't mean you should be Allergic to it. Just recognize the dynamic. It's all there You know rock stars end up in rehab now, of course People read that a certain way when jordan was in rehab and you noticed all of the slight deception though Jordan peterson's in rehab what made you think he was an alcoholic? No, he's not an alcoholic But but yet others said hey, he was a mental health professional He should not have been unaware of benzodiazepine And the I mean that was quite well documented and so surprise come on We're all vulnerable. We're all weak You know the doctor gives us something and we think about it and do we want to take a pill and on and on we go? And so the the pastor embodies the archetype and then falls But you don't really fall out of the archetype falling is is sort of part of the same story And it was supposed to embody wisdom and strength And he stood up to aggressive neomarxism. He was our hero He would go to jail to defy his employer and he'd launch a hunger strike to avoid the state-mandated Zur the evil pronoun but notice with a rather Well, let's say with a better story the story affords the trip to the underworld and the story affords the trip to the underworld for For carl lenz and the story affords a trip to the underworld for jordan peterson And now a priest's story is a little bit different. What is the priest designed to do? What is the building designed to do if you look at this magnificent altar and the Statuary and the symbolism and all of this going on Is this any less psychological than the smoke machines and the lights and the music now? You might prefer one and critique one and and there's plenty of critique that you can have iconoclasm critiques the the the symbolic way in a way and the Symbolic way critiques the iconoclasm but symbolism happens and all of this Direct machinery that we have to to put people on stage and put people on youtube and turn us into beings of light We're delivering to the people salvation. Well, we're gonna have to think about What do we mean by that crazy word salvation salvation from what salvation for what? Salvation towards something. Why are we using directional? mechanisms Now back to the back to the joe rogan gary lauderman Conversation and again that I didn't think it was a particularly good conversation But it was laden with areas that i'm very interested in and part of what went on is that you know I hear this from some of you too sometimes well what we really need to do to save the world is Is fill it with psychedelics? Okay Did psychedelics save the americans from the europeans? I mean the americans before columbus was was was you know, this is a utopia if Exactly exactly what type of salvation does this do these experiences afford? Well, and and I thought I thought rogan was quite interesting in this and he said well Whenever you're whenever and he was talking about carl lenz, you know, whenever you're Whenever you're you're getting you're getting high on your own pr you know you take a psychedelic and the the little creepy crawlies within your Imaginary will come up to you and then take you down a notch or two so you won't be too big for your britches Okay, make you make you a little bit more humble but The problem isn't that we don't have these experiences It's that we don't learn from them Well, the psychedelics will make you learn from them really and if this was the case wouldn't we just find people who had been taking psychedelics outperforming everybody else on whole different ranges and scales Why didn't they win? Well, they didn't win because the government okay It's it's it's not really a credible answer and I'm not trying to dismiss psychedelics, but I tell you why I don't have a lot of faith in them because Because and and then they go on well religion and they they invoke a bunch of tropes with well religion Well, that's all the dogmas. Well, you mean the propositional truths well, I don't find you two any more able to communicate effectively or to construct anything without propositional truths either and You know Peugeot's tweet about you're gonna have a you're never gonna construct anything using basically reactive Reactive metaphors and analysis against things because you need constructive things and in order to have constructive things You're gonna need propositions in there And the truth is if we'd have if we were to kind of clear away some of the tropes You've got plenty of dogmas beneath it I like what Laderman said about he was looking for the religion that isn't seen as religion and that's good because in many ways once Christianity and secularity come, you know thinking about Tom Holland's contribution to this Well now suddenly we sort of see religion, but we're still not seeing the religion under our normal practices Even in a religious atmosphere. Why is everyone wearing the same hat? Why is why is everyone so into the clothes? What's what's with all of this and this this woman who grew up in an Orthodox Jewish tradition that wasn't into the clothes Ah, but they were different clothes and and you know, even if you're in a much more dowdy Evangelical church well there's different there's different status around clothes and you're not gonna get rid of the hierarchies and and Everything has to be embodied in some ways and so the symbolism will happen and and all of these things will go the drugs the drugs well, I Remember listening to something. I think it was on I forget what podcast one of the early podcasts that I used to listen to before I listen got into all of these newfangled podcasts You know the drugs the chemicals we put in our mouths just initiate other chemicals in our brains And so you can initiate chemicals with chemicals, but you can initiate chemicals with with a picture You can initiate chemicals with a look you can initiate chemicals with a relationship You can initiate chemicals with a memory, you know the fact that we sort of Differentiate thought from chemicals. Well, then we've got the two worlds and and again We're sort of putting the worlds together, but what we're realizing is that well there's a meaning crisis that has to be that has to be dealt with and None of these issues are really going to go away You know, so Joe Rogan talks with his friend who friends who go to Christian churches And he has a lot of respect and admiration for him and Rogan's an interesting guy You know, he'll he'll He's he's chameleon in a way and that's part of what makes him so interesting In a way and that's part of what makes him such a good interviewer he can sort of move into the He's got he's got sufficient members of his consciousness Congress to to slot them into the seat and so he can be the druggy he can be the cool guy he can be the MMA wrestler he can be the you know That's that's part of that's part of his skill and part of what happens if you're an actor and a comedian is you is you? figure out how to embody these things with your body and with your persona and Rogan's good at this but You know, so he's got friends who go to church and his respect and admiration They're good people and and again and again and again, I hear all this wistfulness about community But but but it seems sort of flat food footed and and unrealistic because well What does it actually take to have a community? Part of the reason that adultery doesn't wash in these communities is because adultery is just dramatically Destructive to communities and well all these churches they're sort of regulating sex But I'll tell you sex can take apart a community faster than anything else And and so Rogan here is is sort of enjoying the you know mocking people like like Carl like Carl Lentz, but I Don't see Joe Rogan promoting adultery And And that's true again and again I see people who are you know mocking the the prudishness of of Christian communities in terms of their dogmas, but They're not living like libertines. There are people out there living like libertines, but the consequences are obvious They can't they can't maintain a stable marriage They have trouble maintaining community who wants to be around these people if they're always gonna be hitting on Be hitting on their friends or them and and hitting on is you know even the even the other YouTuber who was the former worship pastor said exactly what I said before that if you have any Community that has any sufficient level of intimacy there's going to be sexual tensions within it and The men are gonna be hitting on the women and the women are gonna be hitting on the men and unless you actually have strong Rules and norms that address these things you're not gonna be able to keep that fire in the fireplace There's an old evangelical trope isn't it but it's just true you know you know if if if Joe Rogan has a whole bunch of Of hot starlets in his studio and winds up sleeping with them after the session What do you think his wife is gonna do? Well, why is that? Well, why can't we be open about that? Well, why can't we be open about it look into that question? You know It was very interesting because in some ways Joe Rogan's sort of mocking Carl Lentz about his his dick root and all that stuff and again, Joe Rogan has a real point but Jordan Peterson's point about lipstick and high heels in the workplace same goes for church and it goes both ways There's a rather prominent evangelical Journalist who is a graduate of Calvin College who wrote a little bit of a snide piece and religious News service about you know hot pastor in his skinny jeans, but it's like yeah Yeah, you know point taken and all these talking to women up there and what they're wearing This is you know, again, I gotta go back to Peterson in that vice interview because Peterson was honest and And upfront about this stuff and even though you know not unlike Carl Lentz Even though he can't necessarily embody every archetype perfectly and certainly will fail as do I as will I? This is the nature of human of humanity Woe to him to whom the stumbling blocks come Jesus says and Jesus was right but Peterson in that vice interview was dead on right We don't want to talk about this stuff and I have to find tempted to make a clip out of it because when I when I know when I make clips of Peugeot some of the Peugeot community get a little nervous because Vanderklaas horning in on the clips but sometimes Jonathan says some things and it's like I gotta I Remember it but I want to find it again because when Jonathan was talking about the it was it was in a it was in a nursery rhyme or something But basically the thing we can't talk about there are reasons we can't talk about things and sometimes it's important We not talk about things it Everything can't be out there on the surface some things need to be concealed and hidden and and some things need to be up there And reality is like this and the patterns lay themselves out and Peugeot is right, but you know We've all got those things don't we? Joe Rogan wants to save the world by giving away mushrooms well contemporary Christian contemporary worship basically does that without the chemicals and And and so do sacramental churches because maybe you've had years and years and years of the Christian contemporary thing like my friend Warren Mills Who was started out with the with the dispensational and then went to the that went to the Charismatics and now is in a you know Old right Anglican place, and he says I've never loved it more To take on sort of this Spock like Protestantism that say we have no feels well even in the even in the frozen chosen Variety where we stand up at the same time when we sit down at the same time and we keep all of our emotions Inside even doing that process is an emotional process and you don't escape this stuff It's all there and it plays out in different ways Liturgy does this too. We all do this. It doesn't mean there aren't better and worse ways, but This is what we're navigating You know invoke the trope that Christians need to lighten up about sex It's so interesting cuz Gary Gary Lauderman that all of these groups They all talk like well the whole world out there seems like one repressed Christian One repressed Christian. What is that movie on Hulu? It's not a movie it's a whole series haven't watched it The handmaiden's tale like like like the whole country are all these frozen Christians and this and this this libertine sexual the 60s were 60 years ago I mean it's come on You're going you're at university and you're you're telling people that other cultures have had other rules about sex and this is somehow enlightening Because they're all little repressed evangelicals Maybe the thing is that that only people who are going out of church are the able the ones able to keep their life together Enough to get into college maybe that's the way it'll become and so the you know the trope of the university university professor expanding everybody's minds and I just Think well, that's it there's a lot of front-row mythology in there because I'll tell you if you if you talk to a lot of people who grew up in back row churches they know all about sex in church and pastors hitting on people and and and and and and Stuff doesn't go away It's not like people don't know about it You know it's always a trope to that people come to the pastor and the pastors live these sheltered existences and it's like I Don't live a shelter's existence at all people come into my office and tell me the most amazing things that are true and about their Lives that you wouldn't believe and I can't talk about them, but there it is It's just fun pointing out the hypocrites isn't it Got this some Jonathan Heights happiness hypothesis scandal is great entertainment because it allows people to feel contempt a Moral emotion that gives feelings of moral superiority while asking nothing in return with contempt you don't need to right the wrong as with anger or flee the scene as with fear and disgust and Best of all contempt is made to share Stories about our moral the moral failings of others are among the most common kinds of gossip They are a staple of talk radio and they offer a ready way for people to show that they share a common moral orientation We're all being prudes together when we tisk tisk about his adultery and hey, believe me and I'm sure his wife You got a feel for his wife even that even the mistress goes on good merit. I'm sorry, you know And and wasn't something Donald Trump's mistresses Apologizing, you know, and it's I don't know. I think if I was them I'd probably have some really harsh words where to tell them to go do with their apology, but This is the mess that we're all in isn't it? This isn't new Tell an acquaintance a cynical story that ends with both of you smirking and shaking your heads and voila you've got a bond Well, well, why can't we create these these stable communities just out of scandal no scandals part of it and I'll tell you I go into plenty of churches and Back when we were having a lay preacher training when we could meet together It's just a staple of sermons to to to to portray this we know better scandal and to tisk tisk about the people not in the room and I always call the The the preachers that are training and that say this is a cheap way to build a bond but it won't hold You need something you need something bigger and and the bond isn't those sinners out there The much stronger bond are the sinners in here in terms of in my heart Because actually you might be able to get someplace So invoke the trope that Christians need to lighten up about sex and the fun of pointing out the hypocrites these guys Have plenty of codes and dogmas about sex. How does Joe Rogan feel about adultery? How about his wife? How many celebrities are in open marriages? How well does that work really over the long term? Thou shalt not overtly claim Superiority there's a deeper one in our culture. It's the God of it's the God of equality Then we all understand it and that's what scandal and pointing out hypocrisy is all about Sinners in the church including the pastors what upholds multiple values communicate these values through what they do Liturgy and worship and norms and hats and what is and isn't permitted and so they're modulating and Modifying all of those things in real time and they're getting some things right and they're getting some things wrong and they're they're they're helping people You know try and do some things but it's it's got it's got limits But it's it's got it's got limitations and yeah pick your favorite tradition and your tradition to in your tradition to call out and you know before If you read your email and you read your comments and you listen to the people following your channel You got to really watch the smirk and the snark You know because It's easy to get smirky and snarky over Tim and Jamie Baker and then someone comes up to you and says My parents became Christians because of them That saved their life and their marriage And get smirky and snarky about Joel Osteen and then I'll get a note from someone who you know I Go to Joel Osteen's church, and I listen to your videos That wasn't an uncommon thing to have people who went actually to living stones here say I watched Joel Osteen before I come to church you and Joe say the same thing and I think Do we really? Kind of doubt it, but what commonality between me and Joel Osteen are you saying it ain't the hair What does failure look like What happens when you fail? Churches have to get a better way than just you know dismissing the pastor quietly What do we do when we fail? How are we treated? clergy continue to be treated differently held to a higher standard and that's good, but We've got one speed and two speed going on here if you haven't noticed And that's so often the way it is we're gonna get rid of the monks and so we kind of make the clergy the monks And we're gonna get rid of the celebracy so we saw it sort of elevate the clergy family And Justin Bieber comes to Karl Lentz and learns you know Wow Karl can really help me out with my celebrity and Lentz is a pastor to the stars and can really help with that but Then what happens when Karl stumbles and falls maybe Justin will Forgive him, maybe he won't because it feels to Justin like a sin against him. Maybe maybe not Maybe Karl and Justin will get together and they'll look at each other and Karl look at Justin and say hey, it's still Jesus. I Was never your God to the degree that you put me on a pedestal You put me there because you needed me there But I never belonged on it and one of the things you learn as a pastor is those people that put you on a pedestal They'll kick you they'll kick the pedestal out from under you just as fast They put you on a pedestal because they need you there. They need a little God up close a little God That's a little bit more relatable one. They can come around but then when they find that you're an insufficient God The good pastor will point and say yeah, I always was and I played that role for you to a degree Maybe a little bit voluntary Maybe a little bit voluntarily maybe Maybe you cast me in this and you shouldn't have but we're all doing things. We shouldn't don't we? Ideals incarnated we need them back and forth and then when we learn we can't fulfill them Well, then we begin to understand what an ideal is for and what a real ideal is and why these things are located outside of the iron box of secularism and why in fact we have metaphysical systems and Imaginaries that afford things above and beyond what is incarnate but yet are not detached from them It's a short week because we've got Thanksgiving which means lesser sermon time which means lesser video time Although you might not have noticed it. So I'm not terribly disciplined But it's the beginning of Advent well What is Advent Advent's the beginning of the Christian calendar and it's a fasting There's a fasting and feasting seasons Advent is a fasting season and you'll notice especially in Evangelical churches, there's no Advent. We just rush right into Christmas We want to sing Christmas songs all the way to the 25th and then stop singing them then what we don't notice is that actually the feasting is supposed to start with Christmas and You do your vigil why you stay up late so you can start your end your fasting and start your feasting It's breakfast it's you're breaking the fast in the morning and you're celebrating the coming of the light and you're settled celebrating the the the incarnation of one who does not stumble Unlike your local pastor or YouTube celebrity who talks for hours on ends who will one way or another let you down as Warren mill says beware of you who meet your who meet your models and your heroes Advent is a time of fasting a time of anticipating a time of waiting a time of recognizing that all of our all of our All of our heroes in this world are insufficient The pastor preaching against sin as a sinner the pastor idealizing marriage commits adultery and The common lectionary begins with a little apocalypse. What's the little lectionary? What's the little apocalypse? Well in Mark this year as Jesus was leaving the temple one of his disciples said to him look teacher. What massive stones? impressive What magnificent buildings certainly here in the temple we have we have we have an eschaton an eschatological coming of of the Lord that will last so the temple the temple the temple They cried of the first temple in the book of Jeremiah Do you see all these great buildings replied Jesus not one stone will be left on another You see this amazing hill song church and in New York City with all the Celebrities and all the hats and all the cool music Ten years from now It'll be a shell Not one stone will be left on another everyone will be thrown down as Jesus was sitting on Mount olives opposite the temple Peter James John and Andrew talked to him privately tell us when will these things happen? Ha ha I want to game the system. What will be the sign that they are about to be fulfilled? Jesus said to them watch out that no one deceives you many will come in my name claiming I am he and will deceive many there's only one and it's not your pastor pastor might play that role Your priest might dispense the host but don't confuse the messenger for the genuine article Carl Reiner's great quote in the torment of ince of the insufficiency of everything attainable We come to understand that here in this life all symphonies remain unfinished Sorry, Justin Sorry Kanye Christian Church has been going back and forth on this ever since We have our own things we're dealing with now some notes from From Tim Keller 2014 our cultural frame. There's no moral authority other or higher than the self My personal happiness is the highest good Justin Bieber gets baptized comes out of the water a new man Yeah, new and still in process in The end the good of the individual always trumps the good of the community Oh, we're finding out some bitter fruit from that one If God number two does exist God the super thing He does for the benefit He does for our benefit to make this this good world to make this a good world to live in moralistic therapeutic deism Whatever meaning or happiness there is must be found in this material world Stephen Smith's paganism revisited So, where do we go with this it's time to land the plane it's time to end this video There are many ways into this My prayers for Carl and his family I genuinely feel for these people Will their marriage survive maybe it will maybe it won't How will their children remember this episode what will they take from it? What will they learn about the gospel? What will they learn about the church? I? Unlike many pastors kids Was not really scathed my father By virtue of Northside the church I grew up in my father by virtue of him Not really put on much of a pedestal Might be why I'm uncomfortable with a little pedestal sometimes y'all put me on Once we can no longer laugh at ourself even if there's a little bit of hurt in it and we're really in trouble, but This woman she has a couple of videos a little youtuber and You know less than a thousand less than a thousand views but big big views about You know some of these videos went viral YouTube will modify it monetize those suckers You Know oh these are these these are how we can avoid it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah all those things those tricks and hacks They work to a degree But all the other stuff she's saying it's true to celebrity pastors stop it yeah, but it's a function of the system So how do you avoid the system? well Look at Jesus did he avoid the system not entirely The crowds came to him spoke the truth to them, and they all ran away Even his inner circle didn't dare be at the cross You know so much of this is leaning towards okay, how can we How can we get beyond order sometimes some need to get beyond chaos What exactly is this Christian life How does it manifest John Van Dock yesterday in a phone call Asked a question about the manifestation of the resurrection in today's world and maybe John and I'll have a conversation about that soon He doesn't listen to my video so I can say this about him When Justin Bieber comes out of that bathtub, what does he want? What does he want? He's not even sure when when Carl Lentz is showing up in his skinny jeans and his ripped bod and his his you know shorts pulled way down low and now what does that itch in Carl Lentz's life that That Wanted to that needed itching that you know again you look we say well his wife is beautiful. That's not it's not just beauty People with very beautiful wives commit adultery It's not just it What is that thing that what is that thing that he wants that that he tastes some that he tastes of to a degree when the The crowds are around him and and the lights are on and the church grows and success There's a few things quite as dangerous as success but Few things, you know more meaningful than chasing success Can we embody it? Can we can we really hold it? No Here's the thing again to break up that iron box of secularism If this is all there is Then all there is is finally chasing. This is CS Lewis's argument. You can find it mere Christianity and in other places Then all there is is chasing CS Lewis suggests well, what if What if what Carl was looking for first in this Beautiful woman he met in his training school and then in the joy of having a family but didn't quite find it Boy that hurts for them Didn't quite find it and so went out looking forward and other women. They're probably more Or looked at it in the mirror image of himself and the nice clothes and the ripped bod and and The and being on top of the status hierarchy when it comes to pastors and celebrity Because to be a Joe Rogan gets out of the stuff, right to be a celebrity of the celebrity That's the you know, you're that's the that's the hierarchy of the hierarchies to be the guru to the celebrities Billy Graham sipped on that To be the spiritual advisor to the president Rick Warren Bill Hybels dangerous dangerous stuff much safer to be a Pastor in a dying church and a Small little YouTube channel. Yeah, don't don't too quickly. Wish me a million subscribers But These things come some Not too many people it's what a hierarchy is about but they come so What is this? What is this thing that we desire? Why do we come looking for Jesus? What is this itch in our souls that can't seem to be met in this world? CS Lewis suggests It's because We're here for another we're here in anticipation of the next life and again if the materialists are right and This is wrong then What was me then? Maybe Carl should you know say to his wife? Hey, I'm gonna You know some reports Hey, I'm gonna chase tail from now on Yeah, I talked to plenty of people who've chased plenty of tail that gets old It's the same question and whether you call it religion or don't call it religion all this stuff is boiling down to the same thing We're struggling to talk about it. We're struggling to conceptualize it We're struggling to to to create mental and verbal systems that adequately encompass all of it And so that's why you're here that's why I'm here That's why we're talking about these people every now and then we taste it and it's like there's there's some of it I want more it sends such it's the it's it's Lewis's joy nostalgia business so Yeah, pray for this dear family Deeply sorry that they have to go through what they go through My prayer is that this will be a refining Passage for them and that with all of this pain they come out of it and Deeper stronger better people that's my prayer