https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uLtrbAIXA88

 Sorry, I commandeered his office. Well, tell me a little bit about yourself. Yeah, so I am a Christian filmmaker. I'm based out of Phoenix. I grew up here and spent the first 21 years of my life kind of in this weird conservative Christian bubble. Okay. But I went to college in the Bay Area. Okay. I lived in Oakland. I went to San Francisco State and I was there for about two years trying to get my degree in cinema from SF State. So, yeah, I... It was weird because I grew up going to church. That's like all I knew. My parents didn't really grow up in the church at all. My dad, he kind of was in a household that didn't really do anything with spirituality and my mom was definitely not in like a conservative family that was like had all these Christian values. So I got to see how Jesus changed their lives in this weird way. I'm like totally transformed them in different people, but it didn't really become real to me until I was 18. So like between 18 and 21 is where I really started, you know, making my faith real to myself and doing that in this Christian bubble. And then when I moved out to San Francisco, it felt like this weird transition of being able to say, okay, I'm in a totally different environment. Yeah, I mean it's so funny because before I left there was people in my church like be very careful. Like, you know, they're crazy out there and there's always a part of me that was sort of like, I don't know, turned off by that thought like, yeah, they're different, but whatever. So I kind of took that as an opportunity to like see what it meant to be a Christian outside of like a building. So I spent two years there kind of just not going to church, but still following God and sort of engaging people outside of my faith and conversations, which was really interesting and I started learning a lot more about how other people thought and kind of getting insights about even my religion from other people, which I found really interesting. So after two years there, I ended up doing a year abroad in Australia. Yeah, so I lived in Melbourne for a little while and when I moved out there it was, I didn't really know what I was doing. I had two bags, an Airbnb, like knew nobody and just kind of went out there and I didn't even know if I was supposed to be there. Like when I went to San Francisco, I really felt like God was calling me there and that's what I was supposed to do and with Australia, it was like, I have to move and God, if you want me to do it, just like let it happen. And it did, so I just kept saying yes and then when I got there, I eventually met a friend who, I don't know why I knew this, but like very early on I had this feeling that he wasn't going to like that I was a Christian. And so I was just sort of like, God, you know, if, I'm not going to talk about Christianity to him, but if you, if you want me to talk to him, if he starts asking me questions, I'm just going to answer them. And so, he did, he started asking me questions, found out I was a Christian and he's this, he's a very militant new atheist sort of guy. And so he started asking me questions and I was answering them, but like not very confidently. And one thing led to another and he eventually gave me Christopher Hitchens book. Yeah. And I remember, I distinctly remember when he gave it to me because I'm sitting in this lecture hall and he hands me this book with this white background, these black and red letters scrawled all over the covers. And I just had this wave of fear come over my whole body. And I'm in that second. I'm like just thinking there's something there could be something in this book that changes my mind about God and who Jesus is and it terrifies me. And in the next second, I was like, well if I'm that scared, I probably should read it. Because before I was, before when I, before I was 18, I was a very apathetic person. I didn't really care about anything. And I didn't really care about the truth. But when I came to God, like the truth became the most important thing to me. And so as I'm starting, I've never been introduced to atheism. I've been introduced to other spirituality and kind of have an idea of like, I have a good idea of what Christianity is, but even then it wasn't as in depth as it is now. But yeah, so I was kind of hearing some of these new atheists and some of the tenants that they stood for. I was like, those are actually really good things. Like the pursuit for truth and you know, believing in things with evidence. I'm like, well, yeah, that that makes sense. So I started, so I read Christopher Hitchens book and that started me on this weird path into this dive into atheism. And after I read his book, it didn't change my mind. Like I wasn't like, I'm an atheist, but I did see a lot of truth in what he said and I had a lot of questions and it kind of, yeah, it started a lot of questions in my head and one thing led to another and eventually like I just kind of got to the point where I'm thinking, well, what if he's right? What if I'm an idiot? And I just believed all these things and what if he's right? And that was just a thought and it kind of passed and I actually had this moment one time one night after I had that thought I go to sleep and I woke up and I had a pain in my side and I started praying immediately and it slowly started to subside. I'm like, why am I even praying? And then as I think that it like another pain hits me even harder and I start praying harder and there was like this realization like okay, I still believe in God, but why? And then the the Trump election happened and it kind of totally made me lose consciousness. It kind of totally made me lose confidence in everything I knew because we were told so often that Trump could never be president like I wasn't super into politics. I'm more into politics now, but in Australia, they just care so aggressively about our politics and they're always looking to us for answers for Americans. American politics? Really? Yes. I watched the news one time with a friend and it was I'm not joking. It was literally the royal cat's birthday in American politics. That was it. I was like what are you doing? It was a it was very weird experience, but they care so aggressively about our politics and so they were always asking me questions. I had no idea, but I just I knew as soon as Trump won that that was going to be a whole different ball game of just people asking me questions and like and I think for me too, it was just like why we're constantly told that this guy was never going to win yet he won and why were we so willing to believe that story without questioning it? Yeah, good questions. And so I yeah, I sort of just yeah, I mean there was a whole other set of things that built up to it, but I lost all confidence in what I knew and it sort of led me to this literal insanity where I just I couldn't believe anything. I didn't know what to believe and I kind of had to start all over strip everything away and just say I'm gonna believe whatever I can intellectually stand behind. Interesting. Yeah, because I when I came to the faith it was very experiential. Like I had this experience with God. I had seen other people walking and I'd seen the change in their lives and I took the Bible and Christianity as this way of you know, this is sort of the set of rules and it's kind of a way to live and if you follow the way that they say this should happen. So I took it as this weird science experiment in a way of like, okay well it says to do this and maybe if I live and actually believe like that and if there's change I'll keep doing it. But then you get to the question of well then what makes your faith any different than a Mormon or a Muslim and you're like that's a good question and I didn't have those answers. So I think I stripped everything away and started with philosophy and just like went to the very question of is it even reasonable to believe that there's a God? And just kept digging at that question until I can get to a place where I felt like I had an answer that I could stand behind besides whatever anyone else was telling me. And then when I got to that place just kept building up and trying to learn more about religions and figuring that out and that sort of led me into this weird this like constant consumption of information and trying to figure it all out sort of on my own led me to more insanity. But I think at the end of the day when I kept digging and finally got out the other end it gave me this clarity. So like in some ways atheism drove me insane, but it also is the thing that brought me out of it because I finally took it seriously. Mm-hmm. But yeah, I definitely got I mean I was I was watching everything from atheists, buddhists, muslims, christians, I definitely got into all the christian apologetics and the debates and just trying to really take away all of this emotional stuff and just really figure out what was actually true. And yeah, so it was kind of cool and I eventually I'm still a christian obviously and why obviously. Well, I I mean I think if I what well, do you have non-christians who reach out to you and want to talk to you? Oh, yeah, mostly. Yeah. Oh, yeah Really? Yeah, mostly non-christians. That's interesting. Yes That's interesting because I feel like I I'm in a I'm in an industry where there's a lot of non-christians because I work in comedy and then I work in like documentary filmmaking and narrative filmmaking. So there's a lot of people who have very different perspectives than me and yeah, sometimes I feel like it's hard. Some people are really into that stuff. I think with the Jordan Peterson stuff and the you know, all of that movement it's become more like cool to talk about religion and stuff, but good point but uh, I don't know I feel like a lot of a lot of people don't want to kind of dig they want to hold on to whatever and they'll they'll sit and argue it but when it's like oh watch this no one wants to watch it. I'm the only weirdo who's like Give it to me But yeah, so I I yeah, so I'm still a christian but I definitely have a totally different perspective of what Christianity is and I think I got to a point where I'm still questioning I'm like, okay, but You know, what does that mean to be a christian? Right and those are questions to keep asking your whole life long. Yeah Yeah Yeah, I mean, yeah, it was a very humbling experience I think and Why? Yeah, because I think for so long growing up in this bubble where you're You're with this people who believe the same things you do it can easily become like oh, I'm right I'm right and I know I'm right and I can understand well I think for a while I couldn't even understand why someone would not believe in god until I read Christopher Hitchens book. I had no Conception of why anyone would not because I just always did But like finally being able to see their perspective go. Oh, okay. I still believe in god, but I totally get why you wouldn't and being able to say Oh, maybe i'm wrong Is not something I think our culture is very good at but was definitely not something I am very good at We don't like being wrong. We like being right if we think we were right we change our minds. So no Yeah, all of us. Well, that's I think that's the thing. We have so many different perspectives and we're always arguing um but like ultimately Somebody's right If something's true like somebody's right, maybe both of us are wrong Maybe if we're partly right or wrong, but like just because I personally believe something doesn't make that ultimately true and Yeah, getting to that place where you can admit that is Um Not easy No Well, you and I we have a we have a short half hour time frame So I'm wondering if I don't eat up all your time with my questions So the time is yours got to quit before the next guy comes in at four I locked the room so we won't have somebody just jumping in but Okay. Yeah, sounds good. Um, yeah, I mean, uh, so basically, I'm think Kind of sharing that story kind of led me into a place where now that I do work in industries that are Filled with people who think very differently than me. I think it sort of prepared me to be able to be in those industries and um be a christian without feeling ashamed good, um yeah, I Because I think I was never ashamed to be a christian until I left home and um Kind of getting to that place and understanding what people actually um Like how they saw christians was totally different and um if I didn't go through that Questioning and didn't really dig for myself. I wouldn't be able to sit and stand and say hey I'm a christian because of these things and um I mean, I i'm very moderate in my political beliefs but there's some things that i'm very conservative about and that people can hear and just immediately think that you're you know A bigot or an idiot or something but because I have that background where I can defend it. I feel comfortable in that way and it it's sort of cool to be surrounded by people who don't believe what you believe too because Um, it tests your own assumptions or it's You're not just sitting around with this confirmation bias. You have people Challenging you and trying to figure out Like in some ways when i'm sitting and i'm talking with people i'm not just sitting and arguing trying to win them over i'm trying to see if this actually makes sense and if this holds up and Find where i'm wrong. So that's been pretty cool Good, but good. Yeah No, that's cool. So how did you how did you how did you find my channel? Were you watching jordan peterson? No, no my friend christian Oh christian. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah Yeah He um, because we were kind of talking about this stuff and I was Um, we were talking about podcasts and he mentioned you and he's like, I don't know you might not like it But go ahead and go ahead and listen to me And so I listened to the first half an hour. I was like, oh my gosh. I'm obsessed Oh my yeah, because it's just so So much information and so I don't know i'm i'm a huge philosophy nerd And like I you know, I love learning and I love the way that you sort of talk about Talk through things and take all of these different pieces and try to kind of put them together In this way that makes sense of the whole world instead of just like one slice of it but and I like that you don't Talk with all of this Just like words to where it's being outside of a church for so long that we talk and all of these like Christian lexicons. It's like nobody knows what you're talking about You have no idea and there's so many times where I'll have like atheists or something very clearly Tell me this is what christians believe and like well, that's not true. But okay And christians do the same thing Exactly. No exactly. It's so true Um, but I don't know. Um, so he got he showed me the podcast and so But Um, yeah, it's been cool. I I mean I like what you do I think it's really cool that you do stuff like this. I watched his conversation with you Which was fun. That was fun. Yeah that you Like just bring randos from the internet who are like obsessed with your podcast I don't think most people would do that Well, I you know, i'm a pastor so This is what I do. I talk to people and people, you know people have various ideas of what pastors do What I do here on the podcast is what I do So I figured why not do it on youtube and let people know what pastors do we sit and we listen to people and and people come People are them are all over the place and it's it's quite amazing And so as a pastor, it's really cool to just meet all these different people with different perspectives and I enjoy it thoroughly Yeah, I don't know if all pastors Do that I mean, i'm sure some and to an extent but Well, I think I this is what I think pastoring should be I think pastors should talk to people because That's how we learn by talking with people and it's also how We influence people so people people go and talk to their pastors part of the issue is that churches right now There's a big gulf between there's a few churches that are really really popular and they have thousands of people And there are many many churches that are really tiny and often they have bivocational pastors I'm a lucky person who is a full-time pastor in a small church. And so that Gives me more time I always tell people and they're looking for a church but think about a small church because You can get to know the pastor you can get to know the people and you can actually have and it's it's actually in the context of that church and the relationships that cool things can happen And if you just go to a huge church, he'll never get to know that pastor They'll he'll never have time and the small church go out for coffee with him. Take him out to lunch Find out what he thinks about share your heart with him. That's What part of it is your church pretty small? Okay, that's very small How many about 50 people on sunday morning 50 to 60? So it's pretty small. How long have you been pastoring it? 21 years Okay, why do you think it's stayed so small it's it been because i'm a crappy pastor I Because I spend my time talking to people on the internet no, it's it was small before that so It's churches. It's kind of hard right now in society for churches the Churches vary a lot depending on what's going on outside of the churches and so It's there there are some you know church Pastors study all kinds of things to try to figure out how to grow their churches and A lot of if you want to grow a church a lot of it is having a specific message at a specific place in a specific Time addressing a specific audience and you can grow a church big Especially the right kind of music And i've never majored in music at this church saying we're gonna hit this demographic group with this music now I don't yeah I don't do that. I've got plenty of books that say I should but Yeah, I don't know. It's a weird thing. I've I definitely have a weird Relationship with the church now after being because I spent three years out of it well two and a half but like I obviously i'm connected with the local church now I think it's good because I think trying to do it all on yourself is just gonna lead to insanity, but Um, there's so many things where I feel like We're not technically wrong For wanting to have good music or whatever, but I feel like it's just it sort of puts How to say this right it sort of puts I don't know. It's like they're selling jesus in a way that I feel like he's never packaged himself. That's right And so it's always that thing was like there's nothing wrong with it, but I just wish that we would Just stop trying to win people over and just I don't know. I don't know. It feels like That's exactly when jordan peterson says pastors are liars. That's exactly what he's talking about That pastors are trying to sell the success of their local congregation And there's reasons for pastors to be committed to that but that shouldn't be what pastors most directly want to do And it's a tension that pastors always have to deal with in their lives because obviously if you grow your church large You'll make more money. There'll be a success. You have all the status indicators And to and to say well, I have a church with 50 people in it and it's uh aging and declining and dying Well that just in the world just looks he says well, you must be a crappy pastor And there was this one grandmother of someone who used to go to this church and she'd come out of there on sunday She said I don't know why they can't get that man a better church Personally, I love it because if I had 500 people in here on sunday morning What would that mean in terms of how I could actually connect with people and meet? Visitors coming into the church and even so even with 50 people you can have two three Maybe four decent conversations on a sunday morning. That's all so It's you know It's complicated Yeah, no it is but I don't know it's interesting I I mean, I definitely I don't don't have animosity against the church as much as some people do but there are things that it's like I have to wrestle with and I think some of them are me issues and I think some of them are church issues And it's just finding the balance between them but the one thing that I do know is I I don't think I'd ever go back just being In that little bubble of just always being surrounded by People who believe the same thing to me. I just grew so much so much and have learned so much being outside of that so it's kind of cool to be able to Do like be a christian but not be that And be in filmmaking but not be that christian filmmaker that's just trying to You know stick to the the perspectives and that sort of thing But um, oh if you don't mind I kind of i'm actually working on a project right now. Can I plug it? Sure, go ahead Awesome. So it's a documentary about the tip free restaurant movement in the u.s um sort of why minimum wage Is fueling that movement and why restaurant owners are choosing to Go that way. Um, what's the tip free restaurant? I don't know anything about this Yeah, so basically restaurants are starting to include Gratitude into their pricing. Um, we're focusing on a restaurant in oakland actually and they're going to kind of be the main one But we're we're focusing on other restaurants in the u.s Who are sort of struggling with minimum wage and trying to survive in the changing markets? Well, some states have Some states have special minimum wage for restaurant workers where they don't actually make minimum wage and they're supposed to make it up on tips Other states like california They make the full minimum wage and tip is on top of that Exactly. So and that's where we're focusing Mostly on california. We're going to be talking about new york a little bit too and then a little bit in flagstaff, but um Basically the way that a modern tipping system is structured servers Make minimum wage or below depending on the state right and get tips and Um with their tips, even though they're the lowest hourly paid worker They're making the most money out of anyone in the restaurant including kitchen Employees dishwashers managers so when you have laws like california where you have A lot that says you can't pay anybody below minimum wage Even if they're making tips and you have other restrictions that stop them from distributing tips to pay other people within the restaurant and you have such low profit margins that make it really hard for um restaurant businesses to pay their kitchen employees a decent wage and it creates a huge disparity between front of house and back of house employees Really? So that's interesting. Yeah yeah, so a lot of restaurants are choosing to Go to a tip-free model to kind of uphold the spirit of minimum wage laws without um Breaking the law and there are restaurants that will say don't tip Mm-hmm. Yeah, so uh, i haven't been in one yet Well mcdonald's they don't they don't encourage it. Yeah well, um, so the restaurant that we're that um Mainly focusing on is located in oakland. I actually worked for it When I lived in oakland and they're called homestead restaurant They're in piedmont avenue and there's a couple other restaurants in oakland that has gone tip free And then danny meyers. He's a big restaurant guy in new york. He switched all of his restaurants to tip free back in 2015 And he's been fairly successful with it. So it's um, it's a really interesting topic and there's a lot to talk about but we're uh, We're we're trying to get support for the film. Um, we want to get it for the 2020 festival cycle Just to make the biggest impact in the conversation. So we launched a crowdfunding campaign, um earlier this month uh And it ends march 2nd. So if anybody's interested in the uh topic or wants to support christians and filmmaking Uh, you can find all the details about the project at indiegogo at www.indiegogo Project slash tipless t i p l e s s. Oh, that's very interesting Yeah, look at that a plug on my podcast about that Well, thank you cassidy i've got my next person coming in that's okay was delightful to talk to you Yeah, thank you so much. It was lovely talking to you and say hi to christian for me. I will I will for sure All right. Bye