https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=byShLqLzlh4

 Hello. Welcome to this special after hours live event. I am your host Cassidy with my co-host Catherine. I'm coming live from the Netherlands and she is live from Ontario. And yeah, we are here to talk about some of the live events and festivals. Catherine, did you want to say hi? Hi. It's good to see everybody. Probably most of you know me from Bridges. But if you don't, I am up in Ontario, Canada, as Cassidy said, and we've been looking forward to getting to talk about the upcoming events and whatever else people wanted to talk about. Yeah, that sounds great. So I was just on Paul's channel talking about my event that I run with Mathias that's happening in Germany. So if you want more details, you can definitely watch that video if you want or go to our website, which I think is in the link. But basically we've created this event where, you know, Bridges of Mean People can come and have conversations and build community. Paul will be there along with Burn Powers and John Van Dunk. And so it's been a fun little project. But Catherine, I'd love to give you a chance to kind of talk about your events, sort of how it came to be. I know you've been waiting quite a while for it to happen with COVID and everything. So, yeah, why don't you give a little more about your events and sort of the ethos behind it and why you're excited about hosting it. Yeah, yeah, we've been waiting like two years now. So I am very thrilled that it will be this September. Lord willing, if things don't get scuttled. Yeah, so it actually started out because my husband was like, it'd be so great to just meet with everybody. You know, there's all these people you watch on the Internet and you chat with on different forums, on YouTube channels or in Bridges of Meaning, and you chat with all these people. But it's so different when you're actually in person. And we thought, well, what kind of thing would we want to do? And essentially we're like, well, wouldn't it be great to get together Paul, Jonathan Peugeot, John Vervecky and somebody from like a local university. So we brought in Richard Mondrell, who's a professor of psychology, who has a or a philosophy who focuses on ethics and consciousness because we thought, well, great, that way we can bring in some like local thinkers, maybe draw in the community a little bit into the conversation too. And we love going to conferences. But the one thing that you always know that at least drives me crazy is you know that the speakers are talking with each other and they're like behind the scenes, like chatting before they get on stage and then afterwards they like process it together. And I was like, I just want to do all that on the stage because what I always want to do is be like a fly on the wall. Being like, but what do they talk about when they talk together after? Like what is that conversation? So basically the idea was let's get everybody together who we would love to listen to, love to chat with and sort of make those like fly on the wall conversations you want to listen to front and center, like make that the main event and make it so there's room for other people to be able to come in, you know, like throw in some questions, even sit on stage for a little while, but really make it focused on the conversation and that sense of connecting that you can't really get on the Internet. So that was sort of the ethos that we're going for, the motivator behind it. And like I really, I really love the spirit that we have on this like corner of the Internet where it for the most part, it really is about exploring other people's ideas, trying to build towards a new thought together, trying to really understand the person and how they see things the way that they do as opposed to like debating and trying to rip somebody's ideas down or that kind of mentality. And so I really do as much as possible want to be able to bring that spirit into the area where I live. So I live in Dryden, which is four hours away from Thunder Bay, but Thunder Bay is significantly larger than I'm like in a little town. It's like six thousand people. So Thunder Bay is the closest larger center. And my brother runs what's called Urban Abbey there. And so it used to be a church building. And then about, I don't know, maybe eight years ago, they took over the building, turned it into an abbey. And so it's just sort of the perfect setting for this because they already are trying to bring in people into the community, trying to make it a place for conversation and connection. And so it felt like a really good fit for the kind of conference we're looking to have. So that's basically the idea. Awesome. And so we have a Q&A page in the Discord for people who want to submit questions about the events or anything else. So feel free to go there and listen in and post questions if you have any. I did want to kind of ask you a couple more questions to kind of get started. What for you has been sort of like the rewarding parts of creating this event and then the challenges as well? And how have you seen that sort of fight kind of reflect your overall feelings about this movement and the importance of it? Well, I think the most rewarding part has been seeing how many people have gotten excited about it. You know, obviously the guys who are coming, Paul, John, Jonathan, Richard, there's a lot of energy there and like excitement about getting to spend time together, getting to talk to each other face to face instead of through the camera. I think there's a lot of excitement on their part, which obviously gets me excited. Oh, good. We pegged it right. Like that is something that they want to do. And then the people who have written in because they're going to be attending, just lots of people who are eager. One of the things that we did in designing the event was we really wanted to make it so that people could participate as much. So one of the options on the app, what's the form called? It's not an application form, registration form. One of the options on the registration form asked, do you want to volunteer and how do you want to volunteer? Do you want to do service or would you like to lead a discussion group or would you like to just greet people at the door? And there's just been a couple of people so far who have said, no, I don't want to volunteer. But almost everyone has said that they would like to volunteer and listed discussion topics they'd like to lead or ways that they could help, which for me has been super gratifying because obviously people really do want to be involved and they don't they don't want to just be sitting in a chair showing up and just sort of heads on a stick. They want to be involved, which I mean, that's what I love is when you really are creating a space that can host something that people are already wanting to do. There's already that sense of what they're wanting to move towards and be a part of. And so instead of feeling like I'm trying to come up with something, it's felt more like I'm figuring out the best way to posture myself so that I can create the space that people are actually looking to have, which at least for the people who have stuck there, it seems like we've done that successfully, which is really fun. I haven't planned an event of this scale before, so that's been definitely a challenge. I'm definitely like learning new things. So like setting up websites, I've done a little bit, but not as complicated before. You know, trying to organize like professionals to do like higher end filming so that we can produce it properly once it's done. Figuring out like musicians, because each evening we're going to have live musicians there for afterwards so that there's room for people to chat and eat food and have some good music to listen to. So organizing like four evenings of that, it's just been a lot more complex. So that has definitely stretched me. But. Oh, can you hear me? Oh, I was laughing, but no, I think, no, it's totally funny because I mean, I've worked in event production before, so I have some sense of what I was getting into before. But, you know, taking on something like this, it definitely it teaches you a lot. And I've just been surprised as well about how much the community wants to contribute. And there's just so much variety and different expertise that we have in this community. And we've actually been trying to connect with a lot of artists to kind of find ways to help showcase what they do, because I think that's a huge part of our community and a really big part of like embodying the fullness of what this movie like movement can be. And I just love the feedback that I've gotten from that and the support we've gotten from people there. So, yeah, I just love I love seeing that it's happening throughout the community. And I just love seeing the support people have to see this become live and grounded in reality and moving forward. Same. Well, let's start with the question we got first, which was all about COVID and vaccination requirements. I think this is probably a big question for anybody at all the events. And it's been kind of I think one of the big issues why the events haven't happened sooner. But I'll throw it off to you to start. You already made an answer in the in the actual event page, but give it to our live audience, people listening outside of us. So the question was, if you're coming up to Canada from America, do you have to use the ArriveCan app? Because some people don't want to have that app with them on their phone the whole time they're up there. It's a little weird. Feels a little disconcerting. So you have to have that. So essentially, the rules right now are you're only allowed to travel to Canada if you're double vaxxed. You do need to log your vaccine information into the ArriveCan app. If you don't want to have the app on your phone, you can you can do it on a computer and you can print it off and then bring the print off with you. Or you can have the app and just have the information on the app that you can show to the customs officer. But if you've been vaccinated and you do that, then there's no extra quarantining or testing or anything like that. At this point in Canada, they have removed the restrictions. So now you can fly if you aren't vaccinated within Canada. So before an issue was that some Canadians who weren't vaccinated couldn't fly. But that has for now been lifted, which is wonderful. That I'm praying will remain true through to the end of September, at least. But yeah, there are no ongoing masking issues or something. So you don't have to wear a mask at the event. There's no social distancing. I think that pretty much covers it for our event. Yeah. And for us, it seems like Germany has opened up the borders, particularly for other EU countries. I mean, if you're coming abroad, you can still come in. But I would say try to find like the most up to date information via the the websites. But from what I've seen, it looks like, you know, there aren't requiring vaccinations or proof of that, which is exciting because then it doesn't limit who can come. And we don't have any plans. We have an outdoor event mostly. There are some things that will be inside, but we're going to have an outdoor event. So we're not requiring masks or vaccines. But, you know, COVID is always a tricky thing, especially in live events. You got to be careful with it. It's really sensitive for some people. But, you know, I do love that it's it's becoming more accessible to do these things. But, yeah, I mean, COVID's actually affected your event quite heavily. Has that been difficult and a worry of, OK, when when are we going to be able to do this thing? Yeah, I mean, it certainly was a couple of years ago when it had to get cancelled and then, you know, kind of touching base with the speakers every few months being like, so do we think we could do it this fall? Could we do it this summer? How hopeful are we feeling? And to finally be able to feel like we don't we don't see the political landscape shifting over the next couple of months and it looks like it should be OK. We do have it earlier in September because sort of the last couple of years in Canada, as we move into the fall, it seems to be that's when the health officials get a little more concerned and want to be a little more restrictive with travel and and everything. So we were trying to time it so that it would be when the university students are in town. So all the new students at Lakehead, which is the local university, should be there. And I anticipate a handful of them will want to attend. But not so late that we're risking cancellations and that, you know, flights get locked down again and that sort of thing. So. Oh, my goodness, look who we have, a special guest for, you know, your regular host, Paul VanderKlay. Thank you for joining our live takeover of your demo. Can you hear me? Yes, it's going to be a terrible delay. The whole Wifi is crappy. Your video is a little delayed, but hopefully we can still hear you. Just fine. Oh, you're back. Hi, Paul, where are you coming from? I don't know if you can hear. Brighton, Michigan, right? And in a hotel room. So. Yeah, the hotel Wifi is pretty crappy. Brighton, Michigan, OK. There's a huge lag. I don't know if this is going to work. I know I'm suspecting that this might be a little too choppy. The joy of doing live streams, you never know what will happen. But. Well, that was hotel Wifi. Are you back? Are you are we back now, Paul? Or is there still a delay on your end? Yeah, it's a huge delay. Rick's trying to lower my bank. That work, but I don't know it's going to work. Yeah, I can't. My phone is better now. My phone isn't any better because the cell signals isn't good either. So. Well, we still got an appearance from Paul, so. Yeah, that's exciting. It means he cares. It means he's committed. So that's good. So what were you? Yeah, Rick, if you can hear us, I can't hear Paul. I hear sometimes pieces of him coming in, but. That was Paul, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for stopping in, Paul. I'm sorry it didn't work. Thank you for letting us take over your channel. You're probably too kind to us. But yes, we're talking about COVID. Yeah, that's that's it's definitely been a challenge. Well, we haven't seen it be such a challenge in this event so far, but I've definitely seen it be a challenge in other events that I've done because I've been running live in virtual events throughout COVID. So it's you learn a lot about pivoting and being flexible. But it's I think it's been helpful to kind of get some momentum and get some feedback from the audience. Helpful to kind of get some momentum with the live events. And I wish Sam could have joined us because I would have loved to hear his perspective on Chicago and how how all of that went. But I'm glad that they were able to do that. And it seems that he seems pretty happy with the turnout and the support that he's gotten there. So it's just so exciting. Yeah, it sounds like they were really happy with the event. They had good numbers and everything they had planned went pretty smoothly and a lot of just good engagement. And I think there's a lot of energy right now in the community towards wanting to just meet with people. You know, you get to a certain point and you're like, I've talked with you a lot on the Internet or I've watched, you know, 30 hours of your video, 150 hours of your video. I would love to see you face to face and just talk with you. And so I think we have a lot of momentum right now combined with people being so isolated over the last few years. So people on top of feeling connected within the community are just feeling like really disconnected in general. And like they've been sitting on their own with a computer for too many years, not really allowed to go out too much. And that's eased up a little bit over the summer. But I know at least in Canada, there's been a lot of feeling sort of locked down and isolated. And so there's even more momentum to people wanting to say, OK, yeah, let's get together. I want to drive or I'm willing to fly and we'll figure it out. Yeah, I mean, I've been a part of the Bridges of Meaning community basically since it started, the Discord part of it. And probably before watching the randos conversations, because that was some of my favorite things Paul did. And so the chance to get to meet people and have face to face when you've been talking for two years with people and creating friendships. And finally getting the chance to meet each other in person. That's just wild. And so it's fun to hear those stories. And, you know, like Jacob is always driving around, meeting all these people. And the fact that now we get events to allow that to happen is just, I don't know, I find it super special. There's definitely something about this little corner that I think COVID helped it in a certain sense because of that isolation. We look to Internet or online participation to fill a void that we were missing with sort of what you could do in the every day. You know, going to a bar or a coffee shop and meeting with people. And yeah, so it's fun to see the next evolution. And I'd love to ask you sort of what your what your view is on sort of the importance of having it become more rooted in reality and meeting people, because I've always thought that that was a really important part and a super crucial part of it is going to continue to grow and be healthy. But I'd love to hear your thoughts about that and sort of where you see the importance of that, particularly with your background in psychology. Well, I think it's super critical. I feel like I almost can't put words enough on how important it is to actually meet people in person. I mean, for one thing, you get to be like if you arrive and you meet people, you actually get to be seen in a way that's much more unfiltered. You know, if we're going to talk from a psychological side, if I want to bring that in, even when you meet somebody face to face, it's still filtered, right? It's still your persona. You're still bringing the side of yourself that you want people to meet. But way more on the Internet, because there's you don't see the person's face. You know, most people don't even have their own picture when they have it on a disk. And then you have, you know, the the filter of what words do you want to type down? What don't you say? There's no body language. There's no sense of like pausing or timing. I mean, there's a level, but it's not nearly the same as in person. And so you can get to know people over like a an Internet dialogue on a chat page, but it's exponentially different to actually see someone in person. And so for you to be seen by someone else in person and to be seen and then, you know, embraced and listened to and attended to, and you actually get the eye contact, it's such a different level of being known and connected to. I even think of the video Paul just put out yesterday, I think it was where he was talking about the importance of faces and sort of the the value and the other sort of level of processing that it takes to move all those pieces around from just, you know, pieces that you see like, oh, there's an ear and a nose. But to actually see somebody's face is such a different experience and then to be seen as a person. So to be able to step into a space where you are seen mostly, obviously, there's a little filter, but much more than online and then to be seeing the other people and actually getting to know them as people. You know, even just smelling other people. And it sounds kind of weird, but much more information from smelling people that we don't we don't even realize gathering. And, you know, maybe it's a little woo. But I think our our spirits are real. And so when we come in contact with each other and you get to be in contact with the other spirits around you and the gathering of people and what that gathering creates by having all of those people together and then the feeling of that group together, you just can't recreate it online. You can get little hints at it and little like whispers of it. But it's the difference between watching a basketball game and being at a basketball game where you feel the resonant of like everybody yelling and cheering and you get swept up in the moment of it. You can taste it a little bit when you watch it on TV, but it's just it's not the same thing. So, well, there's there's just a whole, yeah, a whole scale of sensory things that the the door is open to. It's not only smell, but like the vibration of the seats and the stands and the sounds of the conversations happening around you. It's it is a totally different experience. And I think particularly because most of our communication is nonverbal. There it just opens the door to understanding and picking up and sensing people in a way that you can get somewhat over online participation, particularly if you're doing video or voice. But it's still a limited participation. And yeah, I'm excited to see how those things manifest in real life with that full scope of everything. And so I had to interject. I don't know if I'm invited to this discussion at all, but I'm listening to what you're saying and absolutely agree with everything that you're saying right now, like over COVID, when everyone was meeting on Zoom, you totally felt the difference between that and being there in person. And so, yes, having that meetup is very important. I was actually wondering, does anyone know if there are any Australian meetups that are happening? That's a good question. I don't think there's. Oh. The best way to look would be to go to the Estuary Hub website and look for some. I know that Warren was trying to set some up in Melbourne. There are some in Tasmania, so I believe there are some. And so I would I would check with John Van Dock because he's been working with all the leaders. And I know that there are two or three leaders from the US or two or three leaders from Australia that have been working with John Van Dock on Estuary meetings. OK, and so that is that one of the is that one of the channels in here? No, if you go to the link is EstuaryHub.com. EstuaryHub.com. You can find. Excellent place for meaningful conversations. Gotcha. I'll look that up. Sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt you. I was really enjoying what you had to say there before. Sorry, your name. I can't even see it on my screen. Yeah, my name is Stephen, by the way. I'm from Brisbane and I just noticed that there are a couple of people in the chat room. I just noticed that there are a couple of people in here having a chat and I dropped in to see what you were chatting about. And it was actually something that I wanted to talk about as well. No, no worries at all. I'm glad you interjected. Yeah, I think that's what I love about these live conversations is being able to have community members who can come in and add to the conversation. So thanks for your question. Did you have anything else you wanted to add or say? Well, I guess my thoughts were I had a discussion with a guy at my church who's one of the pastors there the other day and was talking about how I'd been listening to this preacher from America who is Calvinist and we all made fun of him for that. But he'd started up this estuary movement. And I'd heard a bit about it and was kind of interested if there weren't any already in the area to maybe looking at starting one up and potentially using some of the church's resources to help facilitate that. So I've actually kind of been wanting to get into a conversation about something like this for a while. And I just saw you guys here. So. Yeah, I'd recommend contacting John Van Donk and getting into his estuaries leaders support network. There are, like I said, there are a couple of offices already in that network. And basically what they do is they meet twice a month and they talk about how to start new groups and they practice basically the protocol. What they do in a group and encourage each other to help start new groups. And so that's if there's not a group near you, I'd recommend talking to your church or your pastor, see if you get some space. And there might be some people around you that would like to start. So but the Estuary Hub dot com is sort of the way into that program. Yeah, so I hadn't been able to actually find where there were the resources. I heard that there were resources, so that is great. But like, that's that's awesome. Thank you for that. So a little bit. Yeah, a little bit about myself. I'm a full time stay at home dad, so most people would be at work at this time. But my job is taking care of kids. So that's why I was able to jump on at this at this crazy hour. What time is it for you in Australia? Midday or actually quarter to one, something like that. Yeah, quarter to one. Yeah. Yeah, people are at work. I'm based in Brisbane. So it's you said when you said that there's stuff going on in Tasmania, I was a bit shocked because Tasmania is kind of it's kind of like the. I don't know, maybe the. Putting it in American terms, it's kind of like the Hawaii of Australia, except that nobody actually wants to go there on holidays. I went to the. I actually studied abroad in the Alaska. Sorry, I think. Sorry, we keep talking over each other. So, yeah, so Australia is basically the same size as mainland US, but where we only have like a tenth of the people. And so Tasmania is like got maybe three or four hundred thousand people at most in the state, and most of them live in the main city. So it's kind of a backwater. But yeah, anyway, that I got what I came for. So thank you for that. To you, your discussion about how important in-person meetups are, because I think that I absolutely agree with you, having been on the Internet now for what, 25 years. What I have noticed is that Internet communities spring up and they can be decent communities, but unless unless they have some kind of physical in-person get together, they don't last and they fall apart and they end up descending into trivialities and people yelling at each other. And that's entirely because people don't actually know each other in these things. So I think, yeah, getting together and talking about these things in person is a great way of actually building a real community. And for stuff like stuff like the stuff that Paul, you talk about a lot. Getting that language and using that language and actually thinking out loud with other people makes a massive difference to your understanding of it. And I guess it kind of comes back to that whole, why do we have free speech? Well, it's so that you can think kind of thing. But I, yeah, I've been wanting to find some other people around who are wanting to talk on these issues and discuss these issues, because, as you say, Paul, church is not really the best place for it because that's covering a whole bunch of other spiritual needs. And you've only got, well, in my case, 20 to 30 minute sermons. You can't really go into the kind of depth that you want to go into on some of these issues. And then you've got home groups, but they're more focused around individuals, personal needs at that moment, not really the bigger kind of questions necessarily. So, yeah, getting an estuary group going would be awesome if there's and if there's already one actually joining it. Be really good. Yeah, Stephen, I'm really. Go ahead, Cassidy. I've been talking so much. Even I'm really glad you put your nose in and it's nice to meet you. And it's encouraging to hear that it's not just sort of us in our bubble, but it really is a lot of people who are feeling like it's time to get together. It's probably overdue. And it's worth it. I mean, to put this on for people to come and travel, it's a lot of effort, you know, like you've got to give up time. It costs money to travel. There's I mean, there's a fee to come to mind. I'm pretty sure Cassidy's has a fee as well. So there's an expense to all these things. But I think that the value is absolutely there as well, because. Having a community and people that you can engage with on a level that you just aren't going to be able to access with people who aren't like minded. It's worth it, I think. So I'm glad we're not the only ones feeling that way. Yeah, well, and just to just to comment, I actually lived abroad in Melbourne for about a year and a half. And so I have a special place for Australia in my heart. And I actually went to Tasmania when I was there and I lived there for a year and a And I loved it. It's been my favorite place to visit. So I do think Tasmania is underrated and should be visited more. But I mean, I'll say that having participated both in an online estuary and an in person estuary when I lived back in Phoenix. It makes a huge difference to have that monthly meeting where you can meet with people in person and where you can go and do things and participate in life outside of the things on the Internet. And we try our best to kind of bring that into British of Meaning. We've done game nights and book clubs and all these other things, but nothing beats that real life person connection. So I think that's what we hope to see. And we're actually having John Van Donk at our festival and he's going to talk about his estuary protocol, why he created it and sort of how other people can implement it to make those things. And we'll be recording all of our events and releasing them at some point. So yeah, hopefully you can all see that conversation if you're interested in those conversations. We do have a question from Jared. Will there be prizes for the airsoft for Meaning winners? Oh, there will be prizes. I think that's directed. Yes, that is directed to me. Unfortunately, if you have not signed up, the airsoft and barbecue is all sold out. So there are no more airsoft things. Although during that time, everybody who hasn't signed up for airsoft will be in discussion groups and chatting and hanging out. So there is still fun to be had. But if you have signed up for airsoft, yes, there will be prizes that are priceless, priceless prizes. Very exciting. Well, I'm excited to eventually see the winners and see what those special prizes are. Another question I've been getting is sort of asking the purpose of what these events are. And if there is a hope that they will lead to some sort of Christianity, I'll let you start with that question, Catherine, and then I can have my answer for my events. But is that something you're hoping for with your events? No, no, these are not like evangelism, evangelistic tools or something. Um, it genuinely is what I said earlier, that we are hoping that this spirit of conversation and exploration and connection is what will be built. And that there will be room for people to Yeah, um, and ideas and follow where that goes. Um, I am a Christian, so, you know, for anyone who doesn't know me, cards on the table. So I have my own opinions on what I think is going on. And I think that would be fabulous if other people agreed with me. But there's no like secret agenda of, well, we'll get them in the door. And then, you know, we'll just try to force something on them now that we've got their, you know, butts and chairs. Right. Paul will be preaching on Sunday. But that is by no means something people have to attend if they feel like that would force them into a corner. But I enjoy Paul's preaching. I'm sure that people would find it engaging and interesting if they've never been to a Christian service to go to one. Shout out to Father Eric Big Mac, who is going to be having a Catholic service nearby, so that all the Catholics can get mass early and still be able to go to Paul's sermon. So that was awesome of him to be willing to do that and suggest it. So yeah, there's no like secret agenda of trying to, you know, transform the world or something. Right. And we have a similar stance. You know, we, me and Matias, that's the main event organizers, we also identify as Christians, but from different traditions. But we really are aimed at making neutral spaces for religious and non-religious people to come together to have those conversations and wrestle with those questions. And so there's no conversion methods or, you know, alter calls or hopes to push somebody into a specific religion. We just really want to help people move in the conviction of the path that they feel drawn to and like have support in that. Because I think we're all trying to find what's meaningful. And the best way to do that is to participate in what makes sense to you and test the waters that way. So yeah, we're also, we also find ourselves in the asteroid space, which I think really is about that neutral spaces and non-conversion. So. And frankly, I feel like that attitude of you only have a conference or a public event if you have a particular goal where you're trying to drive people. I think that hasn't served the church very well. I think there's a lot of people who have sensed that there's like an ulterior motive and then you don't walk away feeling like, oh, you, you know, me as a person, you care about me, what I think and value matters to you. It just sort of feels like this is a manipulative ploy. And then I think it means people don't want to be near the church because it feels like I'm a project or you have an agenda for me and it's not actually. What I mean, maybe it never was, but at least in my head can and, you know, a space where people would actually come together and have philosophical dialogues and could engage and seek wisdom. The church has sort of. Abdicated that role by always having a particular agenda instead of respecting people and the journey that they're on and trusting that if, you know, if what you have to say in the life that you're living is attractive and valuable to those people, that it will speak for itself, you know? And if it's not, and it doesn't compare to what they already have or some other philosophy, then that's fine. You know, you like, how the cards live where they are. So I very much did not feel like that will be the spirit of what we're doing. Right. I mean, it's a really tricky balance because I, you know, I've been to events like that and I've seen people affected by that and people drawn to that and convicted to participate in that. And I think there's probably a space for that. But yeah, for myself, too, I always struggled with that evangelical tendency and sort of the forms that came out of and trying to find a way of having less of a sale or a pressure to convert and being orthodox. Now, you know, I wrestle with those things and see those things different as when I was more evangelical Protestant. But, you know, for me, it's like I find a special place for it because I, through participation in estuary and this sort of neutral space outside of the church walls that I was planted in, I mean, it opened up the door to a different participation. And what I think is a, what I feel is a newer, more true expression of the faith that I was given as a child and participated through my adulthood. And so I'm very grateful for that. And I don't expect that for everybody that they're going to find orthodox or even Christianity. But I just love the way that I've seen people from all different backgrounds enter the space and have the chance to grow and develop and learn from other people. And I've seen it change people in ways I haven't seen changed in some of these other evangelical movements. So I'm certainly not against them. But for me, I feel whatever space I'm working on has a little different motive. So I just really want people to feel like they can move towards the thing they feel convicted for because you can't participate well in a religion if you don't have a conviction for it. You don't have a sense of a sense of truth in participating in it, if that makes any sense. Well, and I think you have to have space like that too, if you want to push against what seems to be sort of like a growing trend in culture in general, which is that people get siloed, you end up feeling like you have to double down on the position that you have, that because there's so many voices that oppose whatever position you might hold, it's sort of your job to defend that position and strengthen it and debate it. And I feel like that's just toxic. It's so toxic to all of society. Not that there's never any place for that, but you just see broadly in society, people get more and more siloed, they get pulled further apart. Real conversation is so much harder to actually find, which I think is why this type like the estuaries, bridges of meaning, there's a hunger for it because it's very hard to find spaces where you can actually just have a conversation it's very hard to find spaces where you can actually just have a conversation and say the things that are sort of taboo, whether you know, if you're on the left, exploring ideas on the right, if you're on the right, exploring ideas on the left to do that. It feels like if you do that with somebody on the other side, they're all excited and they just want to pull you into their camp. If you do it with people who are on your side, they feel like, oh, no, you're slipping away, you're in danger, and we need to convince you that those ideas are stupid. But where do you actually explore the ideas? Where do you actually talk things through? And if there's no space to actually honestly be able to say, well, these are the ideas I'm playing with, I've wondered these questions, without feeling like you're about to get, you know, hopped under the arm and dragged away into some new camp that you, you know, you're not really sure even what you think. Of course, society will keep siloing and distancing and then defending different positions and then people don't know each other. And then it's so much easier to demonize each other. So yeah, I do also feel like this kind of mindset in having conversations is the only antidote to the other approach of just getting more and more distant from each other. Right. For me, I see it as it's not the conversation problem that's the taboo or people don't want to talk about it's more the spirit in which we're participating in it. And this sort of them against us mentality is not actually helpful in coming to good answers because either someone feels like a project. And then it's like it creates a weird dynamic. And you know, that's not always but it has that potential. Or, yeah, there's this sort of defense mode, where I have to protect the thing that I'm arguing for. And I just think the world's a little more complicated than that. And I mean, I was funny, I went through deconstruction in college and started questioning things and having conversations, probably very poorly to start, but you know, eventually finding better ways to talk to people. And, you know, all of a sudden, I'm talking to all these different people from backgrounds all over the place, like very earnestly about religion, and in places where like they were coming to me, I wasn't having to come to them. And there was this spirit of like real exploration and questioning that was so beautiful. And it's hard, sometimes talking about that and seeing that in churches, because there's a big defense of the truth. And I think truth is important. And there's certain things we should stand for and, you know, advocate for with truth. But it was hard to kind of match that with this idea of honest exploration, because sometimes you have to ask the tough questions. And sometimes you don't fall into the answer that your community around you think is true. And that's a really difficult thing. And so seeing what Paul had done with conversations and then through estuary, it's just been really cool. So yeah, it's been fun to be a part of. Yeah, I love the analogy of the house for that, right? Where it's like you've got the bedroom, then you've got the dining room, family room area, then you have like, the entryway, and then you have the porch, and then you have the front yard. And so it's like you have layers of intimacy and layers of space that require more defensiveness and less defensiveness. And so you get in trouble if you have an entire house that's just the front porch. There's nothing being protected. There's nothing that's being held as sacred and holy. But you also get in trouble if your whole house is a bedroom. And it's like bedroom and then street and there's nothing in the middle. There's no space for conversation. There's no space to meet strangers. There's nowhere where you go outside of your bedroom and you get confronted with things that are uncomfortable. So yeah, I think, of course, the whole church shouldn't just be like an open space for dialogue all the time. But if the church never has that, or if religious communities never have that, then it becomes a monstrous version of what it should be. It just it's all one thing instead of the full picture. So yeah, I agree. You do need to have sacred space and holy space and something that's a little bit between that and completely secular. But you need that full range to be able to have a fully living community too. Yeah, I love that analogy because I think it makes so much sense. And people get the sense of that, of the difference of the sacred space between your room and the living room versus your front porch. You just feel it. So I love that analogy. And I think for me, that's why I feel like estuary has always been something very distinct from church for me, where church is the place you go to grow with people who, you know, you believe the same things and you're moving towards the goal and you're challenging each other. And estuary is the thing outside of the church where you're challenging the thing you plant yourself in. And there's this place for both. And there's a time for estuary, but I also think there's a time not for it, but having it available for the people who need it has been, I think, a very good thing for a lot of people, particularly in our community. Let's quickly, why don't we do some sort of announcements about the event? Why don't you talk about price? Any changes that are coming up or anything special that you want to talk about? And then we can open it up to the just main chat for any last questions or comments. Okay, I don't want to get the dates wrong because I'm super bad with numbers, so I'm going to look at my calendar. Okay, so our conference in Thunder Bay, Ontario, which has an airport and you can fly into despite the fact that some people have been confused about that is on September 15, 16 and 17. So it starts. Well, the conference itself starts on the Friday night, but we are having like a get together for anybody who wanted to fly in the Thursday night because sometimes flights are wonky. So it's better to get in the night before. So that evening, there will be music and drinks and food and people can hang out. The next morning will be airsoft and barbecue for anybody who signed up for that. And then just discussion groups around different topics. Like I said, lots of people have been volunteering to lead different groups. And so there'll be some sort of loose topics that obviously you want to just mostly talk to people. But when you're first seeing people you haven't met before, it's kind of nice to have a loose topic you can kind of go around on. But the actual conference won't start until that evening after dinner. So the format will be a couple of 45 minute talks, one by each of the speakers. So there'll be two the first night, and then one dialogue between the first two speakers. Then Saturday will be all conference. And then Sunday, if people want to stick around, Paula's gonna preach, there'll be a service. And then in the afternoon, Jonathan Peugeot is going to do sort of like a walk through orthodox iconography and sort of talk about symbolism and do a slideshow. And then John Vervecky is going to lead a meditative contemplative hour and a half. And hopefully everybody sticks around and enjoys all of that because I think it will be fantastic. The price is $235. It includes one lunch. And that is it. We used to have an early bird, but we have blown past that now. So there is no longer a deal, unfortunately. Yeah, I think those are all the important numbers. Perfect. Well, then I'll say the ones for our festival. So we're the Bridges of Meeting Festival in Landau, Germany. The dates are August 26, Friday, August 26 to the 28th. We're just selling tickets for the full event. We are having a campfire and a concert night that you can buy individual tickets for as well through the event center that we have. But for our members, we're hoping to do the whole conference. Like we said, we had Paul Bern Powers and John Van Dock as the main speakers and then some other panels from that represent community members. And then I'm actually doing a live podcast with my friend Sarah. So I think that'll be fun. The price right now is $150, but it will go up on August 14 to the full price, which is $225, I think, or $250. It's on our website. I don't want to give the wrong information, but it'll go up on August 14. So I would definitely suggest to try to get your tickets in before. That includes all the events, coordination, and as well as two meals, a meal on Saturday night and a breakfast on Sunday morning before Paul's Sunday service. And we also have a little special going on that if you pay the $225 for a ticket, you can get a seat at a private lunch with some of the speakers. So if you'd like to do that, that's available too. Feel free to reach out to us through the website or even on Discord. My handle is Cassidy P. I can answer any questions that you have. We also have camping opportunities on the festival site and those are filling up quickly. $20 a person for two days. You can come in Friday to set up camp and then you gotta leave Sunday after the event's over, but that's also available. So let me know if you're interested in that and I can get you on the mailing list. But other than that, I think that is all the announcements Mathias wanted me to pass on. And then, yeah, you can look at both of our websites. They're in the link below to get more information. And I believe there's also links below for other events that are happening in Europe. And I don't know if there's any other ones outside of Europe, but there's UK events, there's Dutch events. I think there was talk of something in Scotland, but I'm not gonna talk about that confidently. You can look below for those things. So yeah, any comments or questions from our live listening audience on Discord before we head off and close this little talk off? Before those people chime in, I do want to say these prices are not in American currency. So Canadian, $2.35 and German, which is gonna be different. So some people have thought that was pretty steep, but once you make it into Canadian, it's not actually as much. So check that currency exchange number because it changes every day. So that's all. Yeah. And I mean, just transparency on pricing for us, we really did our best to make it as affordable as possible, but we want to make sure that this is sustainable. And for the German event, we want to try to make it yearly, but we've at least committed to next year. And so you can also buy tickets now early for next year if it's you want to participate in the future. So, you know, the truth is these events are expensive and we just have to do our best to cover the costs and make this sustainable so we can keep bringing this kind of value to you. So we're definitely not trying to pick any pockets and actually everything that's coming in up until August 14th is going directly back into event production. We're not taking any profit anywhere. None of the organizers are taking payments. We're mostly volunteer run. So yeah, we just really want to give back to you guys. So just know that. Yeah. I mean, it's the same for our event. I'm hoping at this point, I'm mostly hoping that we will cover our expenses. There are a lot of people to fly in. They are just expensive events because they are, I think, so awesome and there's so much going on. But yeah, it's, you know, obviously I'm not getting paid for what I'm doing and it's all volunteers. So nobody's trying to fleece anybody here. No, no. I just were, there's a lot, I do think there's a lot of value in them. And so I hope people see that. And yeah, we can continue growing and doing those things. Any last comments? Live listening audience, last chance to be on Paul's channel. Yeah. All right. Well, I think the silence is the cue. So thank you so much, everybody, for watching. I apologize for some of the technical issues and delays, but hopefully you found this helpful. And I thought, you know, we got somewhere really good there. So any last thoughts, Katherine? No, this was lovely. Thank you, Cassidy. Thank you, everybody. All right. Well, thanks guys. Rick, you can end transmission.