https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vlj7zGm41B8

 Hi, this is Paul. Even though Justin Brierley is no longer at Unbelievable, the Unbelievable show is still going on and they seem to have a series of hosts there probably trying out a bunch of people and seeing who will really take and who will really work. There's a two-part series with Alistair McGrath and Alex O'Connor, Cosmic Skeptic. I've made some critical comments about O'Connor before, but I thought he really did well in this conversation. I say he really did well, I don't just mean he kept up his side, but I thought there was really a good faith conversation here. Part one was okay, but I think part two is even better. I wanted to do a little bit of work on this. At the start of the podcast. What I'd love to do before we dive into this really important topic is just to quickly acknowledge that actually the date that we're recording this show is the 11th of September, 22 years to the day since those catastrophic events, which in many ways provided a catalyst for the new atheist movement that we're talking about today. And Alistair, in your introduction to the Coming to Faith Through Dawkins book, you say, the tragic events of 9-11 turned out to be the intellectual and moral launchpad for what is now generally known as the new atheism, with Dawkins as its central figure. Would you mind just very quickly saying why you think some of these events sort of kickstarted this huge movement? Well, there's a big debate about this, but the way I see it is that Dawkins have been saying things like, original is evil or it's violent for many, many years. I mean, it goes back a long way. And then something happened, which if you like, crystallized the perception. This isn't just rhetoric, this is reality that actually something has happened, which in effect means that what Dawkins is saying needs to be taken incredibly seriously. So I think if you like, this was a pivotal event, which in effect meant that ideas that might have been seen as slightly marginal, somehow really became center stage. I think that's one of the reasons why I think this event is seen as so important. And also to give the obvious second point, I mean, if you look at, for example, Dawkins' own writings, he was very clear that actually this event made him write the God illusion. So I think we need to say that actually both in terms of the participants in this debate, Dawkins, Harris, for example, but also in terms of the public perception of this debate, 9-11 did play a very significant role. Now I think that's a great point. And I think it's a point worth sort of pausing and thinking about attention and how we work as a culture. I'm going to bring in something that you probably can't imagine what I'm going to bring in right now. So on Twitter, Matthew Peugeot brought up the paper mache looking aliens in Mexico. And I had seen this and I had seen a little video of this look like a cake, someone sort of cuts a cake. And I saw the cake video and I thought, that's a strange thing to make a cake from. And then when I saw this, I thought, oh, I hadn't heard of this. And why hadn't I heard of this? So of course you go to YouTube and you YouTube, you know, you search for it on YouTube and you find it's funny because you just look at it and here's x-rays and what is this going on? And they're holding him up and there's two of them and they had some scenes of when they brought him to the Mexican parliament. So I've been wanting to do a video about aliens for a while, but it's going to take a little bit. It's going to take a fair amount of time and thinking through about this whole topic because I think it is an important topic and there's a lot to say and think about it. When Oak Island is not in season, my son and I will often watch Skinwalker Ranch and they have all these measurements and they see all these lights in the sky and they do this. And before 9-11, there were many, many, there were a number of attacks, on a US destroyer, there was a first attack on the World Trade Center, but this didn't have the attention of the nation. And this attack sort of changed everything. And so Matthew Peugeot writes about this, it's very interesting, presenting potentially menacing unknowns as funny as an effective way to gradually introduce them without causing offensive reactions. This is not tabloid revelation. It came with all sorts of official tests and proofs. Seeing this as merely a distraction seems like a mistake. It seems important to notice that these non-human entities were presented exactly in the same way as an archaeological discovery. This informs us gradually and unthreateningly that aliens are part of our ancient past. This is not just a revelation of something out there. It is implying that the past is informed by these aliens, so in a way we are not presented as aliens. There's an old conspiracy theory that claims the idea of aliens might be used to undermine, subvert, replace all traditional religions. The idea is that all supernatural past events and all civilization founding myths could be explained by attributing them to quote unquote aliens. Part of what we're dealing here is the fact that to us, everything feels straightforward and it isn't. That is very much a big topic in this whole video. It's clear that Alex O'Connor is more mature than he was a number of years ago, while we all are to a certain degree, but at a young age obviously you mature quickly. He's been doing a lot of study. His speech is more nuanced. One of the things that I've wanted to get at for a while is our language about believing in God is so low resolution. Peterson's point that he made about, you know, didn't want to answer the question, do you believe in God? I still think Peterson's response to that was helpful in that we don't in many cases really kind of know what we're talking about. And I see that, so Justin Brierley with his upcoming book, which is mentioned a few times in here, belief in God will return. Well, what does that mean? Faith in God? Because when we're talking about something like that in that frame, we're talking about God as a relational character, as an omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent actor, power who we relate to, that we can have a direct relationship with, who both pursues us and connects with us, but also who we can have a relationship with and even a relationship which has importance and consequence and even power, such as, you know, prayer works as, what do you mean works? I mean, prayer can change things, prayer can move mountains. I mean, that's that kind of register, but similar to the alien thing, we, so okay, we got these little, we got these little things that we're x-raying and looking inside. In many ways, none of that means much of anything and there's always this hysteria. So someone at another comment about aliens recommended the Mothman Prophecy, since I've been reading that fascinating book. And I think to me, the book sort of proves the point that I'm trying to make, as does like Skinwalker Ranch. When something comes into our world, we have no conceptualization of it until it sort of breaks the plane of our lives. And so Islamic terrorism was just sort of out there and we paid no attention to it, of course, until the towers came down. Now, certain other people were paying attention to it, of course, but it sort of breaks in. And then what moves is a season in the culture of just that fast, a lot of the assumptions of the Cold War in God we trust, all of this machinery to recruit God, to help fight godless communism. I mean, that's how the whole thing was framed. That was the cultural first draft that wasn't printed on everyone. And now suddenly, religion, fundamentalism is evil. So it was first Alastair and now Alex is going to give his response. Now, Alex, I'm aware that you were very young on the 11th of September 2001, but have these tragic events shaped the way that you personally view religion at all? Well, like you say, I don't remember these events. I would have been, I think, one or two years old at the time. And so just about within my lifetime. But I live in a world where this is taken as a historical fact. This is something that I always know as having had happen. I struggle to comprehend what it must be like to turn on the television and see this happening live. Now, right away, and this is going to be important later in the conversation, right away, you have both, okay, this is a fact. I'd say most people don't deny it happened. I'm sure people are debating on details about it. I mean, there's always a conspiracy that a theory that rolls a account, I'll say it this way, a counter narrative that rolls around about consequential things like this. But then he immediately goes to the view from inside. So the fact is sort of the view from outside. And then he goes to the view from inside. And even in this conversation, you can see the page of modernity turn. Right in front of you. But I can imagine that it would inspire a lot of questions as to what possible kind of thinking could motivate this kind of behavior and this kind of self sacrifice. And okay, and so not only is he seeing it from the inside, first, he sees it from the inside of a viewer and says, I can't imagine what it would be like to, because I was young, I didn't didn't see it. But then see it from the inside of the attackers. Indeed, this kind of bravery, Bill Ma, I believe once had a show canceled, or at least it contributed to the cancellation of politically incorrect. When he said that the hijackers who flew the planes into the World Trade Center were brave, which of course they were, the bravery can go in the wrong direction sometimes, something extraordinary must be motivating them. Now, of course, there's no surprise that this would put the question of religion on everybody's lips. But I think it's done just as much to to engender debate about foreign policy and about American. Now, now he, he mentions religion. And in that context, again, it's sort of in the modern frame and the secular frame where there's the non religious world and then there's the religious world. So Sam sent me this video. It's a remarkable video with Peter Boghossian and David Silverman, they get to one point towards the end of the video where they have to ask if becoming if making your children Christian as a prophylactic against wokeness with making your children a Christian to be would be a prophylactic against wokeness. Would it be worth it? And I thought, wow, has the world changed? And so little little introduction here. Yeah, talk to me. You were woke. I was woke, man. I was right in the right was right inside it. When I was running American Atheists, I was woke, and proudly so emphatically. So I had my inner doubts. But and I held back on certain things. I always held back on their I always held back in my support or I can maintain my support for ex Muslims. And for to the to an extent freedom of speech. But man, I was woke and I was in there. And I remember a good example is, you know, when Johnny when we were doing Reason Rally to 2016, Johnny Depp was coming. And he had that whole thing with Amber Heard come out and I believe the woman, I believed all women, I was in charge of the roster, I took him off the roster, you know, we canceled them. And I feel terrible about that. I publicly apologize for him since then. But I was so deep in it. And then Okay, hold on, hold on, hold on. So go ahead. I just want to linger on this. So when you say you're deep in it, like, when you participate, or when you were a believer in that ideology, what kind of stuff did you believe? Like you gave us an example of believe all women, which is truly insane. When you think about believing half the population, and we know that like to want to Brawley, when I was good, we know that, okay, what other kinds of things did you believe? Oh, I believe it was really, it was really, really important to have, you know, a certain number of black people, a certain number of gay people, a certain number of women on the roster of any event that I put together. There were, there were unfortunately, a lot of white guys that I looked over and pushed aside because of their sex and color. And, you know, I look back on those decisions with disdain, because that's me engaging in racism and sexism. And, you know, I'm not, I'm not happy with the way I behaved when I was like that. You know, I think, well, I know it was Hitchens who said it takes, it takes for good people to good people can do good things. And for bad people to bad people do bad things. But for good people to do bad things, it takes religion. And this is what I was doing. I was doing bad things in the name of what I now see as was my religion at the time. The whole video is full of this stuff. It's quite a video. But part of what is gone or going away is this framework where religion is something over here and you don't have, you can, you can, if you're an atheist, you don't have a religion. You just look at evidence. I mean, that's just going away. What's, what, what is, what is present and they'll talk about, they'll talk about this in this video. What is present is it says everybody has an operating system. Everybody has a first draft and that's your religion. That's your worldview. That's, that's the way in which you react to the world. Now, again, religious communities, my own community has been, this is stuff that was taught to me in junior high in Christian school. All life is religious. Everybody has a religion. I was a kid, of course everybody has religion. Then I bump into people and say, I don't have a religion. It's like, yeah, you do. There's a, there's this, there's this first draft that you have, this pattern through which you address and see the world and interact with the world. And, and that gets, that very much gets played out in this conversation as well. And interventionism and, and many other more political ideas. But of course, religion is sometimes political. And I think particularly in the case of this farm, it is politicized and a more political religion in many ways. And so it kind of makes sense to me. And I mean, Sam Harris also quite, I think quite obviously is motivated by this particular event in the writing of his book or this particular kind of behavior. And I think that the usual line on this is you have to decide, it's sometimes attributed to Dostoevsky, but I don't think he ever actually wrote the words, if God is dead, then everything is permitted. Oftentimes in the moral argument for the existence of God, atheists are faced with conundrum. If there is no God, then can't you just do anything you want? And the new atheist retort typically has been, it's the other way around. If God is real, then anything is permitted. Because once you have divine authority, there is simply no, there's no appeal. And what's incredible is that the point that Peterson makes a lot, which, you know, I've seen the decoding the gurus guys just sort of scoff at, is that there is an arena. Okay. And there is, C.S. Lewis opens up mere Christianity with this argument saying people believe in moral realism. Very seldom do you find someone who isn't at one level of moral realist. And what you find is they can't actually live that way. They might declare they are not moral realists, but if I would, let's say beat them up in the middle of the street, they would say, that's wrong. You just can't live. Most people don't live that way because it just doesn't work. And so even if there's no, you do have a religion and you do have a morality. Now you might say, well, my worldview doesn't have supernatural things or special books or anything like that, but you do have a first draft. You do have a framework. You do have a concept of right and wrong. If you have no concept of right and wrong, then very quickly society is going to sort of put a cocoon around you and push you over to the side because nobody will want to live or work anywhere near you or be anywhere near you because they can't work with you because even just basically some degree of collaboration requires a mutual map of this is right, this is wrong. That's what makes cross-cultural interchanges so difficult. There's no other authority or other judiciary to which you can appeal that authority. And so if that authority tells you to commit some kind of horrible atrocity, there's nothing you can do to stop somebody who believes that. This is something that I think is unique to religious thinking, perhaps. See, and you see him sort of in the middle here sometimes. He sort of goes back and forth over the line and he just kind of held it back. Well, perhaps because once you have a morality, a public standard, now you might say, well, this is simply a culturally conditioned public standard. Okay. Then you have to ask, well, why did it develop? Well, it developed because people needed a common cultural standard. Okay. Does this have any other purchase besides it? In other words, is it arbitrary? One of the amazing things is that the complaint against Calvinism in particular sometimes, but against other things is that, well, it's arbitrary. But if it's simply culturally isolated and it's arbitrary, and so part of the reason I think Jordan Peterson has made such an impact that he has is because deep within the arguments that he's been making is that it's not arbitrary. And that's where sort of he and Peugeot come together because Peugeot, pattern, pattern, pattern, Peugeot was saying the Bible discloses the pattern of the universe. Whereas again, this is God number one, God number two. The Bible discloses God number one, the patterns of the universe that are universal, that are historical, that are perennial. The Bible discloses these patterns of the universe, God number one. Whereas evangelicals for a couple of centuries have mostly emphasized God number two, God as an actor, God as a relational actor that you can, that you can relate to and make deals with and pray with, et cetera, et cetera. But the mistake that's made, I think, is to think that this is universally a facet of religious thinking. Even if it is unique, that doesn't mean that it's universal. Okay, well perhaps this is something we could talk about. So then he sort of flips it around and says, well, not all religions sort of work this way, that if God has your back, you can do whatever. It's true. A little bit later, but just very, very briefly, because I'm obviously very keen to focus on some of the stories and the arguments in coming to Faith 3 Dawkins, but I would just like to briefly return to something that you discussed in the previous episode with Ben Vitali. Alex, you asked Alistair a question about the moral permissibility of slavery. I think it was Leviticus 25. And Alistair, you very kindly said that you would look into that for him. So would you mind just taking a couple of minutes just to kind of honor the fact that you said that you would do that in your response, Alistair? Of course, I'm delighted to. Alex raised a very good question, which is, in dealing with the question of slavery, which Richard Dawkins raised in The God Delusion, there's a reference there to Leviticus 25. I pointed out that Leviticus 25 seemed to indicate that slavery was something that would be kind of deemed impermissible under certain circumstances. Alex rightly came back and said that the passage seemed to him to be more complex, and it is. And so if I were to rewrite that section of this book today, what I'd want to do is to disentangle the two different notions of slavery in the first two parts of this text and try and correlate these with wider debates. And certainly Alex is right to say that I kind of had glossed over that one, and I think that is very good to be reminded of that. Brilliant. Thank you, Alistair. I actually made a little video that I didn't publish with respect to this because I caught that in the first debate. And McGrath did not do well in the first conversation with respect to he got a little bit defensive, he was sort of explaining it, and that's part of why this comes up. But the whole slavery thing is funny to me because, again, as Peterson notes, there's always sort of this implicit, arenic quality that even the atheists have to appeal to and acknowledge. Peterson will often say, well, this is reality. And in a sense, there is a faith in this reality that every scientist presupposes. And John Vervecki sort of details that out a little bit more, that the universe is reliable, that patterns are predictable, that the patterns are durable, and that the universe is intelligible. Now, none of these things can be, in fact, themselves established by science, but these are sort of the presuppositions with which we approach this. Now, when I watch people make this argument about slavery, there's always a few presuppositions behind it. Number one, there are certain assumptions about what kind of thing the Bible is, that, again, predominantly, and this goes far beyond new atheists, this is very common among Christian people, among all sorts of people, and in fact, some traditions very much work this way, that the Bible is basically a set of rules, and these are eternal rules, and you have to follow these eternal rules, and if you follow these eternal rules, then you will be blessed. And if you break these eternal rules, then you will have trouble or be cursed or be subject to divine judgment. Now, there's a degree to which that is true, but the Bible is full of a whole bunch of things, and certainly you can't just distill the Bible down into laws. I was listening to the medieval mind of C.S. Lewis, and Lewis notes that part of the turn in the 15th, 16th century, Lewis points this out again and again and again, is that everything sort of goes from a relational, from a relational model to a legal model, and I think you can do quite a bit of talking about this with respect to population growth, the experience of people, and the sort of the rise of large governments and large states, and this of course even gets into ideas about justice. Now, I'm not saying, again, I'm not saying laws and rules aren't bad things, but the implicit narrative goes like this. If the Bible would be a special book, then the Bible would have countercultural things in it that would be universal. Again, this is a very modernist way of thinking. There would be sort of monarchical vision rules that come down to us that today we could look at and say, oh yeah, that's right. A lot of the argument with respect to slavery is, well, this would have sort of been an impossible thing to lay on Israel because slavery was simply pervasive and universal. Well, but a timeless book would have a rule against slavery because we know slavery is wrong, and if you say that slavery isn't wrong, well then, you know, other things are going to happen, and yes, slavery is wrong. Of course, there's a whole lot more nuance that goes into that, and so then I thought about the fact that, are there rules in the Bible that seem timeless and countercultural that almost every single time and place people listen to and say, no, we can't buy that, and I thought, look in the Sermon on the Mount. You shall, if you look with lust after another woman, then you have committed adultery in her heart. When people hear that, I mean, that's about as out of the sky as you can have, and it is regularly mocked. How about anger? It's regularly mocked because people say that's an absolutely unkeepable rule. Well, wouldn't the Israelites have said some banishment of slavery is an absolute unkeepable rule? And I'm not even convinced how you frame it. It could even be intelligible in the way that some of these elements of the Sermon on the Mount continue to sort of be unintelligible. When I was preaching on the Sermon on the Mount, Craig Bloomberg in his commentary on the Sermon on the Mount said, you know, just basically listed the seven basic interpretive approaches to the Sermon on the Mount that are out there today, and in many ways, we still quite don't know what to do with the Sermon on the Mount. It's just sort of it's just sort of out there, and there's, well, are these laws? Are these eschatological pronouncements? What exactly are these beatitudes, for example? So, and then I thought of the fact that, okay, well, what if God came to us and said, well, you may not deny your employee anything that they need? Well, what does that mean? Well, it means that right now, in terms of the terms of your employee, you have a limited contract. If you contract with your employee that you're going to pay them minimum wage, or even if you're going to pay them a healthy salary, a six-figure salary, let's say they have a need that comes up that goes beyond that six-figure salary, then you must give it to them. No, that would just be that, in fact, we wouldn't look at that as moral at all. We would look at that as a violation of justice, and so what you see in the Bible is this sort of movement in a direction towards something, and I think that's a, instead of this way of talking about slavery, I think that actually makes more sense. Anyway, I made a little video about that. I didn't actually like how that video went, so I never posted it, but seeing as it came up right here, I thought I'd mention the main points of it here. Well, it's such a huge issue, and perhaps at some point we could create a whole show about slavery and some of the difficult pastures in the Old Testament, but for now we want to get on to discussing new atheism, and I just want to start with a quote from Peter Byrom, one of the contributors to the book, and he, in some ways, I think what he says sort of sums up a lot of the stories in this book. He says, he wouldn't like me saying this, but Dawkins put me on the road to Christian faith. He shook me out of my apathy and insisted that I follow the evidence where it led. The only twist was that the evidence took me where he and I initially didn't want it to go, and it transpired that his atheism was not as airtight as he had claimed. Now, Alistair, we don't have loads of time, but would you very briefly summarise the case against Christianity, perhaps some of the objections against Christianity from a new atheist perspective, and then Alex, I would love to hear which of these arguments you find particularly compelling. So it's interesting, she basically has him steel manna, and the graph does a good job. Well, I think there are a range of arguments. Let's try and tease out some of them. Number one is that Christianity is evidentially deficient, or more than that, the kind of standard line is that religious people just believe anything they like or run away from the evidence, and that faith is blind, a phrase I think that needs very close interrogation. That's certainly one area, that faith is unevidenced, or faith is characteristic of religious people. Ordinary people don't have this pernicious trend, they believe only what can be shown to be right. So it's this whole area of what evidence points to, and there is this argument, which is very significant for many people who contributed to this book, that religion is simply evidentially deficient. That's one point. The next point is that evidence, that perhaps because the evidence is not that good, that religious people are inclined... I should make the comment that it's very interesting in this conversation that even though they sort of backpedal and sometimes they wonder if, well, Christianity might be better than wokeism, they still, for the most part, stick with the evidence thing. Kind of violence. Now, Dorgman's point seems to suggest it goes something like this, that because religious people realize that their ideas are evidentially deficient, they're prone to violence to kind of gain their acceptability and so on. But certainly there's this idea that religion has a link with violence. Now, that is a very significant argument. I would want to say it's not a good argument, and we need to look at that in more detail. That certainly is something... I find that argument quite funny, because if religion is prone to violence, you would think that all you would find in churches and monasteries and deeply religious places would be blood baths. Whereas there are truly dangerous places in this world, the predominant ethos in those places tends to be greed, all sorts of other passions, usually not religion. And again, that doesn't mean that people don't do violent things for religious purposes, religion within the secular frame, but it's really a funny argument. I think it is really significant. Then there are also some subsidiary arguments which need to be looked at. For example, one of them is the persistent argument that science and religion are incompatible. Therefore, if you are a scientist, you have to make a choice, and in effect, it's going to be atheism. And that's quite significant, because some of the contributors to this volume are actually quite prominent scientists. That's quite significant. So obviously there are many more sub-themes that we could begin to look at, but those strike me as being three of the big talking points. None of them are conclusive, they're all things that are up for discussion. I think one of the good things about this volume is the kind of way it reopens that discussion and says we need to talk about this a bit more. Well, Alex, I want to hear if you've got any outside of those objections, but are there any that Alistair's just touched on, or perhaps that you've read yourself within New Atheist literature that were particularly compelling to you? As you say, you sort of grew up in the wake of 9-11, New Atheism. It was already sort of, I guess, an established thing when you were growing up. Yeah, I think that the there's no evidence line is one of the more popular. I think Professor McGrath is right to point that out. And I think it's true depending on the sense in which you mean it. One of the easiest things about being a New Atheist is that your task a lot of the time is actually just poking holes in other people's views. And that's a much easier task than erecting your own worldview in its place. And this to me is a good example of O'Connor's maturity. He just sees this and he admits it and kudos for him. Indeed, that's a point that's made by Justin Breyly in his forthcoming book. I don't know if it's out yet, but he basically says that one of the things that New Atheism failed to do and the reason why it might collapse is because although it's quite good at tearing things down, it's not very good at putting anything up in its place. But in the tearing of these arguments down, there are a few ways in which we can intuitively look at this. We can say, of course, there are lots of arguments through the existence of God and some of them are quite interesting and sometimes compelling. When people say that there isn't enough evidence, I don't think it's just the case that there isn't enough evidence by a sort of normal standard. We're often told, for example, if we talk about the resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth, we say, look, we've got multiple sources for the life and times of Jesus that sometimes say slightly different things or leave out various details and it's really not that much to be going on. It's not sufficient and the response might come. But look, the standard of historical evidence, if you look at any other kind of event around that time, the amount of evidence we have is way above the bar. That may be true, but what are we talking about here? We're talking about the most important question in Christianity and if Christianity is true, therefore the most important question, full stop. From that perspective, I think we perhaps should expect something a little more, something a little bit more, a bit more confirmation, that is, if the entire process is being supervised and indeed the person supervising this wants us to come to know him. I think that if there is any kind of insufficiency in the evidence, we can't just appeal to what we generally accept in other areas of thinking and epistemology as a way of saying that we should accept that here too. Now again, and I think that's a good argument. What's funny is that Jesus didn't seem to care about that so much. I've made the point before that, you know, probably if it had been me, I would say, yeah, you know, I'll show up for Peter and the disciples, I'll pop in and eat a fish. But right now I'm going to go talk to Herod and Pilate. Oh, okay. To me again, this gets into the whole question in some ways of the little, the little men in the box because Jesus shows up to Herod and Pilate and I don't know that it's going to make a difference. I don't know that they're going to see it and well, seeing is believing. No, not, not really. We don't work that way and we're actually going to get in, get into that later. C.S. Lewis, of course, in Miracles and other places talks about the fact that the, the resurrection is set out not as sort of the first 10 minutes of, well, here I am, you know, here I, here I am. Well now, okay, now so what? Well, there's a little, there's a little dude in the box, okay, well, so what? How does that work? And again, it's, it's far more nuanced in terms of what's going on here and even with respect to the resurrection, it's not just that, oh, Jesus was raised from the dead. And I've talked to a skeptics before that would say, even if that happened, so what? Because Christians begin to make far more faith-based assertions that are far more rigorous and also more personal when they begin to say, yes, and I believe I will rise like him. Now, what exactly is that going to be? Well, I really don't know. Sort of like, is this an alien? Well, I really don't know. Well, seeing is believing. Well, what am I looking at? I really don't know. If I look at a dog, I would say that's a dog. If I look at a human corpse, like at a funeral in a casket, I would say, well, that's a corpse. It's because I have this whole world around it that's actually interactive, but just something new coming in, it doesn't function the way we think it functions. And I just finished making a recording about the, the Exodus seminar too. And okay, so Moses, you have the rod to a snake and back again, you have the leprous hand, you have the water to blood. What does that mean? Now, those things sort of have a meaning packed in, the rod to the snake, that sort of chaos and order. The hand is health and disease and the blood is source of life, you know, death. So blood spilt is basically death because blood belongs in the body, not lying all over the land. So again, as modernity recedes, all of this takes on a new register. On the science and religion front, I think it's true, it's silly to say that science and religion conflict because these are such broad categories, but I think it's fair to say that certain religious claims conflict with certain scientific findings. For example, there are flavors of Christianity, like young earth creationism that seem to flatly contradict the findings of modern science. That's not a problem for religion in general, but there are some broader problems. I mean, Well, and again, young earth creationism is in a sense, an alternative science. That is exactly how they are approaching it. They're approaching it as an alternative science. Young earth creationism is in that sense, very modern. And I'm not saying ancient people, if pressed, wouldn't have sort of done, you know, Bishop Butler's timeline. I'm not saying that I'm saying that the approach to it is thoroughly ensconced in the modern world. Evolution has famously been one of the most talked about so-called objections to Christianity. Of course, there's nothing in principle that prevents somebody who's a Christian from believing in natural selection, but it does raise certain problems. For example, the specialness of human beings. If human beings are supposed to be special amongst other animals, then if we were to resurrect the entire evolutionary tree from our ancestral fish all the way up to a modern homo sapiens, you stand them all in the line, you get a human, a human, a human, a human, a human, and then they start to get a little bit more. Notice again, a very monarchical vision. This isn't phenomenological at all. This is just sort of something on a screen like in the matrix populating it. More like our apish ancestors, maybe something looking a bit like a chimpanzee, but there's no point at which a human being stood next to a chimpanzee. It doesn't work like that. Every single animal has always given birth to the same species as themselves. You kind of have to believe something like the- When he says that, it's like, did you really mean that? Arbitrary breathing of life into one of these animals such that two identical creatures, both suffering, both struggling for survival, both experiencing all kinds of seriously troubling conditions, I think. One of them gets to inherit eternal life, is subject to the moral law, and is offered compensation for the suffering, but its genetically identical mother is not. If you want to believe that there's a straight line between humans and other animals, that's the kind of thing you have to believe. Again, nothing in principle wrong with that, but I think it raises a problem that wouldn't exist without the science. Many scientists are religious indeed, and many have contributed to this book, but I also think it's worth noting that there are lots of areas of science, right? Again, look at regard, because, well, how do we regard this? What is this? In that there are lots of areas of philosophy. Somebody could say, I'm a philosopher, and I don't believe in God. That might be true, but you might find that the majority of philosophers don't believe in God, but that the majority of philosophers of religion do, and I think that would be an important clarification, and I'm not quite sure which area of science would be the most theologically relevant here, so perhaps that's something that's worth discussing. Well, Alastair, I would love to talk a little bit about the sort of science religion debate at some point, but perhaps before we do that, why do you think New Atheism has rather lost its appeal today? Well, I think people just moved on. This always happens. For example, you take the publication of AJR's language truth and logic. I mean, it caused a flurry of activity. Everyone thought, hey, you know, the world's a different place. We've moved on. New excitement, all these things, and then gradually people got to realize, no, great to talk about these things. Okay, attention. Notice, and this is a theme that's going to build in this video, that we're recognizing that we're not just these, we don't have this monarchical vision, we're not just these impartial observers taking in a world of objects that we're bringing something to this, and it is in fact transjective as we go back and forth. But actually, you know, it's not quite as simple as that. I think we do have something here that in many ways Richard Dawkins has seen, New Atheism as a whole, but I think Richard Dawkins in particular, has seen as having energized a very interesting discussion, but we've moved on. The New Atheism has got itself entangled with the American right in politics. Why on earth? I don't know. It was a very bad mistake, but that happened, and I think we need to say that that has really been a very, very bad misstep on its part. But I think more than that, I think people are just, well, actually, A, it is rather more complicated than Richard Dawkins is suggesting, just clearly is the case. But secondly, I think there's a point that is definitely- Well, one of the things that has really moved on is the fact that in the first conversation between McGrath and O'Connor, they quoted Dawkins as saying, well, I just don't want these people to have influence. And the one time Dawkins goes on Unbelieveable, he basically says, well, no, you're the nice kind of people. It's fundamentally a political question, which is exactly what these two are worried about. They're, for the most part, worried about politics and having politics roll out the way that they think it should roll out. It was talking about is what is Richard Dawkins proposing in the place of religion. It's very, very easy to critique, and we see that, I think, very powerfully in both Dawkins and Hitchens, but what is the alternative that they are proposing? Because Dawkins would very often say, look, in certain ways, atheists are people who do not believe in God, who don't have these beliefs, which are so dangerous. But I want to know what their positive beliefs are and how they ground them. I think that's an extremely important point because we haven't really been treated to a proper exposition of them. And I think that's something that really is very, very interesting. It's one thing to say this is wrong. I wish I wanted to agree with that, but I also want to know what do you say and on what grounds do you base it? Because if you are, in effect, saying that there is no God, then I want to know what grounds you actually base those beliefs. So for instance, And you mentioned it, and I want to talk to you about something I want to talk to you about for quite a long time, because you're an insider of the substitution hypothesis. And do you want to take a shot at explaining the substitution hypothesis? Well, the substitution hypothesis that worked is basically the idea of Christian, of whether or not we should use this wiring to foster Christianity versus wokeism in an attempt to stop wokeism. If there has to be a religion, as Thompson posited, if there has to be a religion, we should pick one that's not wokeism. Okay, yeah. So is the necessary default position as one ideology falls into irrepute and goes away, is it necessary that another one will fill the void? So let's take a look at this clip from Dawkins, and then I'm going to ask your opinion about this. All right. I don't know who came up with this. I might have come up with this. I don't know who came up with this, but the substitution hypothesis. Yes. So do you think that as one religion fades, like default is the belief state for humans, they just have to believe something. And as one, as the old religion fades, a new one has to come in? There's something in it, I think. And there's no doubt about it that we seem to have exchanged one form of superstitious religiosity for another. And the analogy goes pretty deep. But if you're right about the substitution hypothesis, then I'm rather inclined to give up. I mean, I don't know how to cope with that. I used to think that the one thing that would make me want to die would be if I found myself in a world where I was surrounded by people who no longer believed in evidence and believed in something else other than evidence, somehow felt contempt for evidence. And I hope we're not approaching that now. I don't mean none of my friends are like that. I certainly think that we're in that state with people in regard to conversations. And again, overwhelmingly, I'd like to get the audience's thoughts on that about the substitution hypothesis. And then it's so discouraging. There's a minty meter in the chat. So I'd like to see what the listeners think about this. Okay, so what is your take on the substitution hypothesis? There. But in general terms, we just have a new generation arising, and they have different interests and different concerns. I think one thing that I think is really interesting is this. If you were to try and characterize Richard Dawkins, I think I would describe him as a modernist. I'm not critiquing him in any way. I'm simply trying to give a neutral description of where I think I would place him on a map. In other words, the things are pretty well defined. And thus, in effect, in a world where, in effect, we're into my truth, what I think is right, which somehow trumps what, for example, science might think, I think we're moving into a fresh debate. And actually, I have to say I have an awful lot of sympathy with Richard Dawkins. But what I do notice is that we are seeing a cultural shift taking place, which means that we are moving on to discuss different questions, and we're using different criteria of assessment in doing so. So if you like, the issues are not philosophical, they're cultural. There's what is going on in people's minds, the way in which they self-define, the criteria for rationality which they are adopting, which in effect are very often, if you like, my truth. This is what is true for me, this therefore is what you must respect. I think that's a very interesting trend. So I think there are a number of things going on here. And I'm not quite sure where we go in the future, but I think that's one of the reasons why, in effect, this seems a very interesting discussion from the past. And therefore, I think that does help us to understand why people have moved on. So those are some very brief thoughts on why I thought it was a rather interesting question. – Thanks, Alistair. Well, let's speak to one of the members of that new generation. Because Alex, you are a totally different generation. As you say, you sort of grew up with all of this already established. You didn't see the rise of the new atheism in some senses. So what do you think are some of the contemporary objections to Christianity? I mean, are the big questions for your generation dramatically different from what perhaps Richard Dawkins and his contemporaries were thinking about? – I don't think so. But of course, new atheism is as much a cultural critique as it is a philosophical one. In fact, it's probably more so. If you look at the treatment in the God illusion of the philosophical arguments for God's existence, I think it's wanting to say the least. Christopher Hitchens hardly even attempts to address such questions. And when he does, I think displays a fairly obvious confusion. When asked, how do you get something from nothing, for instance, by one of his famous debates by Frank Turek, he says, well, what about all the nothing that's to come? Think about the Andromeda galaxy that's coming towards us, and we're going to collide with it, and soon enough the stars will be so far apart that we won't even be able to see anything. That's a whole lot of nothing. You know, the heat death, the end of the universe. Seemingly first, not realizing that Christians believe that there's going to be an intervention before that happens, but also not realizing that the question of how something comes from nothing is not a perfect analog of why there is, so to speak, nothing to come. It just seems to completely avoid the question. And I think that's the kind of thing that you often saw with Christopher Hitchens, more of a cultural critique. And so, okay, yes, there's a lot of sort of old news here, but I think that's got to do with the cultural stuff. You know, religion is bad, religion makes you think bad things. Religion causes wars, this kind of stuff. When people hadn't really considered this in the sense that it hadn't been mainstream public appeal for this kind of thinking, it's quite new and fresh and exciting. Now I think that's been replaced by the whole culture wars, woke culture type thing. What 10 years ago, 15 years ago, we would have turned on Fox News or the equivalent of GB News or whatever then, and they would have been talking about religion and evolution in schools, and now they're talking about, you know, gender theory in schools instead. It's just a cultural shift. This happens every 10 to 15 years, something captures the nation. But the philosophical arguments remain the same, perennially. That's very much the problem and part of the inherent nihilism of being a philosopher, and that you realize that you're asking and answering the same questions that Plato and the ancients were. Nothing's changed on that front. And so the sustaining arguments for atheism are pretty much as they always have been. The problem of evil, divine hiddenness, considerations about mind and body, maybe that kind of stuff. It all remains the same, but as do in many ways, the religious arguments. Some developments in science tell us interesting things that might inform these arguments. We say, well, look, science has done so much for the philosophy of religion because it's shown, for instance, that the universe had a beginning. Well, it shows that the universe with a small u had a beginning. It doesn't show that there was a beginning of all that could possibly exist. And also, like Al Ghazali thought that the universe had a beginning. Of course, we now might be able to confirm that experimentally, but the philosophical arguments that are informed by the universe have a beginning have existed for as long as thinking apes have. And so it doesn't actually change that much about the fundamental debate. And equally, there are arguments on the other side. The more we discover, we also discover, for instance, evolution by natural selection is a process that is defined by death and suffering. Survival of the fittest is death and destruction of the weakest. And so we're now in a position to know that the mechanism by which God would have chosen to bring about the variety of species on planet Earth is one that has suffering built into its very system, such that 99.9% of every species, let alone every animal, has ever walked this planet, has been brutally wiped from existence by being torn apart by predators or disease or not being fit for its environment. But again, he's not noticing that he's noticing suffering. Well, why do you notice the suffering? Where does that come from? It's again part of this arenic assumption that he lives within. And that arenic assumption also has a history. This seems to, again, inform an argument from the problem of evil. But it's still the same problem of evil that was talked about before we discovered natural selection, if you see what I'm saying. Thanks for that, Alex. Alistair, we've only got a couple of minutes before we've got to go to a break. But you talked about this kind of my truth, your truth. I guess relativism is perhaps an issue that is more prominent now. And the other thing I wondered was whether apathy is more of an issue now. So one of the people in the book, Johan Erasmus, who's from South Africa, says, at one stage, many Christians considered new atheism as the biggest threat to the church. They were wrong. Atheism is not the problem. Apathy is. For quite a few, atheism is just the beginning of the journey. I wondered what you thought of what he said that actually apathy is the biggest enemy of the church. Well, I think there are many who would say this question is simply something I do not wish to think about. It has no relevance for me. It generates controversy. I wish to avoid it. And actually, that is a well-understood cultural stereotype. The person who does not wish to get involved in these debates because, A, they fear it might go bad. You know, it might lead to violence. And perhaps more importantly, I don't see what relevance is. I think we need to say that the options are not theism, atheism, but also agnosticism. And I think, you know, I have enormous respect for principle agnosticism, which is simply saying the evidence is not good enough to allow me to make a decision at all. So that is a kind of additional point you'd bring in this discussion. So certainly, I would say that we are seeing cultural changes taking place, not uniformly, but in different forms in different places. And it's very, very difficult to construct a global picture. I think that there is no doubt that in the West, things have changed quite a bit. It almost slips by when he says it's very difficult to construct a global picture. And that is, again, one of these points that is behind all of this and behind almost everything. I find myself thinking about this all the time now. All of these judgments that we make when you think about combinatorial explosion and the relationship with which we have to the world as we engage with it. These global pictures of things are getting better, things are getting worse. Look at this, look at this, look at this. Okay, look at that, look at that, look at that. And it's very interesting even within, let's say, just one person like Jordan Peterson, if you get him talking about climate or money or wealth, he'll say things have gotten better, better, better, better. Then you talk about university. Well, things have gotten worse, worse, worse, worse in terms of marriage or sexual ethics. Things have gotten worse. How do you weigh between these things? Are the things, because one of the interesting things about looking back in history is that again and again and again you find people are not paying attention to the thing that's going to completely undermine them. Think about the Native Americans when these boats pull up. The Native Americans are thinking, how, what use might these people be to us? You read 1493, you look at the Massachusetts Bay Colony, you look at the pilgrims and well, let's give them food and keep them alive. But well, what about the diseases? Not paying any attention to that. What about ongoing boats that are going to come and dump more and more and more people here? No idea about that. This is the kind of unknowing with which we live our lives all the time. We do our best to try to think about what is relevant and what is important. But we're almost always wrong. Quite significantly. And that new questions are being asked. I think that my own view is, as someone who's been quite involved in the way things are, the new questions being asked are the more interesting, the old ones. So I think it's refreshing to see that these new debates are opening up because they're much more interesting. So I think that's what I think. So I think it is very important to think about the new atheist critique of religion and ask what can be learned from them. I think that's something we ought to do. But there are others stepping in to say, let's talk about this instead. And I think I'm very tempted to go with them and say, yes, we do need to talk about these things. Let's do it and see what these take us. Well, thank you so much, Alathri Dawkins. But I guess as I was reading it, I was wondering, is there anything in particular that struck you about some of the conversions or the personal testimonies? Because if it wasn't the arguments, was there anything about their stories that you found particularly interesting or surprising? Well, there's always an element of envy in that I'm firmly convinced that the principal mechanism for bringing somebody to faith in God is some kind of experience that doesn't necessarily... I found this extremely interesting because again, listen to Douglas Murray, I'll need to hear a voice. Now, again, I make the point regularly, this pattern doesn't work the way we think it works. Our assumptions we bring to this pattern are both deeply human, but also very modernistic because, well, evidence-based. Well, what kind of evidence? I would need to hear a voice. You can't doubt that. I know plenty of deconstructed Pentecostals who God was a very living part of their lives and miracles and words of knowledge and all of those things. And I don't want to be a troll, but if the right situation proposes, I would say, what about that? It wasn't all of that evidence and you simply cast it aside. You look at it differently now. Moses and his debating with God and here's the blood, here's the snake, here's all of this. No, no, no, the disciples, all of these miracles. No, we don't work that way yet. What's interesting is he's looking at the other three Ps. He's saying the propositional isn't going to actually get me there. It's the other three Ps. It's got to work in sort of my whole life as I live it. And then he even says envy. And I catch this sometimes where, and Tim Keller actually says this is actually one of the first signs that a conversion is going to happen or may happen, is that before you can believe, you have to want to believe. I don't necessarily mean a religious experience where you sort of have a pool line conversion or anything of the sort, but some kind of narrative when people are asked about why they come to believe in God, as you can read in this book, they tell a story. They don't give you a syllogism. And so the thing that really stands out to me is the obviousness with which that jumps off the page. And again, this is where I have a lot of respect for what O'Connor is doing right here. I mean, kudos. Great. I mean, very honest, very good faith. Love it. Something about a narrative. And it does make me wonder why that's not a narrative that every character in this sort of earthly performance gets to experience. That is the problem of divine hiddenness, essentially. It's not just the problem of divine hiddenness. And this in some ways is why do different people play a role? Why are different people cast in different ways? And then this gets into obviously questions of election. And so I mean, the more sort of personally experiential story gets, the more I can really sort of understand why somebody might have come to believe in God, but the less applicable it becomes to somebody else. The more you generalize, the more you say, well, here are some considerations that might work for you. Suddenly you're getting a bit abstract and it loses the personal touch that carries the entire attractiveness of religious faith in the first place. So there's a bit of a kind of a bit of an impasse here. The more general you get, the less personal you get, the more people you're going to be able to sort of have applying something to their lives, but the less personally they're going to be able to apply it, if you know what I mean. So, it's a wonderful collection of stories, but I can't say that news of somebody else's personal experiences and conversions particularly move me to feel like I'm going to have a similar experience. I mean, you have spoken about this quite a lot. So do you think that's the one thing that would really convince you to believe in God, to have that irrefutable, tangible experience of God? Well, I know that that probably would. I can't say it's quite the only thing. I mean, there might be some kind of argument or reflection upon an argument or expression of an argument in a new way that just makes something sort of logically click. But in terms of, yeah, becoming a confessional Christian, somebody who feels like they're- Now pay attention to the argument he just made because he's saying, well, there might be an argument and then it just clicks. Now I'm running out of time here, so I'm going to speed this up. McGrath basically goes through and when he's asked about his conversion will say, actually for me, it was just cold reason. It wasn't an experience. It wasn't a bolt from above. It wasn't a shining light. It wasn't a voice that I heard. I just kept looking at it and decided this is true. This is truer. This is better. This is a better way of life. Now I want to get to the point and I probably should have done more fast forwarding. Let me get to that point because the point that Alex makes here is that, well, if it's a better argument, okay, but you have to apprehend a better argument. This is something that sort of rationalists often sort of imagine or don't see because arguments just like lifestyles, just like everything else that you apprehend, has to be apprehended. In that way, there's a transjective quality to it and a little bit later O'Connor is going to talk, basically, he doesn't use the word, but he's going to talk about transjectivity in terms of our relationship with the world. The Alistair's experience was rather dull. Well, I know it does happen and I suppose that kind of conversion story might be overrepresented in academia, for example. If somebody is willing to devote themselves to study and argument and that kind of way of thinking, then perhaps that is just the way that your brain works. I know that there are examples of people who do become convinced through seemingly argument alone. I think I referenced Anthony Flew before, perhaps even in the previous episode, as an example of someone who at least ostensibly did the same. But then I do also agree. I mean, in saying that there's no experience involved, while I find it interesting that this comes after talking about putting on new theoretical goggles, I think was the phrase, this seems to be a way of describing changing the way that you interact with the world. And I actually agree entirely that this is the case. I recorded a podcast with a man called Anil Seth, who's a philosopher of consciousness at the University of Sussex. He wrote a book called Being You, which is a fascinating overview of some of the recent developments in the science of consciousness. And his personal theory, the theory that he promotes is that consciousness is something like a meeting in the middle of inputs and outputs. That is, it's not just that your brain is this sort of blank slate that just takes in information and processes it as it is. But it's also not the case that you invent the entire world around you. There really is a microphone in front of me, but the way it looks, the way that I position it in my sort of spatial dimensions around me, that kind of stuff is something like a projection of the brain. And it's something like a meeting in the middle. So a little bit of cognitive science, a little bit of consciousness from a source that he respects, learns it in a podcast, basically says, our apprehension of reality is transjective. It's, he uses his own word, sort of a meeting in the middle. And we talked about, I mean, you'll probably be familiar with the black and blue dress that was a phenomenon across the internet, where people couldn't agree on the color of this dress. And it probably has something to do with the white balance of the camera. There are examples of these kinds of illusions, which are all the more fascinating because you can choose what it is that you hear or you see. So the best example, I think, is this this toy of some sort that also went viral for saying brainstorm, the toy, you press the button and it says brainstorm. But if you listen to it, and you listen for the words green needle, you hear the words green needle instead. And it's like the black and blue dress thing. It's phenomenal. If you haven't listened to it, just type in brainstorm green needle into YouTube and you can go as many times as you like, and whichever one you're listening for is just the one you hear it is phenomenal. And we were just talking about how does the brain do this? Why does this happen? How is this even possible? And what we realize is an implication of this that you do hear. How does the brain do this? Why is this even possible? Okay. You're beginning to see your presuppositions, you're beginning to see your religion that's behind everything else. And you say, no, we, we apprehend the world naively. Again, the first big event on stage between Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris, this was exactly the point that Peterson tried to help Harris see. Harris, who apparently has an advanced degree in consciousness. And Harris just sort of, no, we, we see the world and play around with meditation, fine, and play around with altering this, yes. But finally, the religion says, we apprehend the world in such a way so there is no, so there is no God, because the hiddenness of God, we would see it. Again, back to the, the story from Don't Sleep There Snakes. The Westerners didn't apprehend the God. The rest of the village did. Was the God on the beach? Yeah, or see, or experience, I guess, what you expect to. This is a sort of crude, obvious example, but we think that this extrapolates, at least slightly. If you expect to hear Green Needle, you hear Green Needle, you actually do okay, so if you expect to see God in the world, then you see God in the world, you actually do. So I agree that that's the case, but I do think this sort of goes both ways, right, because if I said the same thing as an atheist, it would sound like a criticism of religion. Yeah, well, you know, you just expect to find religion in the world, you sort of go into it with a sort of pre-existing religious framework, and so of course you're going to see evidence abounding for God's existence, and of course you're going to see his hand working in the sort of minuscule aspects of your daily life. Because you come to expect it, that's the thing. But that's not necessary, maybe for a modernist Christian, that's not necessarily a challenge for a Christian. Karen on The Meeting Code just had, I haven't listened to the whole thing yet, I just started listening to it today, had Ian McGill, Chris, and David Schindler on, and what a cool combination. And Karen is super interested in the question about loving, and what does love enable you to see? Now, the whole premise of the modernist worldview is it's all flat, everything, Vervecky runs through this very nicely, it's all accessible, everything, and Vervecky's like, that's not how we work. Peterson again and again to Sam Harris, this is not how we work. Now, the Christian worldview is not dependent upon that modernist worldview, his worldview is. And so this little, this bit of knowledge about the world is devastating, and it's a big part of the reason modernity is going away. And this entire, this entire conversation that he has that he has with Dawkins about, well, if it isn't the case that people just see evidence, then I don't want to live. Well, there's your religion. You know, Peterson says people don't like getting kicked in the axioms. Well, cognitive science is kicking Dawkins in the axioms, and he's basically saying, I don't think I want to live in a world that isn't religious in the way that I think it is. Take off those goggles for a moment and look at the world through a materialist's lens, you know, consider that hypothesis, you'd see that it's equally plausible and equally livable. And I don't- Can you really take off the goggles? We sort of try, we sort of pretend, we do as if, but do we really take them off? To what degree are we slaves to these worldviews? I don't know if that's true, but if that is the case, then in theory, I think this works better as an argument for at least agnosticism. If the argument doesn't have to be something like, well, my goggles are better than yours, but my goggles see just as clearly as yours. That is, you know, if I put on a materialistic lens and look at the world, do I see God's hand working in my daily life? Like, not really. Well, okay, fair enough. But are you going to say that there is no better perspective, or the better perspective can't be known? Because then, at least the Christian has the advantage because the Christian can live by faith. The faith that the evidentialist has is in their ability to apprehend evidence. And if this is true for seeing God's hand and doing all of these things, isn't it also true for the apprehension of arguments? Because sort of what they do is they say, well, you know, cognitive science and the way we view the world and the dress and the hearing and all of that stuff. But that's also true of what arguments you find convincing and what arguments you dismiss. Because if you just watch people making arguments going back and forth, it's amazing any argument lands at all. They do to a degree, but they don't work like purportedly arguments are supposed to work. Well, that's because human beings are. Well, that's exactly the point. Human beings are, and we don't stop being human beings when we're talking about this stuff. We are human beings. And at least in a faith context, you have someone to appeal to. Otherwise, you're just left in the universe understanding that you can't know. And that's sort of on the slippery slope to Neilism. Maybe in some poetic sense, but if it is the case that you can change that just by putting on different metaphorical goggles, I don't know if you'll agree with me that that seems to be. Remember, you started out a little bit of envy. Well, if you're envious, just do it. If in fact, it's arbitrary, put on the goggles that make you happier. Forget truth and evidence and all of those things. Just do what you think feels best or works best for making you happy. Well, why don't you do that? It goes back to Ravecki's argument about, you know, if you're in a wonderful romance, do you want to know if your beloved is cheating on you? Yes, I want to know. Why? Because I don't want to think that I'm living in a lie. Why don't you want to think that? Because I want to at least maintain some illusion of control over my life. Oh, well, what's that about? It's trust. It's faith. More of a trouble for religious belief than it is a help for it. Well, Alex, I would love to know, is there anything outside of that kind of personal experience that would convince you that God does exist, that you could legitimately believe in God? I'd like to say a sound valid argument. Of course, there are many valid arguments for God's existence. The question is whether the premises are sound. What about the apprehension? Again, you just made this whole argument about the fact of our apprehension about so many things. Well, it's transjective. But no, when I'm doing arguments, there's nothing like that. Really? Really? Nothing? Doesn't it stand to reason that you apprehend arguments in the same way that you apprehend the color of the dress or the sound of the word? And if that is the case, where does your whole argument go? And you sort of default back to Descartes and say, well, if God is a grand deceiver, you might as well just throw up your hands because there's no there's no there's no point to anything. But the argument from religion is, well, it's something there is evidence, but it's finally a position of faith that being is good. And God has made the world in such a way that while not perfect, our faculties can apprehend truth to a degree. And I mean, this, again, is the classical argument for the rationality and, in fact, the necessity of faith. And again, Lewis, Alvin Plantinga, they've run through the through the Darwinian argument that says, well, if if if if all of our faculties to apprehend are simply the product of adaptive advantage, then they're not actually connected to any truth and truth cannot be apprehended. Science is based on the premise that truth can be apprehended. And in fact, the reliability of science should be evidence for that presuppositional belief. So I'm about out of time. I'm 40 minutes in. It's an hour and 24. I thought it was a terrific conversation. I was impressed with how honest and transparent and what a good faith conversational Connor was. I've, you know, I've made I've been critical in the past, but I, you know, I was really impressed by this. So, you know, I even in my own transjective apprehension of things am, of course, biased myself, as of course, John Vervecki saying the rational, the relevance realization and the biases are actually two sides of the same coin. We need that to cut through the combinatorial explosiveness. And he's right. So I try to be fair. And I try to when I see something that's fair and truthful and in good faith, I want to, I want to praise it and recognize it and congratulate it. So this has probably gone on too long. I probably should have done some more preliminary editing and picking the spots, but you'll get a sense for the whole conversation and listen to the whole thing. So leave a comment. Let me know what you think.