https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DCC6OYD1ixI

 Hi, this is Paul. I've got three short videos planned just thinking about Sam Harris and the celebrity atheists a little bit. So one question, does reason stand in for God with the celebrity atheists? You know, the more I listen to them, the more I ponder how they use the word reason and how it's imagined to behave and what it is supposed to deliver upon. And so I decided, well what if I just made a list of things that where God would normally fit in for a theist and does this hold true for a celebrity atheist? Reason will bring us peace. Sam Harris talks about the Middle East conflict and if people would only be reasonable and not be attached to these ancient stories where Abraham bequeaths the land or there's debate about what's happening, you know, what Islam is deserving. So reason will bring us peace. Reason will bring us unity. If we only, if we are only reasonable, we will all see everything one way. Reason will bring us conscious well-being. That's Sam Harris's definition of the good. Reason will save the world. You know, the reason will straighten out everything in the world. Reason will win some day. Reason will make all things new. Now you can easily replace God for reason here and the sentences work the same way and I think in terms of the mental system for the celebrity atheists, God and reason are almost synonymous in terms of how they function. Now there, so then I thought, well let me go a little further. In the Gospel of John there are some I am statements that are very famous and a little controversial. Well reason is the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to perfection except by her. Now should I make reason feminine or masculine? I feminized reason maybe for reasons that will come out a little bit later. Reason is, Sophia, wisdom in the Bible and in ancient mythology was a lady and was a woman. So you know maybe, if you want to make reason a dude, go right ahead. I won't be offended. Reason is the good shepherd. Reason is the light of the world. Reason is the resurrection and the life. Now what's interesting in C.S. Lewis's miracles, I've been rereading it again now lately because it helps keep me oriented in these conversations in terms of some of the observations that Lewis made. The reason Lewis used reason for his take on this had had everything to do with the naturalists that he was in conversation with and the naturalism that he evolved beyond in his adult life. And one of the big takeaways from this that I've really lived into is Lewis's observation that the supernatural colonizes nature. And when I listen to, I'm still, still haven't put a video together yet, but I'm thinking about doing a video on natural and supernatural because we're using these words but I'm not quite sure we're knowing what we're talking about. And this idea that Lewis had of colonizing, of the frontier between them, of the ways that that reason colonizes nature, how reason colonizes nature to produce water bottles and books and all of these things. That nature is a willing host, a willing guest, Chapter 9 of miracles. I might do a video just on Chapter 9 because it's quite an insightful chapter about how this conversation changes how we see nature. So reason is the hope for the naturalists. Now what's interesting here is that naturalists worship a god they employ and I would say worship. Now they don't go to church and they don't say prayers to it but worship is more than just formal religious activity. If someone who is in love would say I worship the ground she walks on. Well what does that mean? It means that they're sacred, they're special, they have a, they function in a higher way within the conversation. And for the celebrity atheists or the career atheists reason very much fills that gap. If you just listen to them, listen to how they talk about reason. Now but here's the thing they employ reason. Reason is a tool that human beings use. We are admonished repeatedly to be rational, to use reason. Now what's interesting is that this is a critical error because it means that their agency colonizes reason rather than fully submitting to it. And if you think this thing through, okay so who is using reason and to what ends? I wouldn't say that I myself am reason, I would say that reason is something I use. Reason is something that I employ. Reason is something that I bring to a conversation. Reason is something that I bring to a task. Reason is something that I bring to a challenge and I attempt to use it in order to achieve an objective that I want. Now this walks us right into the big question for this community which is what is I? Do I exist? And now in my past videos I've talked about me being a story and all of us being a story and a story probably being about the best way to represent what we assume a human life to be. Now there's some real scientific doubt that this can be done or that this is in any way as clear or as obvious as the language seems to suggest. Jonathan Haidt has a video or somebody else has a video of Jonathan Haidt out on the internet called the rationalist delusion. Someone pointed that out to me very early in this in this journey. A number of years ago I read a book by David Eagleman and one of the points he makes he tries this is a book for popular consumption so he tries to simplify the understanding he says in a sense we have our our rational faculties and our emotional faculties but the rational center can do math but it can not tell you what to do or what to eat and he goes into this in the book and this point has been made by a number of other people that one of the things that they've learned about our brains and that if we there are certain brain disorders that take out that cut off our emotional capacity and we would imagine that such people become Spock like Spock in Star Trek but that's not the case at all when this happens and a person's emotional capacity is taken out what they can no longer do is decide so in other words if reason is a tool if reason is at hand is reason is something that we employ it still is colonized by us last night at our meetup I had a conversation we had a new person come in a number of new people come and it was a it was a delightful meeting but one of the persons was making the point about pantheistic conception of the world and I shared with him my take on pantheism which is that I don't think it finally works as long as you have beings that are capable of agency they just keep colonizing the impersonal when we when we walk into let's say a virgin field or what we imagined to be a virgin field or a virgin land what do we do with it we shape it according to our desires we do this all the time we do it naturally agency colonizes the impersonal and and reason in this case is an impersonal tool it's something that we employ math doesn't run us but we use math to design a bridge or to design a weapon or to design a water fill it facility or to design try to design an economy so without the emotional center we can never accomplish anything so so how does that really live out now remember Jordan Peterson I was I'm reading maps of meaning now and I you know a friend of mine said it was you know it was it was inks it was inscrutable I'm not finding it inscrutable at all maybe because I've been listening to Peterson for so long but he's it's it's all of the stuff that I've been soaking in from Jordan Peterson all along and now at the beginning of maps and meaning as he said in the Easter Easter lectures you can conceive of reality and in terms of two things a space of objects or a form for action and I think he's correct in this I've been saying this for quite a long time in my videos a form for action is a larger a world of objects is nested within a form for action and we don't actually see objects we see opportunities and obstacles Sam Harris again the reality is best conceived as a space for objects now for Jordan Peterson your God or your moral center articulated by stories guides there's a typo guides the good you pursue of your action in other words you implicitly have telos you have ends you have goals and so you're you're using reason you're employing tools that are at hand to reach to achieve an outcome Sam Harris says will you act with reason as your guide but the problem is reason isn't really your guide reason is the tool you are using to try and arrive at well-being and so how is reason really a guide it's more a means to an end and I think this is why as I'll do in my other subsequent shorter videos reason doesn't seem to be able to deliver well it doesn't seem to be able to yield outcomes and this is the distinction that Peterson keeps bringing up and he's done a blog post now on his notes from the from the Sam Harris conversations that reason can't tell you what is good now reason can offer you a menu of different options but we are still in the deciding seats we are still the ones that employ reason and so I think this is a this is a serious error in the the naturalist perspective at least as articulated by by Sam Harris and to a degree from what I've heard from Matt Delahunty the true gods in Jordan Peterson are not transparent to you your actions express what you truly believe with Sam Harris the rationality of your actions is transparent to you and again as a depth psychologist Jordan Peterson has real questions about this that our motivations are are significantly mixed and in many ways we don't know we may not even really know why we're doing something and someone who is self-conscious and paying attention to themselves probably notices this in themselves so now hope and agency rationality is a god we employ and that's I think fundamentally that's how the naturalists see it now they wouldn't say they would object to the word God okay but rationality is a tool we employ but it's a tool that gives us power over nature and I think our hearts want it to give us power over our adversaries power over those with you know with whom we debate but but we are still doing the choosing whatever this we is that we feel ourselves to be and I don't think we can escape that religious people who employ their gods are idolaters and this is a long-running theme in the Bible and part of why the Lord continues to refer to himself as holy holy holy or sovereign is that every time a human being tries to employ God God is offended now we find this this is just completely common in us as well I think it has something to do with with personality we would rather be loved than used and one of the one of the darkest things we can say about another person is that they used me or they used me against my will now we will often allow ourselves to be used if there are other purposes that we are seeking but again we don't like to be tools we imagine ourselves to be goods in ourselves and that's I think part of the image of God the people who employ their gods are idolaters and their gods are tools subject to their choices now Christians and I think other religious groups as well ideally are servants to their God and their hope is in his decisions more than their own and this is a common criticism by atheists that Christians submit themselves to the will of God Christians submit to bad things in their lives and derive comfort from imagining that perhaps God has a plan for better outcomes but but this shows the difference between reason as tool and reason as goal and whatever I often notice and I'm actually gonna bring these up in the other videos to rationality and eschatology we keep waiting for reason to deliver the goods it isn't it isn't much different from waiting for Jesus to come back how long have we been waiting waiting for reason well I heard Steven Pinker on the unbelievable podcast talking about reason and well reasons making the world better okay making the world better in what way according to whom at almost any point in time there are ways to stand up and say well I think the world is better there are other aspects you can look at it say I don't think the world is worse and this again introduces the challenge of subjectivity because if I'm dying of cancer painful cancer in a hospital bed the world doesn't look very good these assessments generally speaking require a vision like what I've talked about before a monarchical vision that is impersonal subjectivity is taken out of the conversation and we assert objectivity but the only way we can obviously assert objectivity is if we depersonalize it and we imagine our way into it the difficulty with that which we all know of each other is that if I'm imagining objectivity back into the world how do I know what my bias is motivations and motivations are so when we hear somebody else's imagined objectivity we protest because we think biases are sneaking in and there's an agenda to this so if Steven Pinker says the world is getting better well maybe I like to hear that because maybe it makes me feel good Donald Trump in his inaugural address and in a lot of his campaign was saying well the world is getting bad and and we need to do things okay well here's the point everybody pitches it in the way they want and this imagined objective view of the world is always pitched is always pitched by a subject and so right away we doubt the subject what is revealed is that we finally hope in ourselves because this religion of reason is finally a hope in the goodness of humanity or at least in the goodness of some people because we only trust in ourselves but here's where this breaks down we have trust issues with each other often we finally only trust ourselves because that's how we're wired or we or we trust imaginary people we don't know who will make all the right decisions for us but when it comes to actual people we have all these trust issues all the while we don't trust any other actual human being we are in relationship with so here's the first of a series of three little shorter videos just playing around