https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=KsDMb6Akdvw

 Hi, this is Paul. I know I've been sharing a lot of content from other channels lately. Part of that is just to help you become familiar with what all is out there. Part of what's been going on in this little community, this little corner, is we've been doing a lot of talking about onramping, a lot of talking about helping people sort of come up to speed on what's going on. A few months ago, Chad said what he really wanted to do was make a documentary about this little corner and BridgesMeeting Discord and all the other little channels going on. Part of what's happened is that there are so many channels that are sort of connected all together. There's of course GrimmGrizz and there's Jacob's Channel and there's GrailCountry and there's Meaning Code and there's of course the bigger channels and even lots of smaller channels. I try to give some visibility to these smaller channels and the work that they're doing. So Friday Morning Nameless, which arose out of something that at some point we'll probably talk more about, Chad has actually in this video, the second half of this video called The Little Corner and Innovation is really in a nice way sort of a documentary about the growth of what's been going on here. So I'm just going to append it to this video and I think based on my comments with Chad and my conversations, he's totally good with that because usually what happens when I do that to a video, they tend to get the bounce and they'll get another 100 or 200 subscribers and their work will get a little bit more publicity and they like that. So this is Chad's introduction to this little corner of the internet and little documentary about how this whole thing got going. So enjoy. Thomas Edison understood better than anybody before and many since that innovation is itself a product, the manufacturing of which is a team effort requiring trial and error. So I've been informed about a couple of things this week that have really been bothering me and I thought that I wasn't sure what to do about it. I've been communicating with some of my friends and colleagues about it, but that wasn't enough. So I thought I'd try to write my thoughts down and then talk about them a little bit and see where I got with that. So I've entitled this talk Professor Against Political Correctness. One, boom and we're live. 12 rules for life. So without reading this, so what you're saying is... There's only 12 things you need to know in life, right? That's it? This interview that you just did with this woman, Cathy Newmish, was that in the UK? It was, Channel 4 UK. Hi, my name is Paul VanderKlay. I'm the pastor of Livingstone's Christian Reformed Church in Florin Road in Sacramento and I blog at LeadingChurch.com. You can find my sermons at the Livingstone's website too and I want to do a series of videos on Jordan Peterson. Jordan Peterson has been fascinating me over the last few months as I've been watching his Psychological Significance of the Bible series. I've made it through his Maps of Meaning 2017 course and his Personalities course and I've caught a bunch of his other videos. While Peterson gets a lot of attention for the political stuff, I'm most interested in the Bible stuff as you can see behind me. I do a lot of work in the Bible. My father was a minister, my grandfather was a minister and then if you go back through my Jewish ancestry, there are a lot of rabbis and butchers it seemed way back in the day. So I've lived within the context of the Bible. I think the Bible is a fandom. It's a story that invites us to live within it and so I was very interested in Jordan Peterson's videos and I'm very interested in his videos and I want to discuss them and I blogged for quite a while and so when I was thinking about discussing them, I thought well I could write blog posts on them and embed YouTubes of them but the more I thought about it, the more I realized that this entire phenomenon of Jordan Peterson is a YouTube phenomenon. So hello everybody. I'd like to introduce you to my brother, Matthew and some of you might have seen Matthew. We did a conversation with Jordan Peterson, all three of us discussing the story of Abraham and so Matthew and I, we're used to talking about symbolism together. We've been talking about it since we were teenagers and so we decided that we're going to try to have this conversation online to talk about what symbolism is, what are the categories and what are the criteria for a proper symbolic interpretation of a story but hopefully we'll be able to do it because we have our own shortcuts and our own way of talking about things. Welcome. This is a series in which I am going to endeavor to put together a series of videos where I share pretty much all of my work. My name is John Brevecky. I'm an assistant professor at the University of Toronto. I'm in the psychology department and in the cognitive science program and I also teach for the Buddhism, psychology and mental health program. I've produced a lot of videos on a lot of various topics. Some of you have perhaps seen them. What I want to do now in this series is draw it all together and present to you an overall unified argument that can show you the interconnections between pieces that you might have seen before. How this got started is I got very interested in a particular phenomenon. I got interested in the fact that there seemed to be a growing confluence between people who are interested in Buddhism and people who are interested in cognitive science. We'll talk a little bit later as we go on what cognitive science is. You know some of this already in the world at large because we're going through what's called the mindfulness revolution. Mindfulness is being spoken of everywhere. I was in a bookstore yesterday, chapters and there's a whole section just on mindfulness itself. Why is the mindfulness revolution occurring? It's occurring particularly because of this intersection between Buddhism and cognitive science. Why is this happening and why is it so explosive in nature? What do we mean by mindfulness? Some of the work I've done is trying to get clear about that. We're going to talk about that in this series. Now there's also a lot of other things that in my mind seem to be convergent with this growing confluence between Buddhism and cognitive science. There is an increasing interest both academically and in the public at large in the topic of wisdom. Something that people did not talk about very much not that long ago. Well wisdom is now a very hot topic within psychology and cognitive science. Books offering to train you in wisdom are again becoming popular. Same bookstore experience yesterday. I bought my son a book called How to be a Stoic. How is it that a philosophical position from the Hellenistic era has become a popular book that people are seeking? Why is there this hunger for wisdom and why are people meeting it with these kinds of things? I've always been surprised that I've been able to teach what I've been teaching in the universities because I've always regarded it as crazily radical in a sense. It's crazily radical in a conservative way. I don't know what to make of that. Your teaching is crazily radical? In a conservative way, yeah. I mean it's in a conservative way because I think that the past not only has value, we cannot live without the integration of the past. No more than you can live as an individual without integrating your past. I mean we're historical creatures. If we're not united consciously with the past then we're divided internally and socially and that has consequences. So some of them are playing themselves out in the political divisions in the current world. But the consequences can be fatal. So what's the saying? A house divided amongst itself cannot stand. Once upon a time there was a man named Jordan Peterson. Then there was this channel. Duped by a pastor? How have you been duped? I've always admitted I'm a pastor. I've got all these books behind me. What else am I supposed to be? No, no. It was like I'm going to have to push it back, man. You can relax. It's not going to be then. And then, oh, I'm on time, buddy. That was the duping. You can relax anyway. Good, good. It's nice to have you in a Zoom. It's quite the honor in this little sphere of influence or whatever. It's a very little sphere. What do you want to do? Should we start with your story? Yeah, I figured I basically, it feels like I know you. So I should try and get you closer to that and then see where it goes from there. So how do you want to do this? Well, let's just talk and why don't you introduce yourself a little bit and I'll record it. And if it's something that we think we want to share, we'll share it. And if it's at the end of it, I'd like us to speak freely. But if it's something that we say, well, there's stuff in there I don't really want to put on, then we won't put it on. Right. Often in conversations like this, we have a conversation and I think based on emails and comments I get, I think you're asking questions that a lot of other people wonder about and so then it would be helpful to hear this stuff talked about. Yeah, sure. From Latin diurnal, diurnalis, journey journal, diurnal, all that. Now I just kind of want to talk to you about language. All right. Welcome to another episode of Salty and Fresh. I'm Fresh. And I'm Salty. Okay, so I'm here with Nathan. I can't even pronounce his last name. Omend. Omend. Okay. Yeah. And I'm Julian. Last name is Walner. All right. I'm super pumped about this. So I haven't talked to Sam in a long time. Cal, his video is off. But so I'm here with Sam and Cal. Hello. I'm here with John and Paul today. Sort of like what I did with our friends, Luke and Nate. I'm just going to be interviewing Sherry. I think we're live. It looks like it. Yeah. Hello? Hello. Okay. So we're going to talk about a topic. Okay. We're live and we're recording. So we're set. Hi, everyone. I'm Joey. I'm from the Sacramento Jordan Peterson Meetup Group and the Bridges of Meaning public discord channel. We're here today. We're just going to have a little chat here with my two friends, Tyler and Julian. I'll let them introduce themselves. Hi, I'm Tyler. I'm also from the Sacramento Meetup Group and me and Joey kind of been talking about doing the discord for a while and finally decided to do it. So now we'll make these videos too, which also we've been talking about doing for a while. Okay. So this is Julian. I've been active on Paul's channel. I'm a welder. I'm the hotter item in this group and I'm here to talk with Joey and Tyler about the meaning crisis. Because only within Christ can you reconcile those passions and they can find their right place. So if you wanted to do real shadow integration, you would become a Christian because if not, then what is shadow? What is not? All right, we're recording. Yeah. So have you heard my argument for why I think Chad should be Pope? Greetings and welcome to the Bridges of Meaning Hub channel. I'm Chad the alcoholic. I will be doing our first and possibly last newscast ever because I don't have any time to do this sort of thing. And my jokes are super cringy and but I wanted to do it. So I guess we'll do it. Shalom. Shalom. All right, Mary, nice to see you again. It's great to see you. Great to talk to you. And I love watching, you know, your work and what you've been doing with your channel and getting on, you know, the channel, everyone else in this corner. It's an endless source of information and I'm always so impressed with what you have to say. Well, ditto with regard to what you're doing. I'm enjoying your taking us through Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance. I think you're doing a wonderful job of the explication of that. It's just and it fits so nicely with everything else that we've been talking about. So it was great to bring that voice into the conversation. Well, thank you. I mean, I'm kind of I feel like I'm kind of struggling through a lot of it. And, you know, I mean, I know my interpretation is probably the scholarly one is the intuitive one. I'm here today with Sevilla because we've lost a very important member of this little corner of the Internet. Mary Cohen passed last night and Sevilla and I wanted to get together and reflect on what Mary meant in our lives and what she meant to this little corner. And so we're just going to very hopefully transparently and spontaneously share whatever is on our hearts. And I'm wearing flowers today because Mary used to always wear this beautiful flowered scarf around her head because she'd been battling the cancer for a long time. But that's one of the main things I remember about Mary's bright, beautiful smile and her flowered headdress. And as Paul said, she never wanted to talk about the cancer. She just wanted to walk right past that and get on with life. And she was a flame burning brightly for sure. That is for sure. And I too went and put on one of the two flowered garments. All right. Hello, everybody. I'm very excited today. I have two exciting guests who I'm excited to get to talk to each other. I have Bethel McGrew who, yes, I was instructed that it has the Hebrew pronunciation, not the standard pronunciation. I guess do you want to explain that? I mean, when two Bible school graduates fall in love and have a kid, you get Hebrew pronunciation. And like I said, you can just call me Samuel for the rest of the conversation. And Paul is just Paul, I suppose. So I'll let Jacob call you Saul. All right. So the exciting thing is for those who don't know, or for those who already know, there's going to be an event in Chicago where both of these fine people will be present. Very fine people. Very fine, interesting, definitely attractive people will be present. And we will have some live events that you can come to. So this is being hosted and organized by the Chicago Bridges of Meaning Meetup, which is an estuary, although we need to probably more formalize our affiliation with John Van Donk and Sacramento Estuary Hood. We're kind of just in our self denomination, self appointed estuary. Why stop now? Hi, this is Paul. And I have a conversation that I've planned now with John Van Donk. John Van Donk has been working pretty hard on developing the estuary concept. He's been leading three different estuary leader groups, and they have developed what I called, without John's permission, the estuary protocol. And John kind of pushed back on that. But we wanted to have a conversation today and talk about some of the work that John has done and how this is developing and what we think is important. And in fact, John, John created a document that we're pretty good, pretty much going to walk through. And I'm going to we're going to have this document on Google Docs. So if you want a written record of what we talked about today, it's available and you can just download it. I'll put a link to it in the notes. And, John, thanks for doing this today. Happy to be here. Thanks, Paul. OK, so I'll go ahead and. OK, so got this group of estuary leaders, at least in training. I think some of us have on the ground estuaries and then the rest of us are hoping to sometime soon. And just to kind of do a little demo of what this whole estuary thing is about, I'm going to kind of act tonight like I would if it were my own group. So I probably won't talk very much and let you guys talk. But since we have a new person, I think all of us know each other except for but there is one new person. So we should go ahead and go around and do introductions as we do. Although since we're recording this on the Internet, you don't have to say where you are. Shalom. I am here with the Reverend Father Eric Seitz and Dr. Dr. Amon Wilson and his lovely wife, Catherine O'Wilson, and we are going to discuss what happened at Thunder Bay and what we can learn from that and take forward with us. So take it away, guys. Shalom. CW says 500. Yes, it's shocking. I know I'm shocked. I am in fact shocked. So, first of all, I have to say, I never expected this channel to even get 100 subscribers. When I did get 100 subscribers, I decided to do this whole setup and actually, oh, anybody who wants to come and speak with me is more than welcome to. There is the link to StrainYard. Thank you.