https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Lw0cwyyUCN4

 This video is part of my playlist on rough drafts to Sunday. And as I've mentioned in my other videos, I am exploring YouTube. I'm trying to figure out what it is. And in order to do this as a part of someone who has a day job, I try to integrate my work into this. So some of you in the Jordan Peterson conversations have been asking about my sermons and how I integrate some of his stuff into it. I'm not going to have anything explicitly about Jordan Peterson in this sermon. If you watch what I do, I may, you may see some influence or, and I hope to do a video where I talk about that a little bit more specifically in terms of how his stuff has helped me become aware of certain themes and let's say voices within the Bible. But this sermon is basically just a running through and a rough draft of what I'm going to do on Sunday. And to those of you who actually go to Living Stones, I reserve the right to change any or all of this because today is Friday and I preach it on Sunday. And I continue to mull and edit throughout the weekend. And actually the sermon doesn't hit its final draft until early Sunday morning when I get up and look at it. So this is a Christmas Eve sermon. We're just having one service on Christmas Eve in the morning at our usual time. And this is the draft, the status of it is of what it is right now as I plan to proceed. And I'm going to be just in my little video on the upper left hand corner talking. I'm not going to zoom in and out. I'm just basically going to be talking and running through the slides as a practice session for me to to look for language and figure out kinks. And again, see, I'm always working on my sermon process to try and find a better way to do it. So one of the things that strikes me as I reflect on Christmas 2017 in terms of myself is how now I'm 54 years old and it strikes me how deeply many in my generation and younger were shaped by these animated TV Christmas specials that came out. Charlie Brown. I'll talk quite a bit more about them. But the rank and bath Santa Claus is coming to town. Now, again, I see some of this archetypal stuff here with Santa Claus and the winter warlock and the Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer characters with the freeze guy and the heat guy and South Town and Santa Claus and of course Frosty the Snowman. These these things have become in American culture and and to a degree in world culture a what's the right word there. They're they're they become the symbolism of Christmas for a generation. Now, now what happens in the Charlie Brown Christmas Christmas story is that Charlie Brown himself has a crisis. And you know every every good story needs a crisis and then the Christmas story Charlie Bounce Christmas is with materialism and I think we hear Charles Schultz working this out and of course the climax of the story is Linus stepping up getting the spotlight and reciting Luke two out of the King James version. What strikes me as I listen to that now is well this is a this is a this is a rather easy way to to find commonality in a more in depth conversation about the role of the Bible in American history and and the role of the Bible in you know in this non denominational format that grew out of the American frontier movement that the Bible becomes the one thing that that people can rally around and and and so when when Linus steps up and and quoting Luke two becomes the meaning of Christmas and this is not a bad candidate by any means. This is the this is the canonical candidate. This is the biblical candidate. But I think it's it's a little deceptive because if you're really looking for clarity and specificity and and to get down to the nub of it you you can even even this biblical passage isolated by itself can become kind of a low resolution wax nose. And and so you know this week I in researching this I did a little bit more digging into Charles Schultz. He lived here in northern California and I was I was I was disappointed and and a little alarmed to find that in those big Santa Rosa Rosifiers that we had all the smoke from not very long ago. His house was destroyed. Fortunately, there's a museum dedicated to him that had a lot of his memorabilia in it. I visited that that museum. The peanuts were a very big deal for for the country for the United States and Western culture when I was growing up. And I was surprised to know to learn in my in my research that Charles Schultz is the third top earning deceased celebrity behind behind Elvis and Michael Jackson. That's enormous. Now just last year, Jonathan Merritt wrote an interesting piece called The Spirituality of Snoopy. And he talks about how Schultz converted to Christianity shortly after returning from deployment in World War Two. And and he became a voracious reader of theological commentaries and the margins of his personal Bible were filled with handwritten notes. He was a longtime Sunday school teacher at churches in the Midwest and California and even even leading one group through a study of the entire Old Testament. And to me, again, this this speaks about the enduring power of the Bible in in our imaginations in human life. There's a reason that the Bible is the most translated book in human history, the most published book in human history for for all. Even now, the cross presser surrounding the Bible, we just keep coming back to this book. And so it makes sense that Linus pauses and reads the story of Jesus and the manger and the shepherds and the angels. And this in the context of of Charlie Brown's Christmas kind of settles it down and lets us say, ah, here's the meaning of Christmas. I did a little bit more research into into Charles Schultz. And, you know, it's very interesting because if we want to try to appropriate Schultz and say, OK, here is our image of Christianity. Here is our hero. Here is our icon. Here is our ideal. A little bit more digging reveals the fact that he is a human being with with feet of clay, just like the rest of us. One of the in 1951, he he was married and and had a child in 1952 and three further children were born late in Minnesota. And then they move out to California, Sebastopol. And what happens in California? He has an affair and and his marriage breaks down. And and, you know, then he has marriage number two with a woman he managed to stay married to for the rest of his life. And but to me, this just illustrates, well, he became a Christian after World War Two. Did that mean that he no longer had temptation? Does did his devotion to the Bible mean that he no longer stumbled and fell? The picture is is far more complex and it gets it gets more complex. Still later in life, he he referred to himself not so much as a Christian, but a secular humanist. And his his theology went in a less traditional way. And and and one of the things that he lost was he was less certain about other Christian doctrines, such as the existence of a literal heaven. And and so he you know, I kind of look at Charles Schultz on one hand coming coming from Christianity, kind of out of it into kind of a secular humanist space. And then having these doubts about, you know, about what would happen now. He you know, after he had cancer, what would happen to him? And I think about Steve Jobs, who had cancer, who had lived a very secular life. And if you read, for example, the biography, I should have pulled up the name. Maybe I will. The biography recently made of him, the same guy who did the biography of Einstein, that that that Steve Jobs, you know, had had the journey the other way, coming from a very secular life and then and then having having spiritual questions while he was facing his own death of of pancreatic cancer. And and some of this then gets poured into Schultz. And and so then what you'll see is that, you know, Charlie Brown Christmas came obviously early in career in his career. And and for him, so so Linus reading that passage, Linus reading that passage helped solidify him. Later, he kind of drifts away and life. Life is like this for many people. And so, you know, again, this this this comes to my point that just just reading the text might not alone dispel the darkness and and and cast away the clouds. And and so then when we we ask about Charles Schultz and and peanuts and and are we looking for validation? Are we looking for validation for our our particular tribal aspects? Are we are we stumbling around in the darkness? And the thing is, we're cross pressured by all of the things that blow all the things that challenge us in our culture, traditionally in Christianity, that there are three great enemies, our broken human nature, the world that that tempts us and also principalities and powers or the devil. And and and the Apostle Paul, you know, talks about principalities and powers. Now, two weeks ago, we saw the Mark version of John the Baptist and and as is true of Mark, very short version. Last week, we looked at the Gospel of John. And it's interesting how how how John seemed to take a lot of the same stuff that Mark had. There isn't the kind of connection between John, the Gospel of John and the Gospel of Mark that we see in like Matthew and Luke. But but John takes the story of John the Baptist and intersperses it in this song, this song that that likely was it was a Christian hymn that was being sung by by these early Christian churches and in this way tries to contextualize John and fit John into or fit John the Baptist into the Gospel of John. Now, the Gospel of Luke begins this way. Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have fulfilled among us, just as they were handed down to us by those who were the first those who from first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word. I think about eyewitnesses of the word. I should pull this. I should pull this slide into the sermon to the the the the book that was written frequent. Recently, where where Bachman did a very interesting story of a detailed story of the Gospels and noted where there are Gospels that are dependent on one another where they pull in names that aren't carried over into the next Gospel yet new names get pulled in. And Bachman makes the point that, you know, just like we see Luke saying here, he put this together for his friend Theophilus, who was quite likely a high status Christian probably in the in the Greek Empire, probably not someone with Jewish roots, because Luke wanted to piece this together for him and piece together for him a credible account. And so as Bachman said, as Bachman noted when he studied the Gospels that that what Luke says he did here, which is look for eyewitness sources. So Luke says, just as they were handed down to us by those who were first the eyewitnesses and servants of the word with this in mind, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning. Sounds like Luke when he became a Christian thought, I don't want to just believe this stuff because because someone tells it to me. I want to investigate it for myself. I want to do the research. I want to dig into this so we can imagine Luke traveling back to Judea and and and finding tracking down the stories as a journalist and finding the people who told the stories. Now what Luke proceeds to tell though is a far expanded story, even from what we had in Mark. And we know that that Mark was one of his sources because Luke and Matthew both often quote quote extensively from Mark. We also know that that Luke and Matthew share a common source that scholars have often called Q that because there's there's common things in common language, even, you know, text that's been pulled out of the same source. That Matthew and Luke used and this has been known for a long time. But most of this stuff in the beginning of the book doesn't come from that same source either. And so we scholars just ask, where did Luke get this information? And well, according to Luke, he tracked this down and he got it from others. Now, now, now a lot of people say, but this is Richard Bauckham is the book and I'm going to actually drop this slide in for the sermon. Here's here's the book, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses by Richard Bauckham. Gospel as eyewitness testimony. And basically from the prologue of the Gospel of Luke, this is exactly what Luke does. And so Bauckham goes through all the evidence goes through all the Gospels goes through what it means to be Roman historians and and comes to the conclusion that that what we have in the Gospels is exactly exactly what Luke says. Luke got these stories from others. And now when we read these stories, part of us thinks, well, well, how on earth could could this stuff have happened? Well, a couple of years ago, I was reading through Laura Hillenbrand's Unbroken. And as I was going through that book, I was I was listening to what this guy was enduring. And and, you know, so here's this young guy growing up in a miserable household and, you know, having a rough childhood and and the desperate and and but then he grows up and he becomes this this world class sprinter. I mean, to to actually arrive on the the top of that hierarchy, the top of that ladder is is just beyond odds. And then he gets into the Second World War. And then he, you know, he he crashes in the Pacific. And I don't want to give away too many spoilers because it's a terrific book. But the things that he endures are unimaginable. Now, now, read the book. Don't see the movie. Read the book. And and then at the end of all of this, to come back and I don't think the movie goes this far, but but to come back to the United States safe and sound after everything he's endured and and then to marry the girl of his dreams and to get a job and the American dream is hard. And then he starts drinking his life away, which as a pastor is completely is completely believable given what we know about trauma. And and so, again, read the book because the ending will surprise you. And and in fact, I just last night saw a piece on on the girl napalm, the napalm girl from the Vietnam. See, I told you it was going to be a rough draft. I keep editing as we go. I just I just read a little a little tidbit about about napalm girl and and this girl that obviously from the picture. Yeah, this is a very famous picture. And and here she tells her story. And again, I read these stories and and you know, I read the story and I read the story and I read the story. And and here she tells her story. And again, I read these stories. And and you say truth is stranger than fiction. Well, in the time of Herod, the king of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah who belonged to the priestly division of Abijah. His wife Elizabeth was also a descendant of Aaron. Both of them were righteous in the sight of God, observing all the Lord's commands and decrees blamelessly. But they were childless because Elizabeth was not able to conceive. And they both were very old. Well, well, here we are with this, you know, this redux of the story of Abraham. And again, now, now, Luke, you know, why are we connecting this up? Why is Luke connecting connecting this to the Old Testament? Obviously, we're going to have have John lead into Jesus. But but Luke understands precisely that Jesus can't just plop in from the stop from the sky. He needs to come into the middle of a story. He needs to have a back story. He needs to be a tradition in which he fits. Otherwise, Jesus will make no sense. So we're here. We have Zechariah and Elizabeth, and they're very old, like Abram and Sarah. And and they're not able to conceive. And so we have an understanding of what this does for for Zechariah and Elizabeth. They have no future in that culture, in that context. They are cut off and they are there's insinuations. There's insinuations about their their morality, because commonly, if if you suffered a calamity like that, you know, again, similar to the book of Job, everyone would imagine, surely you've done something wrong to make you childless. But but here, Luke says they were observing all the Lord's commands and decrees blamelessly. So here we have this couple that should be living this flourishing life because they're moral and blameless and following the Lord. But instead, they're living this life of suffering. Once when Zechariah's division was on duty and he was serving as a priest before God, he was chosen by lot. Again, this this intimation of God's providence working behind the scenes that, you know, arranging arranging situations in the most in the most surprising way to achieve his outcome. According to the custom of the priesthood, I go into the temple and to go into the temple of the Lord and burn incense. And there, when the time of burning incense came, all the assembled worshipers were praying outside. And again, Lucas setting for setting up for us that the vision, the picture of what's happening. So so Zechariah, this this probably revered but controversial figure goes into the temple and he's going about his duty and and and just, you know, blessed that he will. He was chosen by lot to do this service. But all the people waiting outside praying, you just have the picture of Israel within the calamity of her house, house exile under the Roman occupation, under the Roman Empire. And again, this ties into all the prophetic stuff in the Old Testament. And here at this moment in the temple, which is both at one time a common thing, but on the other time a, you know, all of the elements are there for God to show up and for God to do something. Then an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right side of the altar of incense. When Zechariah saw him, he was startled and gripped with fear. But the angel said to him, Do not be afraid, Zechariah, your prayer has been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear a son and you will call him John. Now, again, this is, you know, sounds like Abraham and and the three visitors. He will be a joy and delight to you and many will rejoice because of his birth, for he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He is never to take wine or other fermented drink. This is harkening back to the Nazarene tradition in the Old Testament, back to back to Samuel and Samson and the book of and the book of Judges. And so right from the start, John is to be set apart, devoted to God because he has a special mission to do. And he will be filled with the Holy Spirit even before he was born. He is born. He will bring back many of the people of Israel to the Lord their God and he will go on before the Lord in the spirit of the power of Elijah to turn the hearts of parents to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. Something huge is about to happen. Zechariah asked the angel, How can I be sure of this? I'm an old man and my wife is well along in years. Now right away we're setting up what we're going to see is the contrast between Zechariah and the old Zechariah who is a priest. He has status. He's been trained and formed and practiced in in in all of the religion of his day. And he was supposed to be at the top of the pinnacle. He is supposed to he is supposed to be the one ready to receive the call of God when it comes. But now he expresses doubt. I'm an old man. He expresses doubt for very reasonable reasons. Expresses doubt for very biological natural reasons. I'm an old man and my wife is well along in years. The angel said to him, I am Gabriel. I stand in the presence of God and I've been sent to speak to you and tell you this good news. And in other words, Gabriel is saying, Really? An angel shows up and you're you're terrified as everyone in the Bible is when an angel showed up. There's no little you know namby pamby touched by an angel here. You know angels are you know are awesome creatures that that that make us you know lose control of our bowels when they show up. They are that glorious and frightful and powerful and tremendous. That's where you know all these words come from. And and you're going to stand here in the temple, the one place where angels should come and show up where God should reveal himself. If you believe all of this stuff that you've been practicing your whole life, you have all people Zachariah, a godly man should be ready for this. And you're not. And now you will be silent. So so here again, here's a man who should be speaking for God now will no longer be able to speak. And not be able to speak until the day this happens because you did not believe my words, which will come true at their appointed time. Boom, drop the mic. Meanwhile, the people were waiting for Zachariah and wondering why he stayed so long in the temple. When he came out, he could not speak to them. They realized he had seen a vision in the temple. All of them get it. The temple is supposed to be the place where angels show up. And now he comes out and he can't speak. So he's making signs, but he can't talk. When his time of service was completed, he returned home. After this, his wife Elizabeth became pregnant and for five months remained in seclusion. Now, Elizabeth, now, when when she has the experiential when she's pregnant, she believes. Well, this is the sum of her hopes. And now also notice in the story, the men and the women. So often the men don't get it. Now, this is a theme in the Old Testament to the beginning of the Book of Samuel. Israel is a disaster at the end of the Book of Judges. And at the beginning of the Book of Samuel, it's a complete catastrophe. And it all boils down to Hannah and her prayer. Now, we're going to have Mary and her prayer, which very much echoes Hannah's prayer from the beginning of the Book of Samuel. But but all of Israel is a catastrophe. And it's down to one godly woman. And all of Israel is a catastrophe in the Book of Ruth. And it's down to one pagan girl. And God uses her and her faithfulness to Naomi, an undeserving Jewish mother-in-law, to reconstitute his story through Obed and Jesse and David. And you see the pattern that this is how God works. And this is exactly what the Song of Mary says. So what's interesting here is that in a sense, we've got the temple scene where all of the focus is on this big political, social, people level picture of Israel. But then for Elizabeth, this is about her personally. This isn't just about Israel. This scales all the way down. And for her, this is God rescuing her from what has been the catastrophe of her life. In the sixth month of Elizabeth's pregnancy, God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth, a town in Galilee. It's a no place town. To a virgin, a young girl, pledged to be married to a man named Joseph, a devout girl, a good girl, not a girl who's out there, you know, a girl who's kept herself. A virgin pledged to be married to the man named Joseph, a descendant of David. The virgin's name was Mary. The angel went to her and said, greetings, you who are highly favored. The Lord is with you. Now, we just had the angel show up in the temple to Zechariah, a priest going about his duty, where we should suspect to see angels show up. Now an angel shows up to a girl, a young girl, a virgin, by herself, as C.S. Lewis says, a girl at her prayers. And the angel says, greetings, you who are highly favored. And an angel is telling this, nobody girl in Nowhereville who's just, you know, she's just a good Sunday school girl who's kept her lessons. Mary was greatly troubled at these words. And again, greatly troubled, I think, is a little understated for the common catastrophe when an angel actually shows up. Mary was greatly troubled at his words and wondered what kind of greeting this might be. She's not Zechariah. She's not in the temple. But the angel said to her what the angels always say, whoa, whoa, if we're going to talk, you're going to have to dial back the fear a little bit, okay? And you might want to say to the angel, well, if I'm not going to be so afraid, you might dial back the whole angel thing a little bit. But of course, you know, the three strangers show up to Abraham as just kind of three men. I'm going to get a drink here. Let's say that Mary and Zechariah disregard the angel at their peril. Little inside joke. So the angel says, do not be afraid, Mary. You have found favor with God. You will conceive and give birth to a son and you are to call him Jesus. He will be great and will be called son of the most high. The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David and he will reign over Jacob's descendants forever. His kingdom will never end. Now, what's interesting here is that, and I know I'm getting into this question of are these texts believable? Did events like this really happen? If so, in what way do the texts represent them and record them? And that's a complicated question. That's the bone of contention between liberals and conservatives. Now, I myself am a conservative. So my bias is to say unless I have evidence against, why don't I take the evidence as it is? And part of the evidence here is you would think if Luke was doing propaganda, he would fill in the kind of statement here that we might find, let's say, somewhere in the middle of the book of Acts, which we also know he wrote. We might imagine he would give an updated representation of what Jesus' mission would be based on obviously the historical knowledge and the developments of theology and his relationship with the Apostle Paul and all of those things. We would imagine he would fill those things in here. But what we actually find here, and we're going to see this both in the Song of Mary and in the Song of Zechariah, what we have here is actually an articulation of how they could understand Jesus from the context of a Jewish girl at her prayers in a nowhere place and a nowhere person. That what could they imagine Jesus' mission would be? He would be to rescue the little nation of Judea from its subjugation from the Romans and from these great empires that have gone through history. Now, if she is in fact, again, a little girl at her prayers, not a little girl, but a teenager at her prayers who was trained in the synagogue and knew her Old Testament prophets and knew the Torah, he will be great and it will be called the Son of the Most High. The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David. Now, what's interesting in the Gospel of Luke, as the Gospel of Luke is going to go on, it's exactly this question of who is Jesus and what is his mission and what should his mission be that is the conversation that Jesus is going to have with the Pharisees and the Sadducees and the Zealots and the Essenes and the Herodians and all of the people in there. What is the Messiah to be and what frame of reference do we locate the Messiah? And here what the angel says to Mary is exactly right for exactly this moment, which to me says either Luke is really smart in how he's putting this together and he thought this through or he did exactly what he said in which he chased down eyewitnesses and got stories from people who knew the people and these were all the ways the story was told. This was exactly what we would imagine an angel could say to Mary before Jesus' ministry, before his crucifixion, before his resurrection, before the theological work that the Apostle Paul does. Now, what's really interesting to me is when I read these, Mary doesn't say much different from Zechariah. Zechariah gets silenced, literally. Zechariah has to go out and make sign language and he has to sit with his mouth zipped for five to nine months until the baby is born. Mary expresses also legitimate doubt, gets no scolding from the angel. Why? And again, this is also believable because Zechariah should know better, but this little girl, what does she know? The angel is gentle with her in a way that the angel is not gentle with Zechariah because Zechariah should know. So the angel answered, the Holy Spirit will come on you and the power of the Most High will overshadow you so that the Holy One will be born will be called the Son of God. Even Elizabeth, your relative, is going to have a child in her old age and she will be unable to conceive in her sixth month for no word from God will ever fail. And Mary's answer, I am the Lord's servant, Mary answered. May your word be fulfilled. Mary here is the archetypal, quintessential servant of the Lord. She can't understand what God is doing. She doesn't have a sufficient frame of reference to actually be able to contemplate this whole thing. But what is her impulse? I am the servant, I am the Lord's servant. If this costs me, it costs me, but I will follow him. And this to me gets into what I think is one of the shortest definitions of what a Christian is. A Christian is someone who trusts Jesus more than they trust themselves. They trust Jesus more than they trust themselves because the truth is, you get this with Jacob wrestling with God at the jay-buck, when it finally comes down to it, we trust ourselves. And Mary says to the angel, I will trust God and I will take you at your word. So then the story goes and Mary visits Elizabeth and the baby leaps. And again we have a reversal here where the older woman should have status, but the younger woman, the Gospel of Luke, is very conscious of status. The older woman should have status and the younger woman reveres her, but in a sense the younger is older. And again this connects up with the story of Jacob and Esau. The younger supplants the older. The younger Jesus supplants the older John. And then you have Mary's revolutionary song, which again is an echo of the song of Hannah. And again this is exactly, we don't have Pauline theology, which Luke could do and pour it into Mary's mouth. We have the Old Testament coming out of Mary's mouth and this is exactly what we would expect Mary to say. God lifts up the lowly and just like we saw with Elizabeth, it's now not just the grand scheme of God reconciling heaven and earth. It's not just the grand scheme of God restoring Israel. It's God has touched me. I call this scalability. That God not only works at this level and this level and this level, but God works at all of these levels. And then of course Elizabeth has the baby and nobody believes Elizabeth because she's a woman and the father is supposed to have the final say. And again you've got the gender war going on in the background here. And they go to Zachariah and then the suspense is what will Zachariah say? Will he submit to God? Is he the servant of the God? And it comes to the climax of you don't have any other members of your family. You shouldn't name him John. John's a pretty trendy name at this point. No, he is to be named John. And then Zachariah sings a song. And he was filled with praise by the Holy Spirit and he prophesies. This is Old Testament language and he speaks as an Old Testament person. Praise be to the Lord the God of Israel because he has come to his people and redeemed them. He has raised up the horn of salvation for us and the house of his servant David. He as he said through his prophets long ago, salvation from our enemies and from the hands of those who hate us. So different from Mary's song, but yet similar. Certainly not Pauline theology. These are some themes that Jesus is going to engage in. In fact Jesus is going to engage John the Baptist as we see in Matthew 11 in John's imprisonment. But Zachariah sings the song and yet it is at the same time totally apt and appropriate to this moment. And it locates Jesus in this grand story. And without these songs we're not going to know who Jesus is. And again if this were mere propaganda it would look far different. Each character in Luke's story sees Jesus through their own circumstances. It's not just God saving the world. It's not just God saving Judah. It's God saving me. Each has their own agenda and each filters and interprets this grander mission of Jesus through this staggering reality through the world as they are able to see it from their moment in history. And all and what Luke is telling us is that in a sense the angel is speaking to us in a sense through the book. This is God speaking to us and we all have to figure out how are we going to respond to this. And so here we are. What is the meaning of Christmas? Now again for those of you who are new to this I take many of my conclusions from the structure of the Heidelberg Catechism which you can find on the internet. It's been written for you know it'll be 500 years old not too long from now. But misery. See here we are. Not any different from Mary. Not any different from Zachariah. Not any different from Elizabeth. Not you know what we are beset by our broken nature. We are beset by the world. We are beset by principalities and powers and we need we don't just need more money or more power or more whatever it is that that that that we think might fix our life because the truth is half the time those things come to us and we realize there's another problem behind it. We need a savior that is both on a cosmic scale and on a personal scale and that that savior has to be both exactly right contextual to me and my situation and appropriate and large enough for the entire world. Because often people say well well Jesus saves and I say well okay well let's let me let me push back on that because we need to know what we're saved from and and in many ways Charlie Brown is wrestling with I need to be saved from materialism and Linus comes in and reads that. But again it's got to be in this context where Luke 2 is actually found. You know what don't we need saving from? This savior comes and he is so big and the job is so fast we can't possibly see all of it. We like like Zachariah and Mary in a sense we only see it from the chair we're sitting in and so it's perfectly adapted to exactly who we are and where we are and so we only see a piece of it. Well how do we respond and I think Mary gives us the language. I am the Lord's servant Mary answered may your word be fulfilled and when God calls this is what we need to practice saying. I am the Lord's servant your will be done on earth as it is in heaven thy will be done not my will be done. Jesus prayer in the garden of Gethsemane. This is the response we have to train ourselves to do because the difficulty is that when the angel shows up and he's bright and he's terrible and And we're terrified of him and he's glorious and and his holiness makes us look at ourselves and know and all of our insecurities well up and all of our fears well up and all of our inability to trust God is exposed. We need to have this answer wrote memorized formed into our bones burned into our being. I am the Lord's servant. May your word to me be fulfilled and I think now we can stand with Linus and there were shepherds in the same country abiding in the fields keeping watch over their flocks by night and lo the angel of the Lord came upon them and the glory of the Lord shown round the world. And they were so afraid and the angel said unto them fear not for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which will be to all people for unto you is born this day in the city of David a savior which is Christ the Lord and this will be a sign to you. He shall find the ray he shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes lying in a manger and suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly hosts praising God and saying glory to God in the highest and on earth peace and goodwill towards men.