https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OZ29TJ3Bv9s

 Hi, this is Paul. What follows is a conversation that I had with Sam from the Transfigured channel on the on the Rando's United channel and on Jacob's channel. It was streamed on both. And it started out with Sam streaming another video, but I had wanted to talk to him about his desire to talk to Gavin. And he had spoken quite a bit on his conversation with Luke about confessionalism and about some of the struggles that both he and Luke had had in their churches. And that led then others jumped into the conversation eventually and led to a more free-reeling conversation. But I thought the conversation was good and I thought it touched on a lot of important points. In some ways, it led up to the video that I released this morning about Gavin and sort of this idea of church doctrine as an immune system and sort of the way to think about doctrine in the total life of the church. I think Sam's video, invitation, I'd say, to talk with Gavin was a good one and definitely see Sam's conversation with Luke about confessionalism and some of the ups and downs that they've had. Again, I'm not just doing this to sort of promote Sam's channel, although I'm happy to promote Sam's channel. I think actually this week I'm preaching on the first chapter of Colossians and so wrestling with that very high Christology that you find in the song in the book of Colossians. So I wanted to bring this video onto my channel because I thought it was a good conversation and I haven't been able to do a lot of live streaming lately. So that's what's coming for the rest of this video. So thanks for watching. Since the apostolic time. Well, hi, Paul. Hey, Sam. How are you? Oh, I'm doing good. I was trying to get this patriarch guy to come on my channel, but and he had said yes for a while, but then sort of ghosted me. And Andrew pointed out that he had been doing some interviews recently. So he is the Pope, basically, or the patriarch of the Assyrian Church of the East, which is a couple million people, mainly from like Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Iran, that are basically the Nestorians that got kicked out at the Council of Ephesus and have been their own church ever since and still exist despite being persecuted by basically every empire of the last 2000 years. And in the 20th century, their capital was Chicago, Illinois. But they recently returned their capital or their seat to Erbil in Iraq. Oh, oops. Sorry meant to take this down. So what's up, Paul? Oh, I just saw you here. I wanted to talk to you. But I mean, my schedule has been so nuts. And let me just land. Land, I just finished a randos conversation, which was good. Hopefully that got recorded and everything. So, you know, I, you know, I watched your video with, you know, trying to get Gavin Ortland to talk to you. And, you know, I really loved your conversation with Luke about, you know, about Confessions and propositions and stuff. Yeah, yeah. So let's hope when I could talk to you and then I just finished this randos conversation and you were here. And I thought, oh, I can just hop on and talk to Sam. Yeah, randos 2.0. Yeah. So, you know, I, you know, I've done a lot of thinking about this. I mean, I mean, with your situation, it's so hard. I mean, you know, someone like Gavin Ortland, who seems like just a really lovely guy. And I think you're right that it'd be a wonderful conversation partner. It's just there's for him and his channel. What does he have to gain from it? Now, if you were his personal friend or, you know, there's just got to be another way. And so, I don't know. So I felt for you because Sam, I really appreciate you and I appreciate so much about you in terms of your character, your knowledge, you know, your heart. And, you know, I want to see you succeed and having the kinds of conversations you want. And I'm sure it's frustrating. It is frustrating. And, you know, some of it is penned up frustration from my recent experience with church and feeling like I didn't really get to have any of the conversations that I particularly wanted on my way out of the last one. And she almost, you know, some sort of need for like, all right, if they can't talk to me about what's going on, I got to find someone who can. And that this just isn't like this pressure on my everyday life is real. Like, I'm not making this up. And honestly, if anything, sometimes on YouTube, I probably downplay how hard it actually is. And like, you know, someone was like, hey, Sam, why don't you go to, you know, if you're worried about public schools and like, I'm a little worried about public schools, but I'm currently on the school board. I'm doing my best. But someone was like, well, you know, if you ever got fed up with your public school, why don't you just send them to the local Christian school? I'm like, I can't go to the local Christian school. I literally can't send them to the local Christian school because parents have to sign a statement of faith. It's the same reason I didn't go to that Christian school when I was a kid. My parents tried to send me there, you know, back when I was three or four. And and here I still am in the same conundrum. And, you know, this isn't this isn't made up. So I don't know. I I feel like I was with the Gavin video. The idea was that I'd seen Gavin making these videos for a while. And it's like, hey, let's check the receipts on church history on some topic that the Catholic doctrine has evolved on over time, of which one could pick from a whole menu of choices on that one. And then making the point that it's not apostolic. I'm like, oh, you know, Gavin, you're leaving out a pretty big one there. So that I don't know. That was sort of the point of that. That's it. You know, it's a good point. It's a good point. Hank and I actually talked today on the phone. So we talked about it a little bit. Well, how many weeks does Hank call you on the phone? I get a call from Hank about two or three days a week. I can't always pick up. But Hank does call regularly. But, you know. So I'm reading I'm reading the D Church book right now, the one that's sort of going around. I haven't made too many videos on it. A little bit more will come out with my Sky's Tiny video that comes out tomorrow. And. I, you know, obviously, estuary for me is. Is is part of a response for. The. The dilemma that church is for a lot of people. But it obviously isn't the whole answer. And I mean, to me, a case like yours is. So, I mean, anybody who. You know, I obviously haven't, you know, I'm not your next door neighbor. I didn't go to grade school with you. So there are people who know you better than I am. But I watch people pretty carefully. And although I'm a pretty optimistic guy, I'll tolerate a lot of stuff and a lot of people. You have always seemed to me like a very genuine person. You know, to me, it seems like you are you are who you present to be. And I met your father and he seemed the same way. It was lovely to meet your father, to sit next to him in Chicago. The whole Internet can be jealous that you and Jacob and my dad sit next to each other at an Italian restaurant and talk about speaking in tongues. And the whole Internet can wonder what that conversation was like and feel like. Yeah. So, you know, and I. These these. I had a wonderful conversation with someone who. He comes to my church pretty much every week, drives a considerable distance. He watches all this stuff. He's another one of these people that works in tax and probably won't. Probably won't show his face on the Internet or do a randos conversation with me. But, you know, and he's you know, he's been coming to my church and another auto didac grew up in a grew up in a church somewhere else in the country. You know, his parents had split up. So, you know, a lot of the usual stuff that we hear from from many people we talk to and. You know, comes every week to church. And I mean, to come to Living Stones is kind of a high commitment thing. You know, it's it's not people. You've got your own steep slope. It's a very good deal. You know, people people always say they want authenticity. It's like, yeah, I'll show you authenticity. We'll see just how much authenticity you can stomach. But and, you know, he and as we had a great conversation Sunday lunch, we went out to lunch afterwards and, you know, this whole issue. Of confessionality, because you want I thought you're in Luke. You're in Luke's conversation really helped with this, because on one hand, you want you need something that gives structure to the church through time and confessions and doctrinal statements, propositions included, really do that and help with that. But they're they're, of course, not the full answer, because you can sit across the table from I mean, theoretically, a demon would have, you know, excellent propositional statements and still be a demon. So the demons know that God is one or three and one or what? What do the demons know? And they're all clearly Trinitarian, Sam. How would you doubt that? The demons are Trinitarian, right? So. So, you know, to me, the you know, it's it's often been phrased the problem of wine skins and. You know, the John 17 prayer that that Christ's followers would be one. And so I, you know, I just, you know, I don't have an answer for you, obviously, except, you know, I think if there were an obvious answer, it would have presented itself by now. It would have. It would have. So this is clearly a burden you have to bear. But I just want to say I feel for you and I really respect you. And, um, gosh, I wish I could do something for you, but I really don't know what to do. It just, you know, often in ministry, you work with people who have a cross to bear. And by the peculiar of that cross, there's not a lot of that, you know, it's it's poor Simon of Cyrene. He dragged that sucker. And we all get given thorns in our flesh for one reason or another. We do. We do. So and the fact that, you know, even just with, you know, the Christian school thing, you know, there's just another angle to it. And so, you know, I. But it does mean that I'm committed to my local public school come hell or high water. Yeah. Well, there are. I mean, I also often notice with crosses that there are other things just like that, that often bless the world, that someone that God puts someone in a corner and makes them stay there in order to achieve something else that you can't see now. I know Luke listening to this will say I sound like John Piper, but, you know, I'll risk that. Luke still likes John Piper. It's hard to actually get Luke to be too critical of John Piper even to this day. Maybe that's why he's still my friend. Calvinist though I be. So I thought that. Well, go ahead. I thought that was an interesting point that you were making or someone made on your video about the orthodoxy thing. And you were sort of making it, too, as I've wondered about these, the intergenerational stability of the converts to orthodoxy. Because sort of like I said, I know way more orthodox people who have the story that a lot of Catholics people tell, too, about how they went to an evangelical church and it was like they found out who Jesus was for the first time. And all of this sort of dead monotonous liturgy that just seemed boring and empty to them. Suddenly, you know, the perspectival experience of Jesus in an evangelical megachurch captures their heart in a way that the icons and the smells and the bells and the liturgy never did. And that was my mom's story, like to a T, too. And so I know way more people with that story than the in real life, than the, you know, the Peugeot or J. Dyer path into orthodoxy. And so I wonder what it's like for kids to grow up, you know, if your parents are those sorts of burned out on evangelicalism and then Peugeot sort of shepherd them towards orthodoxy. Will their kids feel the same attraction? Will their kids have the same knowledge of the Bible? Will their kids look at the liturgy and notice all of these details that are in it that aren't like explicit. But if you know your scriptures, you can pick up on. I don't know. Yeah. Well, I know you go ahead. I want to do the same thing for the same reasons. And. It's just things, things right now. So I was listening to the Verbeke talk with Theo Vaughn. I'd never even heard of the guy. It's funny because I mentioned it to Jared, my son and and Benjamin, my youngest son, Benjamin's living back at home. And I mentioned Theo Vaughn and Ben's like, is he the guy with a mullet? So how do you know about these people? I don't know anything. But, you know, Theo Vaughn was talking about how he went to a mega church and, you know, the music and that's a powerful psychotechnology, I'll tell you. Yeah. And but yeah, I. I don't know. I don't know. And I don't I was hesitant to put out that video because, you know, my I'm not trying to stick my finger in the eye of the Orthodox who are so excited to have found, you know, exactly what they're looking for. I don't want to celebrate them and I want to encourage them and, you know, bless them with it. But I have seen exactly what you said. I was going to include that little clip, but I forgot at the end. That's what I do. I all I run into former Orthodox people in evangelical churches. And to have seen her. My my wife was in a mother's group at Willow Creek Church that was run by a lady who had grown up in Russia and then came to the US sometime in her life. I forget her exact story and somehow ended up at a Willow Creek one Sunday. And boom, you know, that sort of thing. Sacramento is full of Russian and Ukrainian Pentecostals and evangelicals. And when there was a fight going on about gays or something, the Ukrainians and Russians were on the front line of the conservatives prosecuting that effort. And, you know, of course, the diversity of Sacramento puts all sorts of progressive agendas in weird corners because it's like it's like when Prop 8, so the word was that it was black African-American women that pushed Prop 8 over the edge. And then it's like, are you really going to attack black women in public for this? You know, or now we're just going to point out the white evangelicals and blame them for everything. OK. Yeah. But like in the, you know, to mention logs in my own eye, I have no idea really very clearly at all what my inner generational faith transmission plan is to my three kids. And I feel like at this point, I'm just sort of hoping that, you know, it sort of works for them in this difficult, uncomfortable way that it's worked for me. And there's there's a church that's about between about 45 minutes from me, that is former Way International Fellowship, basically, that has kind of it's like halfway between what the Way International was. And they've also taken a lot of leadership and training classes from Bethel Redding. And so it's like it's like a mix of the it's got the Way's doctrinal distinctives with the Bethel Reddings practice, charismatic distinctives. And it's a strange brew, but it's actually growing and doing pretty well. But, you know, like an hour is a long way to drive when you've got three kids. And there's just there's just Sundays where that just isn't feasible. And and especially when it comes to like midweek programming and things like that. Distance still matters. Yeah. Ironically, I probably can't play the piano because I couldn't make band practice. But propositionally, they let me. You know, if you come to Living Stones, you could play the piano. We don't have a pianist right now. We sing everything acapella right now. Well, you know, I could always bug Mo and go to most church. But I think Mo's got a similar steep slope in the way that you do. Yeah. Yeah. Although, like, I don't know, the church that I grew up in, too. And this is also true, the Naperville Church, it has all stripes and walks of life. And the way because it had a pretty heavy, heavy evangelism thing, like when I was watching Jesus Revolution, I was like, oh, this makes sense. I this this suddenly now I get where all these people were coming from. And, you know, you would see them handing out tracks or brochures or stuff like that. You know, they would go to like Venice Beach or whatever and pass out the little tracks to try and attract other people. And that sort of like really heavy everybody should be doing an evangelism thing, not like full blown Jehovah's Witness, maybe, but pretty close to that end of the spectrum. When you do that really heavy evangelism thing, you get a lot of interesting folks. And you're getting you are finding the desperate, the lost, the unattached and all of those sorts of things when you push that push the pedal on that. And so the church I was growing up with was pretty I my family was not quite average, not the average sort of family in in that church. It was 30, 40, sometimes maybe 50 percent African-American at times. And Hispanics and the whole bunch of everything else in the church that I could go to that's kind of far away is also pretty similar. Yeah, yeah. I mean, it's funny because if there's the one thing that I. I see again and again and again. In the little in this little corner and my little channel and all of this, it's the struggle with churches. People genuinely wanting something and. Having difficulty getting there and as a pastor, that's especially hard because I passed her place a lot of empty chairs. But most of the people that I, you know, most of the people out there wouldn't fit or too far away. But that the church book, the Churching of America is at the name of that. I forget. But it's. I just have the sense that a lot of this isn't really as it appears or as we imagine it to be. First of all, you know, because everybody's an individual. I don't think any book has anyone quite like Luke in it, but. Maybe maybe I'll write a book someday and then Luke will be in it. But I. It's a and I've been thinking, you know, I've been thinking about this for a long time. I've been thinking about this for a long time. I've been thinking about this for a long time. I've been thinking about this for a long time. But I. It's a and I've been thinking, you know, after doing the Doug Wilson video and then the sky to tiny video that I'll put out tomorrow, I've just been thinking about. You know, Christian culture and. Or the you know, the the impact on culture and churches. Sort of by. Sort of by market necessity, of course, have to beat on that a lot, because a lot of what churches do is to try to activate dormant or nominal people into church life, which is a very legitimate thing. But I think sometimes we. We failed to see in some ways some of the blessings of. Of Christians who are not attached in church life. Of Christians who are not attached in church and out there in the world. And I think churches sometimes I don't think give them their due. So. And you know, speaking as one who has never for. The most the most unattached in church I have ever been was probably my missionary service, but I was still in church every Sunday. I was just in a different church because I was serving those churches. But. You know, I've been deeply attached to church all of my life, so. I don't know. I don't know. Sometimes I go to my local mainline church on Sundays when schedule doesn't work out to go to the Biblical Unitarian Church that's far away. It's it's the church that my dad grew up in and that my grandparents went to their grand. My grandparents funerals were there and it's still it's a you know pastor who's been there for a long time. He knows exactly who I am as soon as I walk in and you know, they don't care about theology, which is somewhat nice sometimes and yeah, it's a liberal denomination, but the pastor is probably on the traditional conservative end of his denomination, but it's still a little bit left of my comfort zone and it's a little cringe, but also sometimes it's kind of nice and. You know, what are they saying? They it's well, they have two services. They have a contemporary service where they they I mean, it's one of these churches that has more money than people and they have a pretty nice. I'm pretty sure hired contemporary worship band that is a little jazzy and edgier. It's not just like Willow Creek cloning or or that or contemporary Christian music cargo culting. It's it's it's interesting. I'm like, okay, and then their traditional services, you know, him knows an organ and a choir. Interesting, but I like the traditional service better. They they sing hymns. They sing traditional hymns. Yeah. Yeah. The serving the the dying end of the you know, the greatest generation of the silent generation. That's the thing. Yeah. And it's pretty nice. You know, they can do a nice service. But when you know, you go to the contemporary one, I like double the nursery population and the other kids in the nursery of the grandchildren of the pastor. You know that sort of thing. So it's like even that doesn't seem like a sustainable multi-generation option. But it's it's nice to at least be welcomed somewhere that knows who I am and doesn't mind that I'm there. Yeah. Oh Sam, what I feel for you. I feel for you. Well, I'm going to make I think I'm going to make a video comparing Bethel to Doug Wilson's outfit. Bethel McGrew or Bethel Redding. Bethel Redding. Just checking which one is which one is making American Christian again better Bethel Redding or Doug Wilson. So what are your thoughts on Bethel Redding? I mean, you're pretty close. I assume you know way more about that. I do. I bet. Well, I never get to go there on a Sunday. I would love to I would love to really kind of go up there and poke around and meet people and ask questions. I mean, I would love to go up. I'd love to do that. Grim Grizz is like, you know, raise some money send me to Moscow. And I just thought I want Grim Grizz going to Moscow and doing a report. I want that so bad. Like one of those guys who has the stick and does the travel blogging. That's right. Like that that style of thing. That would be great. Remember Moscow. There is no agency. But I you know, I've read some of Bill Johnson's books. I know some pastors who have done their you know, gone there for conferences and done some of their trainings, you know for a while. I haven't heard anything about this for a while. But Jesus what's their Jesus? I mean, they were going to plant a church in Sacramento in Midtown, which I mean Midtown is like the is like post-college yuppie. That's where that's the cool area of Sacramento where is that where Joey lives as we're Joe. Yeah, Jared. So, you know, they were going to go there and the other Midtown churches are kind of like, oh, you know, because they the big church in Sacramento here is the Covenant Church because there's Bayside up in the up in the suburbs and they've just plastered the city with their clones. And they're they're kind of the big church. So whenever they move into a neighborhood, there's this giant sucking sound because they have the hottest music and the hottest worship and they do the contemporary stuff. But then when writing is coming down, it's like, oh, you know, they might but I haven't heard much but they they're an interesting outfit. So, you know, I was actually reading on Wikipedia and a couple of years ago, you know, tragic story. There was a two-year-old of one of the youth of one of the worship pastors who died and the church sort of leaned into a full court prayer press to for a resurrection of the child and spoiler alert didn't happen. And you know, and it's just they're they're they're interesting and then they're sincere and they're steep slope. I mean, they're hardcore and you know that that's impressive in a way you like to see people, you know, taking it seriously, but they're going to criticize Bethel for a lot of things, but they actually do seem to believe what they do. And you know, there's there's some anxiety. So readings about 90,000 people. So it's bigger than the 25,000 people of Moscow. And there's there's you know, there's anxiety and writing about the size of Bethel because like Moscow, the bigger Bethel draws people from around the world to live there. But also like Moscow in Bethel, there is sort of a crust around the church of people who have people who have left and they haven't all, you know, slammed the door. Actually, there's a guy really very much in in in the corner who's you know, he's been at meetups here in Sacramento and he's pretty active on Twitter and he follows everything very closely. He and his wife were both kids who their families moved to Reading for that church. And so they were, you know, and they're you know, that's part of the reason I I've seen and not just with orthodoxy because I don't know. So, you know, I haven't seen that long enough, but I've seen so many children of parents who were, you know, had powerful conversion experiences and went to hardcore intensive, take no prisoner, you know, church. That's what the way was. Yeah, yeah, yeah, the way was absolutely that. And it was, you know, at its peak, it was like two or three hundred thousand. So that's bigger than Bethel or bigger than Doug Wilson's outfit. But but what's interesting about Bethel and Wilson is they sort of they're localized in a way. Yeah, yeah. And so then the way was franchised and Doug Wilson comes up and says, you know, you know, they're going to make America Christian again might as well start with Moscow. There you go. The symbolism of the town name is just all backwards. Like, I think that's how you can tell that that's doomed to fail. You know, symbolism happens if your plan is to make America Christian again from Moscow. You see, it just doesn't sound it just doesn't, you know, you can't you can't advertise it that way. So that's how that you can tell that's not going to work. But it's sort of weird for me going to this church because like the church I was growing up was was charismatic. Like we did the speaking in tongues and the interpretation and prophecy thing. And we were like we believed in healing and we would, you know, pray for people's healing, but not any more than like kind of a standard evangelical church where you could put in a prayer request and everyone would pray for you that week. There's like this extra level kind of emphasis on healing that seems to come with the Bethel package. Oh, yes, that I'm still trying to make heads or tails of. And sometimes it seems flirtatious with prosperity, gospel, these kind of things. But I'm not quite sure if that's really the right description. No, they're in a weird way. They're not making the video that I'm supposed to make, but maybe it'll help if I talk about first. And, you know, it's sort of similar to to Wilson's post millennialism because they're basically if you read any Bill Wilson, Bill Wilson, Bill Johnson stuff, his argument is classic Pentecostal in that. Well, this is very clearly what Christ intended his church to do. Now they add to it kind of an interesting oral tradition type element. They don't use that language, but it's you know, there's a there's a there's anointing and blessings and this sort of, you know, quasi physical trends transmission of a thing image. Well, and there's a there's a technology to it. So I don't know if you've ever looked at because they've got you know, they've written books too about how to do this. And, you know, Fuller back in the John Wimber days of the class of science and wonders. I mean, that class was at Fuller intending to teach Fuller seminarians how to heal, how to have words of knowledge, how to do these things. And so, you know, there's a very interesting technique aspect to it that and, you know, then there's this other thing about grave sucking or something like that. It goes on. There's there are all those weird fringe stories out of Bethel and it's like, okay, did they did some some fringe person do a fringy thing once and now the whole thing is smeared with that or, you know, how central is that to what they're about? Or if there's enough weird stories then or they just I think they just have their openness dial set to like 11 spiritual practice. Yeah. And that lets in a lot of weird and interesting things. I wonder if I can get the guy in the corner to, you know, but, you know, people have families and relationships and their parents are still there and, you know, you got to be, you know, I'm not about to blow up anybody's family on my channel. So, and they had he and his wife are by no means sort of vindictive, burned, you know, they're very they're they're clearly. Well, here's the thing with the second generation. They're clearly. It's funny. So, you know, I you've listened to more Bill Johnson than I have. I've listened to like, I don't know, one or two hours tops like all combined haven't read any books. I remnant radio, which I like to listen to talks about him sometimes. But I really don't know as much as I should considering that I'm mostly going to a church that seems very downstream from him. But it's it's I think it's I don't know. I think there's a reason there are so many types of Beatles and there's a reason there are so many types of Christians. Yeah, that God in his generosity and openness and God's also very strict. And God's also very strict. It's both are dialed up to with him. But to me, I just find these movements endlessly fascinating. And especially when the or someone like Doug Wilson, who on one hand seems so full of his mission, you know, and especially being a post-mil, it's just like, wow, wow. At least if you're a bell, you can say, well, you know, you leave it undefined. But if you're post-mil, it's like we have the truth. We are going to win. You know, Richard Rowland, I'm in the conversation with Jonathan on the nationalism universal history when he just talks about, you know, that basically how many years from now when this percentage of America is orthodox and I thought, I don't know. I don't know. Because Islam seems winning that race. Islam's is Islam's growing. I mean, even even that video where I have the numbers from ready to harvest, it's not small. It's not small. But there's this funny dynamic that and this is where, you know, again, I continue to think about secularism. Secularism does a fair amount of don't say Jesus smuggling, you know, into America. It's going to be super interesting. Hulu had that show Remy. The first season was the best. This young this young Muslim kid in North Jersey who is just trying to figure out his faith. And, you know, you know, he's having sex with his Jewish girlfriend and he's masturbating to porn and he wants to be a serious Muslim. And his parents have just sort of checked out of Islam in many ways and just sort of checked into the American dream. And I just thought, oh, fascinating. Yeah, like I wonder what the retention rate of Islam and Hinduism really are. And I think that graph was interesting. But I suspect that there is a fair amount of, I don't know, depth of the story that was missing from just those headlines statistics. Honestly, what is relatively impressive is that evangelical Christianity was still their retention rate was like somewhere in the high 60s or low 70s or something like that. And, you know, if you have a good enough birth rate, a good enough in conversion rate and retention rate like that, evangelicalism isn't going to die. No, no. And it's it's hugely adaptable. And it's hugely, you know, it just it just keeps it down. I mean, it just keeps adapting. And and there's so much of it. And it's the very living ecosystem. It's tough to beat an ecosystem if you're like one thing. So anyway, so sorry to interrupt you checking out the anti-optim. I had the video up so that I didn't have to talk while I was waiting for someone to show up. Oh, good. Good. Good. Oh, what? Where are we on? Jacob's channel now we are your channel to Jacob and Randos United. I've never live streamed to my channel. I haven't set that up. I feel like I don't want to I don't know, confuse. I sort of like that. This is an extra level of distance from my channel so that I can I feel like I don't have to perform when I'm just streaming to Jacob's channel in quite the same way that I have to be. At a certain standard for my own channel. Interesting. Well, Sam, I just I did want to just catch you somehow and and encourage you and tell you I'm praying for you. And yeah, you know, I did. You do know that if you just, you know, would just flip on this Trinity thing, all of these problems would go away. It might sound like I'm the devil tempting you. But believe it or not, it's crossed my mind. Yeah. But at the same time, you know, I wouldn't want you to I wouldn't want you to do anything that would violate your conscience. You know, I wouldn't want you to take a step like that without it being authentic if I dare use the word. No. Anyway, I do love you, Sam, and I do very much respect you and, you know, I'd love I'd love Gavin. I'd love Gavin to meet you just because it would make Gavin a better person. Frankly, I think he could use you more than you use him. So, but, you know, I don't know. I don't know. Like, you know, I did this video on Wilson. I've got this video coming out tomorrow on on Sky Jatani. This conversation with Justin Barrelly, I saw it the day after I did mine with Justin and I thought because, you know, I read. So I got an advanced copy of Justin's book and big fan of Peterson and Holland. I mean, Justin's very much barking up the line of this corner. And I thought, what is Sky Jatani going to have to say about Jordan Peterson when he talks about this book? So Hank is going to be pretty mad at you if you give too much platform airtime to Sky Jatani. He said Hank is not a fan. Hank, Hank saw. So Hank's a member and he loved the video. So OK. All right. So you must have been critical then. But but I don't. I really do think that that portion of evangelicalism that's sort of hunkering down in the way that Sky Jatani is there. They're they're they're putting themselves into a corner. I don't think. I don't think they're going to I don't think that finally if I thought it did, I'd probably stick with it. But obviously, I haven't gone whatever direction I'm in now. I say you're saying woke light evangelicalism doesn't seem to have a bright future. I don't think so. I don't see how it can. I think you're just going to be. Just you know, I I know a lot of customers for that, though. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Like it's just like the main line. Well, yeah, it's it's millennials that the wife has started to go a little bit left, probably somewhat pushed and antagonized by Trump and other people's embrace of Trump. And that leading them to, you know, just sort of absorb New York Times NPR NIS and but still wanting to keep a Christian identity and wanting to church that, you know, is willing to call out whatever label we can stick on Trump and the Christians who like him. And but still be authentic. I know there's a big there. I at least where I'm from, I know a lot of people who fit into that category. Oh, there's a lot of people in the CFC that fit into that category. Oh, look at this. But I I think the collapse of the House of woke like the collapse of the Soviet Union will be surprising and swift because I live in a land which ostensibly is very woke. But I know a lot of people who swallow a lot in work meetings and politics meetings and they just sit there quietly and it's just building and building and building and building and one day it's just going to slide. And that's actually my bigger concern because I don't want to see that pendulum swing back hard. Because then you were on if you're on the school board, you might feel differently. I am ready for that to go right for that House of cards to collapse any day at once to sooner the better as far as I can tell. But I hear what you're saying. It will come. And in some ways, when you look at, say, what's happening in places like Davis, California, where you're seeing a lot of people who are going to be in the house of cards, you know, they're going to be in the house of cards. And in some ways, when you look at, say, what's happening in places like Davis, California, which is just outside Sacramento, you know, I there's big university town, big university town. There's a lot of people that are just kind of there. They're getting their limits and you watch a few people pop people that were reliable Democratic voters for years. And they're just I mean, Trump wasn't elected by accident. So anyway, look at this. I know. How can I go make a video now? You know, you make videos at this time of night. Well, it's puppy prisons. So I this is the only time I could make videos now. But it looks way too dark in your office. Like every time I almost all of your videos have sunlight in them. Yeah, well, not the videos lately. And I've been talking to daily wire. I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep doing my commentary on them either. So why what what's going to change about that? Well, they're only putting these things up temporarily. So when they take them down, are they going to start copyright striking people? I don't know. Hey, Raj. So I'm in talks with them because I asked the question when I was like in the first one, because I kind of wanted to know how much time I should put into it. And then they didn't get back to me. So I thought, why do they keep making them? And then today I get it. I get an email. Oh, yeah. You're still allowed to use 10 minutes from each. And it's like, I'm going to do it. Paul, I wanted to ask when I think about Sam and a lot of topics that come up, I think about the Gravaman debate that's coming up. Are you going to address that? Are you does that keep popping up in your mind? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I was thinking those are also some videos that I've been watching. I've been watching a lot of the videos that you've been watching. And I've been watching a lot of the videos that you've been watching. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I was thinking those are also some video candidates that just less fun than. All in culture war. It's less fun than calling Doug Wilson and the potato head. With angry eyes. No, and and it's serious. And I think, you know, I think the conservatives. Well, let me say this. A number of conservatives are imports from the PCA and the PCA handled this issue totally differently. So in the CRC, you have difficulties and the assumption behind difficulties is that you're going to pursue acceptance of the church position. PCA basically had exceptions. You could say, I'm with the church on 95 percent of this five percent. I'm not here and I'm not moving. And the church said, OK, that's not CRC. And so some of these conservatives, they've joined because of that. Because because they don't want the exception, they want the baby. So it's that's that conversation is going to be I don't I don't think we're going to wrap that one up in one sentence. If you need if really what the Calvinist need is a refresher of the sacrifice of Servetus to reunify the church around a new scapegoat, I can grab some ideas that I have and we'll see how that goes. And I'll unify every side against me and you guys can keep willing to scapegoat you, Sam. I'm sorry. I'm not I'm not going to platform that. That could happen. Regarding Doug Wilson, he's up here to some of my neighbors go to a church that went all against the government during covid. They got fined quite heavily. I think the church doors were locked. Anyways, they have a little academy, a little Christian Academy, and the church exploded over covid with people from everywhere. And they are part of this Doug Wilson thing. So, yeah, yeah, yeah, they're they're more little sprouts around the country of that. It's you can I mean, YouTube shows it you can you can grow a thing if it's hard line, bright line, counterculture. The difficulty is new lines keep emerging. So that they'll if people are sort of if your whole group is kind of temperamentally reactive, there are always new things to react against. And so it's just hard to keep the splintering from keeping happening. Yeah, we've got a number of ex members who didn't like the way covid was handled over there. So are you going to touch on the maybe the more technical side, like the reconstructionist and like the history to that? I haven't I haven't planned on it. I think, you know, like I said in the video, the longer you hear Doug Wilson talk, the less. Attractive at all sounds. I mean, it's one thing to point to the California legislature and say there's a bill doing this. Well, let me tell you about the California legislature. There's a lot of crazy bills and some of them do get passed. But that's one way to attract a crowd. Now, you've got a whole program there and living that out. I mean, one of the most funds we've had was Laura on the channel. It's it's in the membership area. Those conversations with her about a yeah, there she is. Yeah, here's my little better community. Here's my bon op community. We're really hardcore. We have angry eyes and. There's a few people like that again and again. Yeah, there's a few people in the corner that are like that from a serious thing. And yeah, you were saying and looking and difficulties with church. So and they have that in their past. Yeah. Andrew, Andrew, the student living on Jacobs live streams. Yes, sir. Has been Paul. Good. Andrew, how are you? How are you, Trey? I don't have to talk when you're driving. Chase. I've got to I've got to schedule another estuary meeting. My schedule. This puppy is just I'm not going to be able to talk to him. This puppy is just I thought I had to talk to my wife when she got home from school. I said, honey, you know, I'm supportive and everything, but I can't change my schedule for the next year over this puppy. There's plenty of people at the estuary group who would love it if you brought the puppy along. But is there anyone who doesn't? If it were just my puppy, this wouldn't be a big deal because my puppy can lick me. My puppy can my puppy can do all these kinds of things. I can train the puppy how I want. This dog has to be trained to a particular program because I only have this dog for a year. And this dog is going to then go into intensive training. And that and it's like and this place really hasn't trained me yet. And I'm with this puppy most of its waking hours. So the plan was the puppy was going to go to school, which I think is a great plan. But I'm looking at this and said to my wife, I don't know when this puppy is going to be ready for something as daunting as public school. And given the fact that my wife is already in the deep end ball. What did you say about the deep end? I didn't get it. Just got to push the puppy in the deep end and see if he swims, right? Yeah, so I don't know what's going to happen, but it's it's sort of thrown my I like my routines and my routines are just. So here I am at church at night. So I got to schedule another estuary meeting. I bought this really you and I are you. Well, I was telling Sam that he and I are going to have a conversation so I can better understand his stance in regard to his Unitarianism. I would love to talk to you, Raj. When I was hearing you talk about gurus, I was like, you know, there's an interesting you are your guru Guru Rology is almost the same as my Christology. I was like, I would really like to know more about how you understand Jesus. So I'm going to in the chat, I'm going to send you my email if you don't mind. Yeah, and I would love to talk with you sometime. I think you'll both find a lot except Sam. You've only got one Jesus. He's got more than one guru. Yeah, that was another thing in early Christianity that people don't like to talk about. There was certain there was a certain sect that is almost kind of nasty. That believed in multiple like the Holy Spirit was like a person and then would possess people throughout history for multiple periods of time and that Jesus was like the last and fullest, you know, human that got possessed by the Holy Spirit. And that you see that that's there and it's like, is that Biblical Unitarianism? That just kind of something else. And that that's it's there in the historical record of like the second century. And so I was hearing Raj talk about the gurus. I was like, that's what that reminds me of. So in in the grand in the second century, I was like, I'm going to talk about the first two centuries. And I was like, I'm going to talk about the first two centuries. And I was like, I'm going to talk about the first two centuries. So in in the in the in the human being don't recall the do don't actually refer to themselves as they use a term called the self, which means something like a mansion. And so they refer to themselves as the first mansion. So they're they're the place where guru comes down into. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Well, I just got a lot of really interesting stuff. He really does. All right, y'all. I'm going to leave you. Oh, do you have a question? Did someone have some of that? Yes. So Paul, in a way, YouTube way in the past, you said that you would have a game with Jehovah's Witnesses where whenever they would knock on your door, you would play a game back and forth. I'm wondering what questions you would ask them. I just poke around in their Christology usually. Okay. And in their escapology, because I was curious how much of their own stuff they knew. And often. So you've got on Saturdays, it was sort of the foot soldiers would go out. And and when if they they have like a little bit of training and when they would hit something that they they were getting nervous about, like they were starting to get in over their head, then they would back away and say, well, I've got we've got someone else we'd like to send to you. And it's like, I don't want to play this game too many hours a week. But I was just really curious because a lot of Jehovah's Witnesses grew up in Trinitarian churches. And so just like Sam's point that there's a lot of people in Trinitarian churches that are not real good at explaining the Trinity. There's some people in non-Trinitarian churches that are not real good at explaining how their non-Trinitarian stuff works, too. It's just that, you know, so and I would, you know, because it's a Saturday morning and I'm cutting the grass or washing the car or something like that. And they come to the door and it's like, you wanted to talk to me. Let's talk. And I have to be good. You know, I don't want to be a but, you know, I was nice and everything. It was always going to be a pleasant conversation. And then I would tell them I was a pastor and that would even be like, well, we don't want to go there. Or they're like, oh, now we maybe if we can land a pastor, you know, all those kind of games. I hooked the big one. Yeah. I mean, usually pastors are the big ones as a former Jehovah's Witnesses. So, you know. Yeah. Yeah. So it was it was it was those kinds of things. And for me, too, it wasn't just being a troll. It was honestly curious about just like I am always. I'm honestly curious about the people and their stories and what sort of gone into their faith creation and who they are now. So I was curious about that. Honestly, Paul, I think he probably made most of these people's day. I'm sure they probably I think you're not interested. Well, you know, there's a joke. Joe's Witnesses faces are flatter than Kansas. And that's pretty true. Last question, Paul. Yes, we must. You got to you should do a live stream again someday. They're fun. You've been doing all these videos. I know. I know. You got a whole list. There's no planning involved, though. You just flick it on. Take some questions. I. But here's the problem. So, well, if I could do it at night, but my nights are getting full. I just did a Randall's conversation tonight and I still got sermon prep to do. And when I used to work nights, it was because there's a lot of meetings and stuff. So I often wind up working two, three nights a week anyway. So it's kind of like flipping the nights. I actually balance my work life a little bit better. If I start a live stream during the day, I just, you know, don't know when I'm going to have to deal with that darn puppy. You know what I'm going to have to I mean, I could talk to people on the phone, but or I could listen like I've had some denominational zoom things that I just, you know, turn off the camera and listen to and get interject when I can. But you can work at a tech company, Paul. What's that? You can work at a tech company. But but but to do a live stream where I actually have to give people my attention when, oh, now the dog is, you know, doing this over here and this dog is not allowed to do dog things because somebody's, you know, this dog is supposed to be a very disciplined creature to help some poor unfortunate, you know, make their life better. What is this friend doing this puppy is going to? It's called canine companions. Okay. And so they'll these these don't don't become seeing eye dogs, but some of them become hearing dogs. And so my friend Rod has a sister with disabled. I think I told that story. And so she had one of these dogs and she would just when she has to get out of bed, she just calls the dog and says brace and that dog just stiffens up. So then she can use it's sort of a movable stool and the dog can fetch things for her. And these are very disciplined, very well trained dogs in the end. Oh, you're talking like a seal dog. That's crazy. I didn't realize that. Well, so we're so we're just so at by basically November twenty twenty four. This dog will go into the serious training where the professional dog trainers. But you've got to get the dog to a certain level of maturity. And you have bad habits because about 50, 60 percent of these dogs pass. But if the dog licks too much, if the dog chases a squirrel, if the dog. I mean, there's all these things that will disqualify the animal. And usually those things are because the puppy raisers. Kind of screwed up. And so we're you know, we'd like to fulfill the mission so that some person has a good service dog. But what that means is you need someone who's going to actually put time and effort into this animal. And my wife was really excited about this because she had a student in her last round who was doing this. That dog failed, actually. But, you know, she thought and she's right. This would be a good thing for her class. Kids learn responsibility. All of those things. But this puppy is. But there's also rules like in the public school, there always has to be someone 18 years or older, older with the dog. In most cases, that's going to be my wife, who's got 30 kids she's responsible for. And now this dog. And I'll tell you, when you're working with this dog, this dog takes all your attention. So I sat down with her tonight and said, honey, I don't know if this plan is going to work because. I mean, this was your project that I'm willing to support you, but I get I got a job, too. And my job's pretty flexible. I can move a lot of things around. But I feel bad about what's happened to the Randall's conversation. I feel bad about doing live streams. I very much want to keep those things going. But at least our. In her classroom with the students. What's that? Is she the only adult in the classroom with the students? Oh, yeah. Especially with a puppy that's a lot. You know, and if she can like the kids are in fifth grade now, so they're old enough to begin to be able to, you know, do some things. And so there's potential there. But that's also tricky, too, because, you know, I bring so big part of it is sort of the. Also, the puppy isn't yet fully vaccinated. And so there are rules about restricting where I can take the dog yet. So I took the dog to coffee break the women's Bible study because I knew there's some hardcore dog lovers there, too. But that was really good because you've got to get the dog used to being amongst a lot of people and for the dog not to be distracted by those people. And so that's just a lot of experience with crowds and stores and classrooms. And the dog needs all that and they can't really get that in training. So a big part of our job is to get the dog super socialized and super comfortable around people. And so ideally, if she could pull it off, she could be able to get the dog to be able to get around people. And so ideally, if she could pull it off, having that dog in a classroom in a public school setting, if that dog can master that. Mission accomplished. But we ain't there yet. So no live streams, no Q&A's, but at least we're doing all that awesome stuff behind the paywall. All that wild content that everyone's missing out on. I know you don't want to pitch it, but I think these guys aren't paying up. I've I'm actually flirting with the idea of only doing Randall's conversations for at least the three dollar a month membership level. I'm flirting with that idea. That would be all that would cause. And it's not a money grab. What it you know, one of the things that I've realized with this is it does demonstrate it. I mean, you see this in churches. You get a better community if people buy in at least with some sort of thing. So I'm not ready to do that yet. I like having a really open thing because it brings a lot of interesting people who wouldn't. I mean, there's just some people who just not going to sign up, give three dollars, Jacob for one, not going to give three dollars to Google, which is funny because if you're watching stuff on YouTube, you're giving plenty to Google. But so I don't know. I don't know. I it's all an experiment. The whole channel is an experiment. Yeah, it's getting a little bit down. What's that? You got to start wondering down. You already got a ton of stuff on your plate. I bet your windows stuff is already backed up. You know, oh, you would believe my inbox. So so do the three dollar whatever thing. Yeah, the part of the problem is to that people contact me and they beg me and they tell me their story. And it's like, I really want to talk to them. You know, so, you know, come on, come on. You're killing it. I know. I can't say no. Probably high openness. Just that you'll prioritize the three month or the three dollar a month, folks. And then like every once in a while, a good enough email can get through to Andrew needs a student subsidy. You know, three dollars a month. I mean, that's a pretty low bar. Yeah, but it shows up on the credit card report and the wife notices and then you have to explain it. I hear you, Sam. I hear you. And that is way more expensive than three dollars. I completely understand. So you just tell her, just tell her, honey, don't. It's on ramping. It's on ramping. Well, the thing is, once you get three dollars and then you're seeing the no wait, no ads, people are getting, you know, first crack at these things. But it's only another four dollars. So, you know, it's just. Yeah. Vander play inflation. Paul, I'm telling you, if you if you charge three dollars, right, you'll win out some down and then some smaller channels will pop up that will do randos combos for free. There's that was what this channel was originally for. It was for DIY overflow randos conversations for Paul. True. The here's here's a very little secret, which isn't really a secret. A lot of people don't watch randos conversations. Because they're randos, which is fine. But I because my channel's a little larger, you know, usually a randos conversation will get between five hundred and fifteen hundred views, depending on if I if I title it well. Because I usually don't do much with the thumbnail. So a lot of people. So, yeah, there's there's not a lot of people are not terribly interested in other people. And at this point, your regular listeners know how to tell if it's a randos conversation before before they click. And they know which kind of randos conversations they like. Yeah, I probably wouldn't watch them either, but they're they're like lower key so you can listen in the background. I usually don't watch and then it's really nice because sometimes it takes an hour to get to a real gem. So I can see why people don't watch them. But listening and if you have the time, it works. Yeah. Well, and actually, if you know, if if Justin Wells actually, you know, makes this documentary because he's mined the randos conversations, there's a lot of gold in those hills and a good documentarian. That could be a very powerful thing. I sent him some time. I think we can say, yeah, I sent him some time stamps and then he goes, oh, yeah, that girl's in my estuary. So I guess I'm out of the loop. Wait, who? Because I'm in Justin's estuary. You'll have to figure it out. What? It's really good, though. The names are left out of the combos, though. I'm not going to. Well, I wouldn't even know the name. Do you know how far Justin is into his documentary? So I saw a lot of development and then I haven't heard anything from him. So it could be that he got distracted or lost interest or got work or something like that. So I don't know. It's a good day. I hope it's used to live today. But from what I saw, he sent me some stuff that he had already done. And I thought, see, I'm always much to Jacob's consternation. Hope he's not watching. I'm always a little nervous about there being a whoosh with us because whooshes are risky. And if he would, if Justin made a really hot because the stuff we deal with here is there's so much of the country that is dealing with this. And there's a lot of good stuff here that if it was packaged in just the right way, I could see it going viral. And I'm not sure that would be good for me. I'm not sure that would be good for us. So start charging three dollars. Makes it makes this if Justin makes this, it's going to be, you know, it's going to be his documentary. And so he's going to make some money on it, hopefully. And but if it goes viral, I mean, I don't want I don't want a million subscribers. You know, what happened to Jordan Peterson is partly because this is what he wanted. But they did almost die. Yeah. Well, and like, like, literally, like some people say, you know, that could kill you. I get it really did actually almost kill him. What what we're doing here is really nice. And it gets really hard to do this once you reach a certain level of fame. C.S. Lewis never really wanted to be famous. And he was fortunate in that just the way it scaled during his life, you never had to be bothered too much. I'm a little surprised you still get as much rando interest. Like people like this is pretty big exposure. People. Well, there's a lot of elements to that. One of them is that you remember what was the name of the guy he would it was a Manasphere channel and these women would call him and he'd be like, you know, they. Oh, he yeah he died. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I don't know. Yes, yes. And it'd be like, why are women calling? You know exactly what he's going to say about you. Why are you calling? They like that attention. And so some of it is people people have a need to be seen. Even if it's not terribly positive, they would need to be seen. Another part of it is never underestimate how many people out there are just dying for a sympathetic, kind, listening ear. There's no end to that demand. And then to be seen as being heard the real secret of estuary is not the sharing it's the listening that people are listening to you. And that's that's that's huge. And to be seen as being listened to and therefore given value, especially if you're sort of you know got a little bit of the person you're talking to has a little bit of status. That's very powerful and even therapeutic for many people. And so, and so that's why just having a randos randos channel isn't going to be the same. And it's it's too bad, but it's also part of the reason why churches do small groups. Why fame, the dynamics of fame are the way they are and why people is a estuary ink at large doing. Do you feel you know I think I don't know what happens when John Van Doe can no longer do else that you know in my estuary. I should really be having more meetings. Josiah Gorder and others here you guys meet once a month. I feel like once a month is a pretty good tenure, but tenor, but people we've had some amazingly powerful estuary meetings. There are times when I just think what a conversation people have. It's amazing when the things people share and it's amazing the support they're getting. I'm just I'm just blown away by almost after every estuary meeting because we break down into groups of six to eight. And I just I just I'm just shocked at how good it is. Is it what it's also takes a lot. Is it the way people come in or is it the longevity of the thing that people are repeating? Because like I run a small group and it's it's like one in every six where it really you're like oh that was a really good conversation and it's taken years like. With this like a bunch of the same people to actually get to that point, but estuary seems more consistent and is it like is there regular strangers or people just. Rangers I've never had two groups alike there again. This is partly because it's my groups. They're always new people. And the protocol does really work well, especially for. New people. And and once a culture develops. It can be sustained. So it's it's been really good. And it's and it's much better in person than on zoom way better. Yeah, I believe that I mean just the sound thing can't even two people talk or whatever a delay and. And relationships develop and you know. In some ways random people seem boring. But you would not believe what goes on the strangeness of reality and everyday lives. Amazing. I hear stories and estuary meetings that are just like wow and it's true. Wow. Sometimes they're really cool sometimes they're painful. But amazing things life is amazing. I think we're a weird group too. Yeah, we do. There is a selection bias going on with us. I have no idea what how I would describe what the selection bias is though. I couldn't even begin to propositionalize what exactly it is that there is one, but I have no idea what it is. No, no. I don't know. I don't know either. Well, there's nothing going on up here. You got to talk to your pastor friends. I'm trying to think. Nate, is there a Nate up here? Yeah, is Nate up there? Ontario, Canada. That's big. Sorry, sorry. I was answering Sam. I'm near Waterloo. Anyways, that's like. It might be an hour and a half from Nate. I'm in between Nate and then who's the other guy. The other pastor you had on the channel. Yeah, he's an Alastin. Yeah, so he's an hour the other way. He was running one for a while, which I didn't realize and are trying to. I don't know. Nate, Nate Vendetta is a gem. I knew his grandfather. I've been reading his posts. Yeah, he's. Pastors are tough, though, because. Yeah, he's got pastors put in a lot of hours. Yeah. And so, you know, when pastors look at these groups, they very realistically say. Because it's not just the time for the group meeting. How much other stuff pastors need tiered. You know, it's like estuaries and little tidal pools. People need to get another tidal pools with other healthy people. And pastors are always thinking about that. Yeah. So I, you know, I'd love for more pastors to do it, but I understand why they don't. My church is right now, but I think it's a little bit more of a. So that lets me do this. Yours has got to be one of the smallest surviving ones like. That's still running. See, it's not the three dollars a month that goes to Google. It's the people that watch the channel and give directly to Living Stones. That's why this church is still open. Well, I would switch, but. I would switch to the church. Yeah. It's harder from Canada to like I have other commitments and then there's no receipts. And so anyways, you guys have that huge tax burden. What? I mean, I think it's a little bit of a. It's a little bit of a. It's a little bit of a. It's a little bit of a. It's a little bit of a. I have that huge tax burden. What? What are you talking about? We're going to get rid of Trudeau. He's on the way out. No, I'm kidding. We don't pay for health insurance, Paul. So it equals out maybe. State of California pays for my health insurance. My wife has great benefits. Those public employee unions. Oh, my goodness. Public school employees have in America, like people think that Americans have bad health insurance and your mileage varies. Public school employees have I bet some of the best health insurance of anyone on planet Earth. See that here. Yeah. Every year I fill out my taxes, you know, and I get the statement about what this health insurance is costing the school district. I think last year it was thirty six thousand dollars a year for our family. Letting stones couldn't afford that. Yeah, that's different than up here. The public employees have a good package, but Montessori would not be included. Well, you're in a weird. Your wife has a weird situation where it's a public Montessori. That seems like an oxymoron. Public Waldorf. Yeah, it's very unusual. But yeah, it's she's she's making more than me now. So so what are your thoughts on theosophony, Paul? I know. Trying to get you in trouble in multiple angles. That's right, Sam. The Lord sent you to me just to keep me in hot water. I don't know a lot about it, truth be told. It isn't really followed in her school. They use a lot of Waldorf methods. There are a few teachers that are big into Rudolf Steiner, but many of those people are just kind of big into new agey ideas. And there's a lot of that in Northern California. So Rudolf Steiner is kind of like you really interesting guy. Brilliant. But kind of out there. But a lot right about a lot of things in terms of I mean, he saw what modernity was doing and very much made a curriculum to be anti modern. And he came up with an alternative to modernity that still kind of sticks around. And he was even kind of Christian. Don't get too mad at me for saying that either direction. But it's just hard not to. I mean, almost every option out there today is some version of Christian heresy. And you can decide which labels go where. But that's that's the state of things. I mean, Jesus just and secularization just sort of steamrolled the world and seeded it with so much Christian stuff so that. But there's lots of other interesting weeds in the garden too. So it's kind of the way everything is. But but moderns tend to get a little jittery about the different anti moderns that are around. And so especially for conservative Christians, then they start worrying about the demonic. So that's it's true of people that are worried about Jung. It's true of people that are worried about Steiner. And that just keeps going. Right. I have to I'm going to shut this thing down at the top of the hour. So, oh, and then Grim Grizz shows up right as I say that. Grim Grizz. I didn't hear you, Sam. I just heard there was a lot of weeds in the garden. You are no weed, Grim Grizz. You are no weed. You are no weed, Grim Grizz. You are no weed. I want to see. I wish I was independently wealthy because I would bankroll Grim Grizz first stopping at Moscow, Idaho to get a sense of Doug Wilson and his thing and then send them to Bethel Redding. Oh, he'd fit in it. Bethel Redding, I bet. It's not neither of those seem off the path, but I have to make the eclipse in Bosque Dell, Illinois in April 8th on April 8th, 2024. Oh, really? I will. I'll be going to that eclipse somewhere in Illinois. Oh, you will. Yeah. That's exactly the last eclipse in Illinois. It was really good. Well, see, in Bosque Dell is where this eclipse is going to cross the path of the last eclipse. That's why that's where we're going to go. So, and we'll have the great disappointment where nothing of astrological importance actually occurs. Astrological importance? No, but what's going to happen at the Dollar General in Bosque Dell is going to be very impressive. It may well shake the heavens. I don't know. Oh, oh, look, I have a button here that says stream this to your audience. Yeah. All right. I was tempted to press that too. I might take this and throw this up on my channel just because it's so much fun. Sure. All right. I have to head out, but I think there's enough of you inside here that have controls over the buttons where I can leave without the thing shutting down. I do not have any control over the button. I have no controls. Nope. Can I ask you guys if you have an end stream button? Welcome in, buddy. I don't have any of that. I think somebody with superpowers should be around. Would you kick out? Paul found his I can leave button. But so, Grizz, if you're if you're streaming it to your channel, but do you have like the end stream button in the upper right? No, I can't even highlight comments or anything, man. I can stop streaming to my own channel. Maybe can I like grant authority to someone? No, no. You got a settings at the team and the email. I do that. Yeah, it's good times. Yeah. So Jacob needs to give out more admin seats. I hit a button that I disappear. It might just be over. I think it might need to be over. Someone could go ahead person with one question. Um, so since you're a Unitarian, have you thought about preaching against the jobs when this is because I'm thinking if there's a group that you can steal, they'd be the biggest group. You're right. In fact, the biblical Unitarian circles have a ton of extra Hova's witnesses. When you go to our gatherings about it's almost half our extra Hova's witnesses, because we're some sort of safe haven that makes sense to them. So maybe we need to put more pressure on that than we are. But Yeah. Hi there. Do you have superpowers over on the Randall's United Channel? Sam's trying to leave and we need to find someone who does. If so, go over there and find the top of the link and get in there. What you want to do is put your memory on and remember who Jacob said he's going to kick off so that he can hand out new superpowers. So I mean, Paul could just start streaming too, if he wants, although I suspect Paul might want to go to bed at some point. And so I got to go home before I go to bed. I was going to make a video. Y'all are I'm not going to make a video because you go kill the video. I'm just copying. Let's make it anyway. Paul Sam put Paul up there and let's start the video. What's the video about? Well, here's the here's the here's the Make America Christian competition again. Bethel Church in Redding versus Doug Wilson's church in Moscow, Idaho. Which one's going to make America Christian again? My first question is, which one is most likely to chase the moneylenders out of the temple? I thought Wilton was saying way too many complimentary things about capitalism. He would let the moneylenders stay in there. But those Bethel lights there, they're pretty free market capitalists, too. It's hard to find a really aggressive Christianity in America that doesn't like like money. Is it true that every Orthodox church has a gift shop? What would the CRC master know about such a thing? Yeah. OK, Andrew icon store. Is this what we're talking about here about chasing moneylenders out or what? Thanks, I see you left the birds in. What can I say? What can I say? OK, so what is this Bethel group? I covered the Doug Wilson group as an adjunct professing today, but I know nothing about these Bethel people. They're a much bigger deal than Doug Wilson. They're the ones that do signs and wonders. They speak in tongues. They speak in tongues. That's the mild end of what they do. That's the mild end. So go there. Make handling. Not that maybe tried it, but I don't know. Are they the roll around on the floor filled with the fire of God types? Listen to this, Graham. They they go to the graves of people in their church who were very powerful, and they lay on the graves to receive their spirit up from the ground. OK, now that's weird. Kind of like the gurus. It's a little there. I don't mean to impind Sikhism, but you know, it's there. They have something of that idea, but they also make a ton of music, like some really high percentage of contemporary Christian music comes out of Bethel Redding, too. They're a big deal. You should research them, Grizz. You would love them. I got to. So the only the upside of my channel got a million views and I became wealthy is that I could fund Grim Grizz and send them all over the world wherever I'd want to see him, you know, investigate. Investigate. You can wield funding with your voice. You don't need to actually be fiscally responsible, Paul. But this notion of you giving up like a rando slot to people who pay you three dollars is a little bit insane. Now, when when you said you were turning the memberships on, you said anybody who does 25 gets a slot. So that you have to commit to because we're all accountability stalk you for saying it. But the thing you're going crazy. I mean, I did one tonight. So you got that. You got I mean, you got that. You can grab a rando slot and then you got I'll do a talk with you for 25. I wouldn't do any other than those are the two options you ought to give. That's the way it is now. So maybe I'll keep it that way. I see W. You take the big screen. Oh, John came in. Good. Oh, it can it can. Someone with powers is here. It's by me. So I'll check in later and end the screen. Oh, I guess I guess he is keeping it alive. But he's left us in our little boxes. No, I think John came in and did that. Jonathan, I'm getting the show and you have no camera on. So can you dare? That's much more. Now we can at least play Tic Tac, though. All right. Everybody get the piece of paper and write an X on one side and an O on another and we'll get Trey is Paul and I'm the only one old enough to know that. Oh, Sandy should know it. What'd you say? I said Trey is Paul in. Was that Hollywood Squares? Yeah. Are you doing CW? I'm an old soul, so I know things like that. I was saying that a lot of people find Randall's conversations boring. I don't think anybody found your Randall's conversation boring. I found the sound unbearable. Can I get that? Can I get an edit with the corrected sound version on that one? It's pretty long. Why it's quiet? When's part two? Yeah, when's part two? I explained earlier in the stream the puppy challenge. So I think you should call it puppy purgatory instead of puppy prison. Am I being am I being purified by this puppy? I think you should give the puppy a Randall's spot and actually do a thing with the puppy. The puppy is supposed to be a very quiet puppy. He's not supposed to talk. In just the last couple of days, he's really found his voice. And that's troubling my wife. The puppy looks up at people and is recognized. If I bark at them, I get things. So it's like, well, that's not the program puppy. Since we have you here, Paul, I recall I recall you not denying the invitation to play D&D with Nathan, Roland and me. Maybe I can do it during the day because I can do that with the puppy. I don't know that Richard's going to be able to do it during the day. But the fact that you have like this time window is like seems pretty gaming to me. Oh, the one right now? Yeah. Oh, this this is supposed to be work. See, I came on because I saw Sam and I really felt bad for Sam with all of his drama with church and stuff. So I wanted to give him a little pastoral care. And then one thing led to another. And I'm still here, which is a problem that we all know in this little corner. Fair enough. Fair enough. But that that game has to happen. But if we have to wait till the puppy thing is over or do it do it with a puppy, that'd be fine. Now we do with the puppy puppies because the puppy just means I can't sit there and devote an hour of focus time to someone. I can do things while I'm keeping an eye on the puppy. If those things include pretending to be a dwarf, we might be in good shape. That doesn't sound unreasonable. How are you doing, Sandy? Good. How are you doing? Great. I'm about 51 minutes from everybody loving me for 24 hours. So it's very exciting. That's a long haul. Happy birthday. Yes. If you're in the East Coast or further, I can take it. Speaking of which, I have things to deal with in celebration now. So I'm going to bow out. Thanks, everybody. Happy birthday. Happy birthday. Happy paganism. I should make a video. So what's the topic? I think you're Tim Keller. That video takes real focused work. So keep bothering me about it and I'll make it because because actually I should just make that one for the members because that's going to get a lot more personal. And I was going to say it has to do with the personal dimension. Yeah. I found Tim Keller at a very difficult time. And it was super helpful for me during that period. I listened to two, three hours of Tim Keller a day for a few years. There's a lot of material out there. So I really am impressed by his apartment and his wife and actually spending time with him. That actually happened before I got into him. Yeah. So you did that in the wrong order there, Paul. It would have been totally different if I had been totally into him at that point. That was a that was a one of my colleagues had a hook up. And so we went to New York and somebody else paid for it. And we had a great time. And we hung out with Tim and other members of his tribe. Got to ask some questions about church planting. Got to ask a question and then went to his house and Chinese food. It was great. It was fun. But I wasn't super into Tim Keller at that moment. About six months later, I was. And it had nothing to do with my time in New York. So I just wanted to ask you, Paul, do you think that Jordan Peterson was miffed? That you kind of like gamed the system to get that interview on your channel there? Is this all just in my imagination? Because I imagine this thing where like because I heard the story where somebody gave you the slot, which was meant to be, I think, for his Patreon members or something. And so there's a sense in which like, you know, you weren't even the person he was supposed to talk to. Although I don't know if you would have even noticed that probably. But then I think that's the point. But then I noticed in the video that it seemed like you didn't mention that you had recorded it until the very bitter end. And then you were like, oh, by the way, I recorded this. Would it be OK if I put up my channel? He's like, whatever. I wanted to. Well, first of all, I didn't I didn't game the system and I didn't know that the system had been gamed. The guy who did it confessed it to me about two years later. Yeah. The second thing was at that point, it was either going to be Skype or Google Hangouts and and and whoever was running Jordan's thing and told me one thing. And then it was the other thing. So things weren't set up at all. So it was really odd. So the connection was bad and it was really difficult. And I felt really bad. I didn't quite know how to. You know, it was just it was just totally difficult. The conversation went well. And so then I thought I should I should at least ask him. I felt badly that I asked him at the end. But I it was it was just a crazy afternoon and almost broke the law in California. Oh, I know. I know. Well, if I hadn't asked him, I wouldn't have posted it. What is going on here? What is going on? You need more admin seats. Yeah, I would love more admin seats. Who wants to pay the four thousand dollars a year? How much is the base stream? OK, so up to 15 seats, which is what I'm paying is seventy five dollars a month right now because I have all kinds of stuff. Sixteenth seats is a minimum of five thousand dollars a year. That's insane. It's quite a no. It's they know that when you hit a 16th seat, they have you by the short and curlings. That's why it would be nice if anybody else was willing to actually bump up their base stream. Anybody else was willing to actually bump up their their stream yard and Father Eric is actually paying for his own. But like there's only so much like if you guys want to give me the money like I've been paying the for this entire thing, a few people have contributed. But like, yeah, they want four thousand dollars more for a 16th admin admin. You know, this is great to talk about the thing they do need money for. Oh, well, yeah, the reason Trey is here is because we incorporated a 501 C3 and he's going to be he's going to be attaching the PayPal accounts to the website. Fountain of comfort. You have to take that painting down behind you now, Jacob and get no that painting is there. But Matt is going to be opening a fountain of comfort thing that's going to go in that empty space right there. OK. But that painting was gifted to Jacob. This painting was gifted to a mother, a joyful mother of children foundation that which supposedly is running the Jerusalem event. But as far as I know, they haven't even started the 501 C3 process. I'm leaving. Oh, now he leaves. Yeah. Four thousand dollars would be nice to be able to give you. But I think I'm going to Israel and that will be two months of income. Yeah, that's why I decided I'm probably not going to Israel because I'm not going to waste my time and money on a tiny conference when I have actual work to do. Before you leave, I'm going to see Roy Klaus in October. Really? Would you like me to ask if he'll go on your channel? Not to put you on the spot. Now you have to explain why you actually don't want to do it because I'd be happy to have him on my channel. And if you're there to help with the conversation, see W. Oh, sorry. Who is he? Now you're trying to sabotage it by involving me because you know that I'll never do it. Yeah. I know very well what CW is. He's trying to give me the last few comments on this medieval Jewish literature that was like a daily commitment, like indefinitely. It's five minutes. It's five minutes. It's not even my religion. Is it this guy? Where is he? Roy Klaus? Yeah, that's him. Yeah, Roy Klaus. Cry of the Little Corner. It's not even my religion. That's him. That should be our motto. He's even got a smaller beard than you. You can talk to this guy. He's from New Jersey. College of New Jersey. What's the College of New Jersey? Philosophy. He taught comparative religions there for like 30 years. You know, college of New Jersey is funny because that's a euphemism for Princeton, but it's not Princeton. Just so you know. Religious neutrality. The myth. Oh, okay. Dang it. I talked to Paul on his channel and he was very enthusiastic about the book. He's like, I love that book. It's like such a great book. And then I low key asked him if he wanted to be in a reading group. He's like, I'm not taking any new projects at this time. I read it like 15 years ago. Paul, what happens to that essay you wrote on secularity as the daughter of Christianity? That wasn't the full theme of the essay. I don't know what happened to it. You submitted it somewhere and it's dead? That was that Mervakey book project that I think didn't ever come about. Yeah. Apparently nobody actually gets anything done when they're Calvinists. John Mervakey is a Calvinist now? He got his part done. John Madonc's doing pretty good, you know? He is? John Madonc's got it going on. Doug Wilson? Doug Wilson? I think Doug Wilson's a better Messiah for you. It's much more aligned with your idea of Messiah. I think you should follow Doug Wilson now. Doug Wilson? That's blasphemy. No, he is the smartest dumb man I have ever. There we go. I say this over and over again. It's amazing the stuff he doesn't know. For somebody as smart as him, he's never heard of secular Roman Catholic priests apparently. Collision, the documentary about him and Christopher Hitchens in their book tour, is the first digital film I ever purchased. And somehow I still have access to it. So far it's working out. I don't know. Okay, I am really leaving now. Oh, look at that! Fleethus has it too. He's got the same edition you have. I've never seen that one. For like 100 years, so. I'm really leaving now and I'm not making a video. I have to set up the video for Homeroom tomorrow. So Grim Grizz has another fun, that's tomorrow's another fun video where I tee off on the next one. I like adjunct professing. It saves me coming up with stuff on my own. There you go. So, but I'm not going to make the video about comparing and contrasting Bethel with Doug Lilsen shirt. So that video may never get made. Well, I hope you cover the Bethel thing anyway. I need to learn. Bye everybody. Bye, Grim. Grim, like he didn't even let me talk to him because he knows he owes me $500. Finally, I've been like telling you for months, I'm like, go get on your mans. And he's been like, oh, no, no, no, no, no. Like, that's on you, okay? Yeah, exactly. I end up holding the bag. Like, yeah.