https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ed2SoTLumzk

 The church is splinter over now like that's we're so far severed from The church speaking in unity and I mean this and tradition Like the bigger tradition because it's all come down to like this individually I mean the whole what is the West comes into the conversation in in this whole thing, too. So Just just you guys know I just started streaming this to my channel, too. Oh Geez just so you know too I have to leave at 2 30 so you can like can you carry it on? We'll see we'll see okay, I Liked Luke F I've never seen you here before. Have you been on any of these live streams before? No, I haven't made it I've been kind of lurking for I don't know two years or so I was able to connect with Ted Ted S from from Arkansas. Oh good. He's live and in person I'm in Arkansan as well. We're about like two hours from each other. Okay You know Luke Luke T when you talk about the thing under the Creed. I Mean, this is the same dilemma that we have with like language. You're right in that The best Our best apprehension of these things are iconic rather than idyllic In that there's there's something When we're using language when we're using the Creed we're pointing through them to something else but especially as human beings trying trying to connect with each other The language is what we have and and we have this through time too and and you know, this is It's funny in our classes meetings when we do these examinations of candidates Trinity will will always come up and And one of the and your classes stuff does oh, yeah well, and nobody's denying the Trinity because Just because of confessionalism Because well you pretty much know if you deny the Trinity, you know, you're gonna be on the outside Right, but as you and as you and Sam noted, okay. Well Explain the Trinity And so, you know, I dealt with this easy bit in my Colossians sermon where if if you look at like say the Christ him that's in Colossians 1 If you try to put that him into your own words You will probably wander into heresy So the only way to not wander into heresy is to embrace the words That are there and and that's you know, that's that whole that's that whole saying about the Creed To to keep the words of the Creed because if you choose other words and and so even though you you are pointing to things under the words or Through the words most of us are best just sticking to the words because When we when we try to get beyond the words Everyone else around us begins to realize we're getting into trouble I mean what one of the interesting things that happened in the 19th century was this this big wave of biblis ism in the burnt-over district where Where everyone's like wow, we're gonna we're gonna rediscover real Christianity I'm gonna read the Bible for myself without any creeds or confessions and if I Appropriate the Bible to myself then I will have it and that's where and we didn't have Sort of one thing that emerged as I'll say Luther had hoped and the Reformation period we had We had the LDS church. We have the Jehovah's Witnesses We have the Seventh-day Adventist there with there were the Millerites there was just this this explosion of churches that varied tremendously and and so for this reason the Creed's Sort of help keep us together by saying You know if you sort of stick with the Creed You'll probably be able to be in the depth of the pool that you can still touch, but if you try and go out beyond it Things are gonna get squirrely especially for a so-so swimmer So here what that made me think of is this comment? So throwing my own terms and I'm controlling the dialogues. It's my story So this is something I've thought a lot about and I think it's true So I was really into classical education for a while and just education in general I think demands that like this is part of why You can't just plagiarize things and part of knowing if somebody really has understood something is that they can say the thing in their own words That's part of actually proper education If you can't say something and this is why I talk about personalist knowing being the only real kind of knowing and Definitional knowing isn't true knowing because you're just repeating platitudes You don't even know what that means and yes, maybe are those the training wheels to get you there sure that's fine But eventually you have to take off the training wheels the law is a good pedagogue It's not ultimate It can't be Yes, and and that's true You know the the old saw about teaching is you do I watch you do I help I do you help? I do you watch but that's limited in terms of things that you can sort of Manage when we encourage students to say things in their own words The feedback loop with the professor is important. Yes. Yeah agreed yet Even if you're using and the reason we we do this this episode is because this practice is because If you're just using the same words, I'm not sure of your level of understanding but that also doesn't mean that Even if I from what I hear from you, I think you have it Doesn't mean that the it that you sort of have that the words sort of lay on top of Is necessarily the same either and And what we're usually looking for is something that's perhaps good enough. So let's say we're carving and Yeah, you do. I watch you do I help I do you watch You know, I do you help I do you watch But the thing that I will carve will still not be the same as what the master carves Because there's a level of knowing and there's a level of doing that the master has that the student Doesn't have and even someday when the student becomes a master The student will not be a copy of the master Not an identical replica. No, it'll be a version of the master and in some ways might Might exceed the master and in some ways might fall short But this is all sort of a function of combinatorial explosiveness where most of what we're talking because by virtue of talking and and and Ideation has to be a reduction It's the same issues in terms of you know, our relationship with God all of us in some ways When we try to apprehend God We only apprehend a reduction and so there's always an element of idolatry in there Which is why worship tries to avoid that by By sort of taking ourselves out and focusing on in a way that isn't sort of an apprehension Yeah, I could I could For something in here and this is probably gonna be the last thing I say before I have to get to work but um Yeah, I think there is something about Confession, you know in the best sense. I mean I think of the 19 Creed the Apostles Creed light and Gosh, even the Confession in the best sense. I mean I think of the 19 Creed the Apostles Creed Learning the Psalms learning learning the language of the Psalms as these deposits Okay, then that that that do something to the heart they do something to the spirit They they train they train someone in spiritual formation train someone to say to the to the trellis Or to the cross from from which they can grow and flower but I think Luke I mean your critique is a Confessionalism that becomes a cage. I think I think at best You know these confessions statesman statement of faith. It's like standing on the shoulders of Giants. I mean to think about the theological work that went into the creeds It is a blessing to have that language To then use that as a spring springboard and and for you know, your faith to grow from that point, but You know, I think yeah what you're critiquing Luke and kind of Modern I mean, let's just say, you know a lot of modern evangelical churches is Instead of it being a trellis that one grows on it becomes a cage that confines So anyway, yeah No, I can say no, I really like that and that's beautiful and and I agree when it's I Would agree when it's a traditional ecumenical creed that maintains It's that maintains itself as an icon that allows for the further up in the further end Which is what a creed does it used to be called the symbol the nice increase called the Symbol of the faith heaven and earth. It is fundamentally an icon and So I have no problem with those creeds Those are great A real joy. I'm so so glad I was able to join but like I said, I've got a got about it I'm happy you did Great. Great to see you guys Of course Sam you were summoned Have we solved it yet? Have we solved it yet? Luke summoned you Okay, he manifested me right isn't that what we're what the cool kids say nowadays I didn't even cheat and for those of you watching I don't know how this I just get this button up that says stream this on your own channel So I hit that and so I know this is going out on my channel But the link to join is on Luke's channel and it might go away Unless on grail has I think powers at grail country can come in when Luke has to go but Jess just said hi Jess. You can come in and control up because he's on grail country I like to look at all the comments to find out who's watching from my channel. Is there the cool people? No, we were talking about confessionalism and the Yeah, and you know Sam's point about You know, okay. So in what ways It's funny because Unitarians too. So there's a there's a box Unitarians There's there's quite a there's quite an interesting sample in that box of Unitarians and and Sam, you know part of what makes Sam interesting is that Sam is is in very many ways very fits very comfortably in the evangelical box though, he be a Unitarian and You know, there's a huge diversity of Unitarians with respect to let's say Christology and you know part of what makes Sam interesting is to the degree that I understand Sam's Christology It's at least a very high Christology But I the truth is now that Sam has You know Colonized a certain portion of my consciousness Congress. It's just I When I you know now I'm going through the book of Colossians and I just I run into these verses and yeah I look at different readings of them and so on and so forth But as I go through the book of Colossians, I just think I'm glad I'm a Trinitarian. I think this just works better And I might make I might make a response video to that although I feel weird making a response video to a sermon A lot of people didn't like what I did to that poor woman who just gave a talk at a sermon at a tech conference I guess anything on the internet's fair game But I also need to respond to father Stephen DeYoung who is taking shots at me on the Lord of Spirits So oh really on his podcast. Yeah, he's taking shots I'm gonna have to fire back on I'm getting hit on multiple fronts. I'm not coming after you. All right, that's fine I mean, I I'm not an anti confessionalist either. I think it's sort of what you were saying Paul and I do think that part of what you can see was one of the mistakes of the Unitarian movement in the early 1800s in the United States was getting rid of all creeds and all propositional definitions of belonging and that's part of what Summoned the spirit of whatever is guiding Unitarian Universalism at the moment and I'm not quite sure what spirit it is, but I don't think it's the Holy Spirit and I do think you know sort of the Yeah kick out a spirit and seven worst things come back in problem was part of what happened when early Unitarianism in the US was D creedifying D propositionalizing itself Because there was like a solid like 50 or 100 years Where relatively conservative Unitarianism was pretty common in the United States, especially in New England But it just slowly and there were signs of it from the beginning of it going in the very liberal And I think that really is the right word Direction, so I'm not not completely against confessionalism either But I Guess confessions you're against confessionalism. I'm against confessionalism. I guess you're right here. I'm not against confessions I'm not against all creeds I'm happy to recite the Apostles Creed and not just because I agree with it But because I think that's a perfectly fine and good thing to do together as a church Yeah, yes tell us the truth of job and save us I'm a one-trick pony. I haven't cried a while. I haven't cried in a while Jess if we can All right, talk about job and cry. I Can I mean just get me going and that's where this that's where this horse leads. I Don't even know what you guys are talking about. I just saw you guys and I was like I can't go not doing All right. So we started talking about Universalism and we've left talking about universalism and it's that we start talking about confessionalism Well, cuz yeah the initial topic was I think I Think that it's well, I'll just say it mean I think it's dumb that people say you can't be explicit about your belief in universalism But you can be explicit about your belief in eternal conscious torment like it's fine to promulgate that But like you can't talk about like a universalism that takes sin and Justice and reconciliation repentance seriously like a George McDonald universalism That's off the table but like we could talk about eternal conscious torment despite like all its problems with metaphysics and how it portrays God Essentially is Unitarianism universalist The most common form of it that people are aware of is But actually the the Unitarians and the Universalists didn't merge Denominate denominationally until like the 1960s And there had been you know Non-universalist Unitarian churches in the US for over a hundred years over 150 years 200 years at that point. So But basically I think an Interesting tale is both the Unitarians and the Universalist had basically stopped being Really kind of Christian honestly by the 1960s and they're like, are you not really? are you post Christian in the same way we're post Christian want to just like, you know join together and so there you know, we I Do want to figure out whatever lesson that was Jordan B Cooper's been talking about Unitarianism in the US and per usual He's doing a pretty slanted and bad job of it. And of course will need to respond to him too Once I'm done firing back at Laura spirits and at Paul's bad take on Colossians one Then I'm gonna have to hit Jordan B Cooper and maybe Gavin Ortland will finally pay attention to me. I don't know We'll see quick quick side pause break for PBK one of my live stream ideas is Why it's so hard to quit or what keeps drawing the people that are in this little corner in this little corner And why we stay here and I think a big part of it is you because that is the thing like you're not This is all happened very organically and it's all happened very personally Your your corner of the little corner the internet is very person centric and maybe it's just because this it's my little corner But I think it's the most person centric And and the people like I don't know I don't follow Jordan B Cooper or But like I don't if your main if your main goal is to like build a platform around talking about ideas You're you're boring Like I don't care about your project Like I care about this project So Paul did you watch the Church of the Eternal Logos? I think I'm getting that channel right video about you know, um So I figured if you said something important someone would tell me I Don't think it was weird. So the Church of the Eternal Logos is very Jay Dyer ortho bro adjacent Men's you know issues slash or so bro dim kind of channel manosphere man Yeah, or so bro. Oh sphere whatever and like honestly, you know, there's some videos of his that I've listened to and kind of liked It's not like he's terrible. He is a pretty smart articulate fast-talking dude But AC who is a guy who is in your comment section a decent amount who got kicked off the discord server? Not by me, but the regular show I did not click the button I will not reveal who clicked the button that actually booted him the only person I booted off the discord with by actually pressing the button was Claire Shaw and I'm proud of that one, but But other than that so AC it was you know, he was poking some fights and getting on people's bad side on the Discord server and got kicked off and I think he's been kind of anti this little corner of the internet thinks were some part of some Conspiracy to what's it? What's it called? What do people who want the Orthodox Church to join the Catholic Church? Where they call them you uniates or something like that? Anyway, you know, basically evil ecumenicalists or something But he they so he paid the Church of the Eternal Logos channel to make a video about you Vervecky and Peterson and it was half complimentary half critical but honestly I don't feel like he understood you very well because most of his criticisms of like say Vervecky are things that you would often make to and you know But it was also like and orthodoxy is the obviously only right answer to the meaning crisis and so become more orthodox But you know, it was an overall it wasn't a terrible video Good good No, I Luke your question it to me is interesting because It'll be interesting to see how let's say the symbolic world conference is different from Chino Yeah And And I you know the each of us and you know when we do a conference like Chino you can sort of tell You know, there's a lot of overlap too because many of us watch all of us but there's sort of the Peugeot group and the Vervecky group and then this strange people like us And then and then to get the question well that this sort of gets into your confessional question though Luke because I mean is there a confessionalism in the Vervecky tribe is There confessionalism in the Peugeot tribe and is that their confessionalism in this corner of the corner and and I don't know You know, we're fairly anti-confessional in some ways But so then what what is holding us together? Religion Okay Love Yeah but but can we can we explain can we not just explain it but There's power in identity and in naming spirits. Let's say naming is important. That's that's an area where I Naming is a big deal. I mean all like I just that's something I would love to actually talk with Yosef and has he about like I was gonna talk to has he about it a while ago because I mean all the way back to the garden naming is a big deal and and I don't know how to talk about it. Well say I mentioned it to Sam When was that the last live stream is I think self naming the white stone name? I think I think essentially that's that's my handle. I think that's the end is when you are When your creation is complete when it is finished for you naming won't be a problem but Naming is important for us But we're on this side of our of receiving and understanding and knowing our white stone name And so that we're still divided man stuff. Yeah, we're double-minded Remember Prince when he took this unpronounceable It didn't work We need names Although even the Tetragrammaton is somewhat something kind of like a Prince style anti-name There is something So, you know and we are gods No Sam or Luke if Sam isn't taking Jesus as God I don't think any of the three of us are gonna qualify Well, I'm fine call the lot in the in the way Luke just called us guys Follow the logic of the incarnation. Let's just Let's go down. Let's keep rocking Further up further in further down Grizz said the thing that holds us together is the YouTube habit we had when Peterson appeared which I think that's relatively true to there is something about it that is The sort of people who have time and ability and Whatever weakness it is to pay this enough attention to YouTube But it's quite remarkable the four of us I mean Jess was on the channel very early We had a number of conversations and I remember, you know before I kind of laid down the law on the patreon on the Calendly app Jess was like I want to get him in before this closes. I thought this is really gonna close. Oh Jess was right it did But we're all still here which is interesting Because that was my wife would call it interesting My wife would call it annoying Turns out we're all mentally ill Maybe we'll see I'm seeing a video of Jess on Paul's channel that is over four years old It's about the book of job for some reason Yeah Really? It's like he's been working on it for a while I don't remember when it started There's an intersection of all and there are others who aren't with us anymore Not that the dead some of them are but I'm I'm a job's busy because he's having a baby But that's three Yeah, Joe What's wrong with you Joe? Stop paying so much attention to your children We're obviously ignoring ours I've outsourced them as like Richard Rollins said I think I've just I've given them away. I've outsourced that that responsibility It's my local Catholic church It is for me because obviously we are getting something from this and And You know Grizz, you know Grizz talks about some of his stuff here But you know Chad and Grizz and all of you guys and then you know We we had this conversation this morning about Europe and you know I'm going to Europe again and we're gonna do the German thing and I'm really looking forward to that and I hope a lot of people who went last time come back because I'd like to see them again and like to hear what's changed and And I guess I guess part of it you know, I guess Luke to your question part of it for me is that I do sort of operate as a pastor even in a realm like this and so even though I can't really sort of keep tabs on all of you I part of me does care and and we also have a greater capacity for outliers like you know, Mark LeFavor and Grizz and Navigating patterns. Yeah patterns And people who have sort of been alienated by other elements of the corner And again that part of that is me because I that's been my story long before any of this So, I don't know. I don't know. I I'm very I Don't want to leave any behind and That's something that how godlike of you leaving the 99 for the one Paul It's something that trip noted, you know He would get so frustrated with me when I would refuse to get dogmatic about something because just kind of roll his eyes Always the missionary always you know, he's the father looking out that son's gonna come down that road. I'm gonna keep waiting. So Trip puts up with me. He's got to put up with you I Don't know. Well, why do you guys keep watching? I mean, I mean my channel isn't that large I mean, it's large is so hard to know when it comes to YouTube, but But I mean if you walked into a room every day with 2,000 people in it, you would feel like that was pretty large Yeah, but that's a different thing Yes, but in a way you're walking into a room with 2,000 3,000 4,000 people and it most days. Yeah So for me this is always I don't know it truly is always been a personal thing I mean, I I got the same Jordan Peterson thing the pastor's response because I've all I mean, I've said this before I've always I care about the church That's what I've always cared about And so like when Jordan Peterson's interesting to me, but all of its always Only interesting because of how it relates to faith and church and Jesus and God That's just always what's been a big deal for me. But then I got to know you I got to know Jess I got to know Sam. I mean, I've known some of these people and talked to them daily. I mean Jess and Sam and I often are messaging daily and we have been for years We just So we just know each other really well and then every time that I you know try to quit the little corner or stop paying as much attention like I'll watch one of your videos because like you're the last thing that I you're the first thing that I usually pay attention to even though I take little Sabbath from it and And then I want and then you'll say something and I want to comment You know, and so then I'm re-engaged and and then I have people like at the estuary meeting last time I was thinking I do or I've said this is what I put at my last estuary meeting. I said I'm increasingly becoming more concerned with just Doing stuff here. Like how does all this play out in Minneapolis and being more involved in the estuary? and what do I have to do here and and simultaneously like you can't ever get rid of something Sherry's always challenging me about like Diminishing the online space but the guy said locally too and this just came up in the comments too You get all these comments all the time like this isn't just for you for us like there are other people benefiting from it so, um, I don't know There's a type of conversation you can have here that I've never had anywhere else, right? nowhere else like maybe Five or ten minutes here and there with someone but it's it's never repeatable but but It's like you always like if I ever need to Talk about something or run some ideas past someone I get on the voxer and I just start talking and there's Luke and there's Hesie and there's Sam and Joseph and Sherry and Nate and you know, like All these folks and if I make a video like people are commenting Even though my channel like like my channel is super tiny I still get people that write me emails every now and then I just got an email the other day about job stuff And it's like really interesting stuff that like like no one You know, this is where Sherry like you said Luke like Sherry really gets on people for saying like oh online life isn't real life She's like why isn't it just part of real life? Why is it? Included in in our friendships and stuff. Somehow it's like secondary And I think there's something to that and then there's also something to like You know, it's just it's just about I have other responsibilities in my life I'm actually supposed to be working right now But There's a refreshment that I get from like talking to you guys and there's a refreshment that like that that I Don't feel like I expend energy I feel like I get something back and then like when I go do other things in my life I feel like those other things get better too. So It's definitely not a bad thing so It's the other thing I think I may be able to talk about stuff too. Yeah yeah, me too, and and I feel like there's like Because it's more than just being having like openness like people have a lot of trait openness But it's more than that. I feel like there's a shared territory where we're all kind of like walking around and Then we're like but we have to talk about it And then we're identifying things in each other's speech and in each other's description of things like oh That's this and this and this and I recognize that and it really is some kind of landscape that we're in And I don't know if that makes sense There's been conversations where I'll come to a precipice and you and the conversation just sort of halts and you're both there like this And it's the same feeling it's standing at the edge of a cliff and you're just like here we are and you're just looking out and the conversation like that's as far as the conversation could go because literally and And then there's other times when you go to an opening and you're walking through the woods and then all of a sudden There's an opening and you can both like it has the same feeling as walking into an opening like a clearing like a meadow and You know and and people will have different reactions to that people will be very hesitant. They'll be like I don't want to go out there I want to stay back here safe back here and like someone else will be going out and saying like no, it's okay. Look at this Yeah, so I've had intimations of that like through conversation I'll be I'll be like I'm really like in a place right now more than I am just a linear conversation Okay, I gotta go Sam, what do you get out of this little corner I Don't know yet. I Still haven't found what I'm looking for you might say I'm hurt Looks like That's how Luke heard that comment You know what one of the things that's important here we laugh we laugh together Yeah, it's not all serious. Like it's it's real. It's all of it. It's real stuff. Like if this was just That's how am I estuary and even here like because we've we've I figured out we need to define goals Boundaries a little bit. I'm realizing I need boundaries in general as a person because I'm not good at that But if this were just like an intellectual thought group or something Boring super boring. Like I just I don't care about it. Yeah, we got to laugh with each other you got to mess around, you know, you got a I Mean, it's part of like I don't know communion and table fellowship and church and the real entails all of that, you know All right Well, well, I wonder what happens when you turn it off if we all go away or if it stays on my channel And I get controls. I have no idea. Let's see. I'm gonna leave the studio three two One I'm looking at Paul's channel It might be Well, I'm a real country Admin oh Do I have controls? I don't know what happens if I leave now It's still going on grail country, too. Yeah. Yeah, cuz Jess has control. So all right Well, I I don't know I think I don't know I think it's love and You know part of the poverty of our culture is that one word is used for how many different things and I wish we had more of the Greek understanding and I think I think there is a lot of love in the corner and It's love is a complex thing Love is a really complex thing. I mean anybody who's in a marriage knows should know the complexity of love Anyone who is a parent or a child should know the complexity of love but I think that's I Think people come to be loved and then hopefully to stay to love And I see a lot of love in the corner, you know when when someone disappears I get notes Oh so and so has disappeared. Where are they and go look for them and And yeah, so I Don't know and it's in it is interesting in terms of Luke's mission that I Don't know if we could write a confession for the corner What would be in that confession but what's our form of unity Yeah, we don't know yeah, I haven't seen the bear I see it advertised a lot to me on streaming TV, but I haven't watched it. Maybe I will watch I don't know what it's about. So I Know I've only seen one episode. I know it's about a cook in Chicago making Italian beef sandwiches, but I'm not quite sure how that relates this little corner. Although at the Chicago event We had Italian beef sandwiches for lunch if you guys remember or if Paul remembers there it is there it is There it is Yeah, we just you know, like I said, we just had a little get-together for the for the German festival Which I'm looking forward to and of course Kansas City will be coming and I don't know if Israel's ever gonna happen But one of the things that's happening is is John Vendonk is recognizing that Estuary is growing beyond him and we're gonna have to do some more Institutional development so That'll be fun. Some people have been screaming at me for years because they wanted more institutional development Well, it's gonna happen and then we'll see what they like about it or don't like about it. But What is what does that mean? What does that look like for the assuring groups that weren't institutional development? well right now John Vendonk has been you know running all the else net and That's like 12 two hours zoom calls a month. It's 24 hours a month And those groups are growing and so you're probably gonna need more of those else net meetings online And so you need more leaders and so now some of them are doing it. So then we're gonna have leaders of else net meetings other aspects of estuary There are other leaders who are sort of covering those and so then we'll have a team of leaders and the only way we have a Team of leaders. There's some other little costs about estuary such as zoom accounts and domain names it's not a lot of money, but There's you know a source of money that it might be that you know, let we say have an estuary foundation We won't call it mother's milk of you know Human unity or whatever Jacob would describe But you know probably something very Protestant like the estuary foundation which you know on one hand sort of holds the values and Does a little bit of policing, you know This is what the estuary protocol is and these are Estuary conferences where you know, that's that collaborates with the estuary You know all this kind of stuff that develops eventually because right now all this stuff is just operating out of John Vendon's John Vendon's hip pocket and John is a 70 plus year old man who? feeling some of his age and So and I've just been basically saying John as long as you want to run it That's cool, but when you feel ready and you feel it's outgrowing you then we'll start to develop more so then we'll probably have a leadership team and then we'll probably have a Larger group of let's say estuary leaders from all the different estuaries who represent and connect with the leaders and you know There you have an organization. So this is in Cardinals and I Don't think I'm very Protestant We there won't be there won't be vestments I'm so Protestant we haven't the Chicago and hasn't even joined this the else net It's like not that's not like always an intentional choice part of it's because I'm lazy and part of it's because we predate the else net Yep, but Pardon me is also always wary of something over me. I guess Well, there wouldn't be estuary unless we had non estuary who's kind of doing the same thing So it probably keeps the whole the whole culture good because the vestuary gets corrupt. There's always the Chicago I mean we're kind of likes the Jordan Peterson meetup, but We've kind of downgraded that as part of our identity and yet some new people find us Yeah, and we've got plenty of people. Um, I don't know Nate says if an anarchist can manage so can you I don't know because Nate's pretty high up in the estuary hierarchy. So You know Nate might eventually be the new job in Donk Let me get I'll be down with that A group led by an anarchist can't can't be too bad, I guess Well, have we yeah, how do you market your group in Chicago on meetup comm what's it called? Chicago land bridges of meaning I think oh That's interesting Yes, I Can't wait. I'm really Excited about seeing what will happen with every Sunday morning estuary at Living Stones That is interesting Every Sunday, what's the difference between that and and Bible one or two Thursday nights a month, you know Who will come up will will weekly meetings on a Sunday morning How will that change what we do and how will that change the people who participate Yeah, Graz I don't know if that game's ever gonna come about I mean it's just it's just I mean, I could play one right now. My son is helping with the dog. So But I won't have my son in the house that once he gets a job and you know moves to the Bay Area or LA then hopefully the The dog will be ready to go to school then but My poor children they think I'm a bad guy Children they think they've they're strange father Chicago land monthly bridges of meaning meetup Boy, that's a catchy name. Yeah, that's good What are they searching it? I don't know No, I mean actually a lot of our growth at this point is word of mouth friend to friend But there are some people who come just through meetup comm There are some people who've just found us because we're on the library where we meet schedule and they're like, well, what's that? And so they just come that we've gotten at least two regular people who just found us because of the we were in the public library and So I I don't know and at this point we don't really need to grow we had 15 people last time which is I think almost too many and so I Get it like at 16 or 17 or 18 then you need to split or something like that Yeah, then then suddenly you have to institutionalize then you need Rituals and habits and practices and rules One of the things so the doctor and I want to make a video about because he's noting the three streams into estuary the There's the sort of this little corner Channel and then there's the meetup comm people who come there and then his church network And so his estuary is very much made of those three streams and so obviously the church and the meetup people they don't know when the chatter in this little corner, but I'll be interested to see I'd be interested it'd be interesting to me to see what to what degree a Sunday morning a weekly Sunday morning estuary for some people becomes a And they're doing that well they weren't going to church But they're doing that in place of church even though they wouldn't go to church without it. Yeah, it's like how Augustine how ambrose would give his sermon and then after they did the Eucharist He would come back out to the people who are listening and give answer questions and give a talk To the people who are sitting in the narthex of his church, but who weren't part of the church It's almost kind of like that again Well, Tim Keller, of course did QA in the early days at Redeemer He sort of asked me anything on Sunday morning Yeah, yeah Where are you at with church Jess? I'm a part of a Southern Baptist Church plant That started five years ago. So I'm Protestant is I'm an evangelical Protestant in my bones and I'm a very bad Well, I really love my church is right in my neighborhood It's really called neighborhood church And so I was one of the founding members and then Yeah, it's different than other church I've been a part of because Like most most people that go here are literally in the neighborhood and all our kids go to school together and all that So it it has a it has like a community vibe about it. That's real Like it's not like hey, let's try to be a community Like we literally are a community and then we go to church together, too. So it's really nice That's so good That is ideal, you know, I have as many of those circles together But yet as you said, I mean part of your attraction to the corner is that You can have conversations this way that you probably are never gonna have locally No, no Yeah, and it's interesting because when I when I was launching The KC estuary we have like three members right now because Lance left Lance is down in Texas now He moved for work, but But when I when I launched it I had a bunch of people come like we had like 15 16 17 people on the night that I was like, hey, this is kind of the idea And I had two friends like me And this is kind of before this is pre Pre The the protocol So yeah, that wasn't established yet and that that was a huge help So Pre protocol I was kind of like trying to describe What we do and no one's been able to do that So Pre protocol I was kind of like trying to describe What we do and no one knows what we do So and then I had two good friends kind of get mad at me at some level and Sort of berate me in the parking lot for about an hour afterwards About how dumb this idea was and I was just like like I was kind of stupefied about it That they didn't understand like don't you guys understand it and And one of the guys is a like overly skeptical former atheist kind of type Who's come back come to back to christianity? I guess he was raised christian Um, and I was like wouldn't you benefit from like a place to talk like this? He he's I don't know. He had all kinds of problems and Then i've had friends that were just supportive of it come a couple times and they're like I don't get it And then they're just they leave which is fine so but like the guys that do come they've had some involvement with uh, either the discord or Watching certain youtube channels or something And there's a certain spirit that we're trying to engage in and they get it and and um, we're able to have like a you know Between the four of us. There's an atheist sort of a questioning orthodox leaning guy there's me a protestant southern baptist evangelical and then um another kind of evangelical guy, but but it's just like So we can do it but like my other You know southern baptist friends can't and so it's not something that people I don't know There's a spirit they have to be sort of initiated into at some point And I think the protocol can help with that and and just being in the group But if they don't stick around long enough or they don't really see the need for it They're like I got other stuff to do Yeah, like I don't I don't want to just go to this meeting to be nice to jess or whatever. So Yeah I did a we had classes yesterday and so I was asked To just give a little report on estuary Little introduction I had two pastors Come up afterwards and they're they're like this What I said they had a really great classes meeting yesterday and some churches gave some really good reports but One a couple pastors came up afterwards and said this is exactly what i've been looking for You know always wanted and so of course I hooked them up with vendonk and get them into else net and You know I can I can help them jump start their groups ones in the bay area ones in Down in the valley in the fresno area. We've had a fresno group before so I think that'll probably be able to go too, but I you know for a couple of pastors They're like i've always wanted. I love you know, I love doing this and I just explained the protocol and how it works and how the groups work and so i'm hoping that they'll they'll start because I think that's the only way that they'll start is On there was a I can't remember his name. There was a famous Christian rocker worship worship leader who deconstructed and You know someone he basically said oh, I want a church. I want a church without dogma I want a church without you know, basically I want a church without dogma So then some people tagged me so you need to find paul vanderklaai and I thought well, this will be interesting But I think I think that's part of again getting back to the confessionalism question in this little corner I think in some ways that's part of what we're playing with I mean I don't not want sam here Even if he's a unitarian I you know, I want sam here. I want grizz here I mean even it was so funny the most the most fervent Critic of estuary in the comments has been Mj who's a unitarian You know, what if what if what if these people get together and they talk heresy says the unitarian? So yeah, I I don't know I I think This sounds very evangelical of me. I think god is doing something and I think god is doing something with us and I'm, not sure exactly what he's doing with us. But Again to me it seems to be bearing good fruit. And so as long as it seems to be bearing good fruit I'm gonna keep at it This is kind of chad's uh drum he's like is estuary a way to serve others yes guys Yeah, I remember paul you had you and I had a conversation a while ago it was before the lockdown on calendly Or maybe it was post lockdown on calendly. I got one more in but we were talking about estuary and you and you talked about Serving people by providing a space for them to think and that was that was really Uh, that was really powerful. Um Yeah, that was very powerful Very powerful Well and and part of what so I was laying out the protocol for these guys yesterday and the sneaky thing about the protocol is What it what it creates space for is for people to listen And i've been i've been amazed at how every time I do an estuary meeting and we break up and so because we have more than More than enough for one group, so we break up into little groups. I have different building different rooms available at living stones um After each time I go I just think wow What what a conversation we just had people shared stuff that was personal and important And they trusted the group with it and and their trust was Their trust was validated and vindicated Um, they think I could be better at having my group be a little bit more personal sometimes How would how do you do that or how do you think you can be better at doing that? Well? actually What's developed is we have a lot more women in our group now our group is probably 40 women And the women The women get personal quicker and um It's been amazing You know women women take to this I think in some ways more naturally I don't want the women to sort of there be too many women so that the guys go away, but I've just been amazed how And I think the protocol itself helps that The the way this is the way that because when we just did the meetup Oh, what are we going to talk about and then you know the same guys usually Have their ideas and they're sort of in the same vein But when you're a little bit more disciplined about going around the room and drawing out some of the quieter people And most of the women haven't been on the jordan peterson train at all they've come with their boyfriends and um but once they once they started and once they realized that This is a place where in our you know, this is a place where men and women can have a conversation That gets interesting too So, I don't know I don't know it's like that When vervecki talks about the reciprocal opening was it? I forget the term he uses but it's like you you and you tell something About yourself and then they tell something about themselves and then you tell something a little deeper than and then he's like that's how you fall in love It's the same sort of thing and so some of it's kind of led by example um So so like if it needs to get a little personal like maybe you gotta just Maybe tell a personal story and see how it lands and see if other people start um jumping on board You know, uh dolly says circling, you know I've had a number of conversations with with guy and I still don't really understand what their circling is and You know, there was a Menchus mold bug wrote that blog which sort of you know went after it So there's a lot of questions about circling. I just don't know anything about it and I I don't need any more tools than what? I got right now. So i'm sticking with the estuary thing um But again, i'm very interested what will happen when a group goes weekly with it And weekly with meeting or weekly with circling weekly with meeting Okay, that's true. We're still a little worried about a neo-pagan elements of the circling thing I'm not accusing it of that and i've never done it myself, but i'm like, yeah And only no, I don't participate in rituals. I don't know the origin of oh, yeah, I didn't know they had rituals I have no idea what I mean. I think circling is kind of a ritual, right? It's like it's like not just square dancing or something like that. It's something a little bit more I don't know that there's videos of them doing it online Oh, I have to watch like this emotional work and I don't know it's I'd be fine with square dancing though at estuary score You'll only you'll only do shapes with parallel sides Yeah I did a college class on square dancing it was almost all women which for a single college guy was Good good. Yeah I I used to call square dances in college. I have the ability to call a square dance Well, maybe at the next um, maybe actually i'll go bridges of meaning except we're we're about 95 dudes and we only have girls when laura shows up, but maybe if you do square dancing some some women will come Estuary slash square dancing Maybe it'll compete with paintball for the uh opening physical activity slash parkour I mean there was some statistic that I saw that who knows I saw a statistic on the internet So take it with all the credibility that that deserves that like some shockingly high percentage of young men like young as in like late teenage years have never asked a girl on a date or never you know done anything along those lines and I was listening to my um to the sex ed teacher um talk about what the sex education curriculum is at the school district and she said something like um, it was like in the section on teaching consent that Flirting is not for getting someone to like you flirting is for letting someone else know that you like them and i'm like, hmm if only the relationships in the world where Someone didn't have to convince the other person to like them through a little bit of effort and a little bit of flirting and whatever If those if those relationships didn't exist, how many relationships would there be? I mean, I had to convince my wife to like me And it took it took more than one, you know, just um, whatever And and I think that I remember in middle school. We did classical Dancing like waltzing and stuff like that and In those classes the guys had to get up cross the gym to the girl's side of the gym And ask a girl to dance with you and that was part of it And I think like those sorts of things are so stigmatized now That I think there's a lot like the the attempt is to prevent people women from being harassed in ways that they don't like great I get that but what better way to do that is there than teaching guys a polite respectful um chivalrous way of Propositioning a girl to dance with them or something like that at an age-appropriate time So, I don't know Dancing was an activity that Ostensibly was something safe But yeah, it was unless he went to wean college and then then you couldn't do well with calvin too But For a while sort of calvin of course was dutch so more flexible than weeden but Yeah No, I think you're right sam and I mean my strategy When I was single was always Developed the kind of relationship before i'd have to Extend myself to get shot down. So You already you already know what the answer is going to be before you have to ask it but Yeah Leave room for jesus. Yeah For the holy spirit Holy crimp Oh Well gents, I should probably work i've got another sermon out of colossians that I don't know if I mean the first one obviously dealt with christology Uh, the second one not so much my sermon last week. I thought went really well Um, it's it's been fun preaching out of paul no matter what jacob says new creation. That's all i'm gonna say new creation God made the new creation through jesus if anyone is in christ jesus, he is a New creation there so he didn't make the he didn't make creation 1.0 through jesus. Jesus didn't make it No 2.0 nation of the world and 2.0 is better than the 1.0 Anyway, 2.0 lasts forever 1.0 comes to an end Oh sam which one's more important? Sam Sam sam Anyway, all right. Well, maybe that's a good place to land the plane. So good to see you jess So good to see you sam and you too lark every other luke always fun to meet a new face so All right guys take it easy gentle people luke for starting this See you later. Bye. Bye you