https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=R8ICrJwqo2s

 I have to start recording because I already missed stuff. I almost set it up so that it started recording immediately. But I should know better that whenever I talk to Hank, start recording right away because there'll be stuff that you'll want to capture. Oh, you know, we could go back to the early 80s, back to like when they had the boxing and the guy, are you ready to rumble? Remember that? That's right. That's right. Well, let's begin with introductions because I am recording. And I don't need to introduce myself. Sam has been on the channel a few times. And so just a brief introduction for you, Sam. Sure. I live in Chicago. I actually, since we're going to be mostly talking about the virus and its ramifications today, I'll say that I'm a biostatistician and that I have a degree in biostatistics from the Harvard School of Public Health. So predicting diseases and stuff like that is actually much more my area of expertise than Trinitarian theology. So this will be something more like my home turf. And so I live in Chicago. And with Hank and Bruno, we host the Chicago area meetup. So if you're interested in a meetup and live anywhere near Chicagoland, we're meeting. We're currently meeting virtually, obviously. But we'd love to have you. And I'm sure Paul will put the link down in the description. Absolutely. Next to Hank's been on the channel. So we'll have him go next. We'll have Bruno go last because he's new. Go ahead, Hank. What do you want to say about yourself? Well, I can't wait for our discussion. I'm 60 years old. I run a small insurance administration company. Now that we're not going to talk about Unitarian theology, I'm sure that Esther will be happy to watch us as we discuss the COVID virus. Okay. By the time I'm done, I'm sure I will have upset everybody. That's what I hope. That's usually what happens. It's usually what happens. All right. Bruno, you and I have never spoken, so it's nice to see you via Zoom. You're going to have to unmute yourself, though. Unmute. There we go. There we go. So now I'm unmuted. I apologize. I'm probably going to shift over from my car since I just pulled into my driveway. I'm probably going to shift over from my phone and my car, which is my wonderful background area, and sign on on my computer. But anyway, my name is Bruno Berend. I'm a friend of Hank's from way back in the 80s. He and I have worked together on... I actually am the one that drew him into insurance before I left insurance. And he and I, along with Sam, host the Jordan Peterson Meetup. I hope we can get some Jordan Peterson in on this conversation too, because I think it has, there's some way in how we should look at the world that might impact this conversation. Otherwise, I'm basically a licensed Illinois attorney. I got my law degree in the 1980s, I mean, in the late 1990s, early 1990s. Never practiced any law. And now I basically tell people when I'm doing a fast quip that I flip houses for Jesus, because through my church... He's gone! We lost him. Wow. Flipping houses for Jesus, though, that's a good way to... I like that. I like that. Well, we'll have to... So this is really interesting. So we have a pastor, we have a guy with a real degree that relates to this area. We have an expert, Sam is an expert. We have Hank, who's a business guy. And then we've got a guy with a law degree. I think this is really shaping up well. So... Is this a Thunderdome? Here we are. I don't know what happened there, but I don't know if I went off, but... You were flipping houses for Jesus. That's right. So I know how to fix just about anything I offered to my church. I said, hey, you guys need somebody full time? And they said, yeah, we can't afford anybody full time. And I said, well, you have no idea how cheap you can get me, because I'm very fortunate in my wife's business and company and everything like that. So basically, I'm working, you know, three, four days a week on houses and fixing things up, but pleasure to be on this phone call. I've been wanting to talk to you for a while. I think you and I, Paul, we did have a scheduled thing last November. I was going to talk about universal basic income idea that I'm working on in a book I'm working on writing. Ooh, that's interesting too. So, all right. Well, Hank, you instigated this thing. What are we going to talk about today, Hank? Well, I think we need to talk about is the cure for the pandemic worse than the pandemic? Meaning I'm not a COVID-19 denier, but we're seeing a lot of the at least on my side, I am seeing a lot of the destruction of when you basically shut everything down hard. I deal with about 800 small employers administering their health insurance plans. And to say that there's a lot of anxiety, unhappiness, concern would probably be an understatement. Here in Illinois, where Sam, Bruno and I are, they've just extended the shelter in place until the end of May. But the good news is, hey, here's the good news. Essential businesses now are, you can go to a garden center, you can go to a dog groomer. I can go golfing. I can go boating. Oh, and doctors can now do elective surgery since the Illinois Hospital Association is the number two giver of money to politicians in the state of Illinois. So, excuse me if I sound cynical, I was elected for eight years. And as I always say, the worst people in the world are politicians because I know them. And the worst politicians are Illinois and Chicago politicians. Oh, just horrible. And then what's funny is Governor Pritzker had the modelers on today, right? But he said he doesn't own the model, so he can't release them. I have a lot of thoughts when it comes to modeling and this whole thing. Okay, let's let Hank finish now. Unless you're already finished. So you've asked the question, is the cure for the pandemic worse than the pandemic? And you're in a position to hear a lot of the pain from individuals who, because of the shutdown economically in terms of their business, they're just shut down, period. And you've got skepticism about the, you're not high in trust in terms of the politicians in the state of Illinois to manage this well. I'll say it that way. Correct. Okay. So do you have a specific idea or change you'd like to promote? Do you think they should just release all of the- No, more flexibility. So for example, Illinois, the sixth county area, which is Chicago and then the Collier counties is very urban. But once you go south of, in far southern Illinois, you're in Dixie. You're in a very unpopulated poor area. Central Illinois, not doing too well either, but very spread out. 15 counties in southeastern Illinois, not one person with COVID, whether a death, just not one person. So there's no flexibility. It's just like, this is what we're doing. Wham. Okay. One size fits all. The other thing is I would say, yes, we need to slowly open up, but knowing that, Paul, I live in an urban area, people aren't going to be rushing to the movie theater. They're not going to be rushing to restaurants. I understand that, but you have to start the process of opening up these businesses so that people can start feeling comfortable. Now, again, I like to see the models and the assumptions of the models, but when the governor says, well, I've got these models, but I can't release them, that would cause, I think, in a relatively sane person, regardless of political ideology, why can't you release it once you're hiding? So I'll stop there and let other people talk. Okay. So you're advocating for more flexibility, less sort of blanket shut down orders that by state law, churches are closed, businesses are closed. You'd like to see a policy that affords more guideline-ish, you think? Right. And people using their common sense. For example, at my church, I would say don't open the church because the first people that come rushing in are older people. Okay. No, no, bad idea. Okay. So I'm not like, release the Kraken. Let's just rock and roll. That's not going to happen. But on the other hand, that, you know, people talked about a V-shaped recovery. That's not going to happen. In my opinion, this is just my considerate opinion, we have screwed Sam's generation twice, 2008 with the mortgage meltdown, and now this time, right? Basically, what we're saying is for older people, we're going to ask younger people to stay in their home, stop working, lose their income, lose their hope so that older people can go out and, and I see this when I go to Whole Foods, I've seen guys in their 70s and 80s walking around without masks trying to bump into me. Okay. And I will ask, why aren't you staying at home? I want to get out. It's my American right. Okay. You understand you could catch the virus and die. Oh, that's my problem. Well, it's all of our problems. So I understand why our government officials are looking at this. But on the other hand, just talking to small business owners who have shut down completely, a lot of them aren't going to come back. Yeah. Okay. Who's next in this? Well, I'll jump in because Hank kind of convinced me of this a little bit over the last few weeks. I was kind of like one of the, and I think there is a balance to be had here. I mean, I think nobody wanted to end up like Italy. And, you know, thankfully here in the United States, with the exception of New York, which I don't even think that ended up anywhere like Italy, although that's the worst place to be right now, you know, we didn't. But as I started looking at, you know, other people looking at some of the data, and also as I experienced the shutdown here, the way that they were doing it, I experienced very little shutdown myself. I mean, obviously I couldn't go to the stores and restaurants and places that I like. But, you know, I never stopped working. I never had to stop working. I've been separated from my wife for four weeks because she's down in Champaign with her parents. But, you know, I went down there for Easter dinner and various other things. So I haven't really been hurt by this, and neither of us really had to stop working or anything. But as I started looking at the real impacts on the economy and I started looking at, you know, what was happening, I think I've become convinced that the social distancing piece of it was very important and the protection of the elderly and the at risk was very important. But I've come around to the opinion that the incredible massive shutdown of everything that, you know, everything that we do was not necessary. And I think in the long term is going to end up causing more pain and damage than it did. And then the only other thing I'll add to that quickly is Hank and I know somebody here who does a lot of transparency work and likes to sue governments for not being transparent. And this is a beautiful, rich transparency suit because the governor here doesn't get to say that I can't release the models because I don't own them. Public policy is being made on these models. Millions of in Illinois, tens of thousands of people, hundreds of thousands of people are being kept out of work. You don't get to say, oh, I, you know, I could tell you, but then I'd have to kill you with this model crap that he's pulling. OK, OK. Sam. All right. I'll jump in on the topic of models and I'll give a half hearted defense of why Pritzker would want to keep the model secret. But in general, Pritzker is the current governor of the state of Illinois. I think he also happens to be the second richest person in Illinois. So, you know, this is kind of anyway, Illinois things. So modeling and this relates a lot, Paul, to actually what you say all the time. There is no monarchical vision. There is no such thing as an abstract model that will tell us what's going to happen, because the weird thing about these models is that people are listening to these models and affecting their behavior on these models. And so the model is actually interacting with the system that it's trying to predict. And so when it says something that has an effect and it's not just observing what's happening, it's affecting what's happening. So if the governor of Illinois comes out and says 10,000 people in Chicago are going to die next month, then people are like, oh, my goodness, I'm not going to go anywhere. And that will cause the effect that its prediction will be wrong if it says only like 100 people are going to die in Chicago next month. Will people like, oh, man, things are fine. Let's go outside. And then suddenly more people die. So it's this weird thing where the model isn't outside the system that it's trying to predict. It's not looking down from heaven describing what's happening. It's inside the thing. It's an agent in the arena, just the same way that all of the people that it's trying to make predictions about are too. And so that's why this whole thing gets topsy turvy is it's similar, I think, in some ways to the way that predictions failed for the Trump election in 2016. People pay more attention to these statistical models than they ever have. And when it's something like an election or something like a disease that's dependent on the behavior of the people trying to be predicted and the people being predicted can look at the model, then suddenly you're not just doing prediction anymore. There's a pragmatic effect of the very thing that it is that you're trying to do. And that's almost impossible to account for with the statistical and mathematical methods that these models are based on. So that that's part of what I think is so screwy about this whole system is that it's not science. It's not it's not what we think it is. So anyway, I'll stop there. I could go way down into the weeds of why I think the math of these things is wrong. But maybe I should just stay at that level that I just said. Well, Sam, why don't why don't you wait in a little bit on. If if we bring ourselves back a month ago, more than a month ago now, because, you know, one of the things that I did when this thing started coming down was my wife's like, you know, we should probably write on the calendar what you know, kind of what we're doing and what's going on. And so I actually did start writing on the calendar, which is really helpful because we very quickly forget details of even a month ago. And I was just getting back from I was in Southern California and and and Arizona at the end of February on this little tour I was doing. I was with Joe, who some of you know from the channel, and John Van Donk and things were California declared a state of emergency and jobs like California declared a state emergency. That's that's that. We get we have emergencies in California all the time. That's not new for us. And but as but then we were we're going to have this whole Pacific Northwest thing. OK. Bruno needs another. There we go. We have this whole Pacific Northwest thing going on. And there we go. Now we have two brunos. Good. So. I think you're still muted. He's OK. OK. We have this Pacific Northwest thing going on. And, you know, it's like, are we going to go up there or not? And and then eventually. And it was that week that things started to happen in terms of closing. And we, you know, and it was it was by Thursday, then March 12 that I had a council meeting with our no, actually, it was it was March 5 that I had a council meeting with, you know, and we're going to have church this week and having that conversation. And it was the week after that we started getting state mandates to close and everything's closing down. People are looking at, you know, what's going on in Spain, what's going on in Italy. And it was abundantly clear that testing was nowhere where it needed to be and that this virus is highly contagious. And so first, a few counties in the Bay Area shut down and then Sacramento shut down. And that then became the pattern. And pretty soon, you know, schools were closing and everything is just shutting down. Everything shut down for three weeks. Now, now, Sam, do you think that in that moment, that was the at least based on what you know, that was the right thing that they that governors and county medical officers should have done? It's yeah, it's important to remember what we knew when and to take into account how much uncertainty there was in the early days of this. I do. Illinois was an early state to lock things down and took pretty aggressive measures pretty quickly. I think I think that it was right to err on the side of caution back then. But I'm in pretty general agreement with Hank and Bruno that I think it could have been much more targeted. I think, ironically, the thing that Illinois did wrong that it should have closed down, but didn't, was public transportation. I think when we're on the other side of this, I think we'll realize that a huge vector and a huge cause of the spread of this disease is public transportation. If you look at the cities in the US that have it the worst, it's almost a direct correlation with public transportation prevalence. Like, why does Los Angeles have such a small outbreak? Right there, the second biggest city in the country, they're super interconnected with China, but there's almost no public transportation system. Whereas Chicago, New York, Boston, Detroit, etc. have large populations, especially of African-Americans who rely on public transit. And that was one of the few things that Illinois kept going. And I think that they could have kept a lot of businesses open, but either closed down public transportation or, ironically, like doubled or tripled the number of trains running such that the trains were virtually empty instead of packed to try and mitigate that. And that was, I actually think, their biggest mistake. I think there was a lot of ways and a lot of decisions that could have been more specific that would have had been more like a scalpel instead of like a hammer, which is something that Bruno said. So, so Bruno and Hank, what do you guys think about the steps taken in the early days, at least? So let's go back over a month. And, you know, we didn't know a lot. There was a lot of fears. I mean, the main fear was that if this thing spikes, health systems are going to be overrun. And if that happens, you're not just losing COVID patients, you're losing all the normal kinds of deaths we have anyway. So what do you think about the early decisions? Well, I'll speak first. I think the early decisions were fine based on this proviso. The proviso was that why we were going to go shelter in place was to flatten the curve, right? OK, not to overwhelm our health care. And what we've seen is, for example, in Illinois, the ICU beds and the ventilators in the whole state, no more than half have been used. OK, so the curve's been flattened. But now they're changing. It's now we need to bend the curve down. OK, and we need to get rid of the virus. You're not going to get rid of the virus. The virus is going to be the virus. OK, regardless of people agree or disagree, they know that until there's a vaccine, the virus is going to be around. The question is what that's going to look like. And so you almost feel like you're being gaslit by saying, hold it. I'm old enough to remember when you told me flatten the curve so we could open the state and not overwhelm our health care. And now you're saying something else. And I don't understand why this has changed because you're not explaining that to me. Now, again, I live in a very urban area. For example, I live in DuPage County, which is just west of Chicago. And in DuPage County and Will County, about two million people, 44 percent of the deaths are better people in nursing homes. OK, and so what we've done is sometimes I think we've spread out our we got to test everyone instead of micro focusing where the danger really is. The dangers with older people in nursing homes who have two comorbidities, you know, you're obese and you have diabetes, you have a respiratory issue and you had a heart problem. Right. That's what we know. OK. And instead, what we did is we said we got to test everybody. And now, so our deaths don't look different than Sweden, for example. OK. Sweden has larger nursing homes. And that's why they're seeing a lot of deaths, because once it hits a nursing home, it's like you just put gasoline to a fire. It just whoosh. It's sad. OK. So there's not a thoughtfulness on policy. There's fear. I think initially it's fine. But as you're getting more data, you have to have the flexibility policy wise and the chops policy wise to explain to people what's going on and what we can do. Because right now, at least where I'm living, people are in a state of fear. You know, you go walking down the street and if you're seeing somebody, everybody just takes a big curve to stay away from the other person. Right. That will work for a while. And where I live, you know, all my employees are working out of their home. They have their computers, their phones go right to there and they're fine. Right. The issue that you run into is that there's still people that have to work with their hands and most of them are brown and black. And guess what? I talked to a friend who works at the Illinois Department of Unemployment Security. He goes, Hank, we're a month behind. Yes. I'm still dealing with March stuff. OK. I'm dealing with either employers giving me bad data or the employee got let go, said he didn't have a job and he had a job, but I have to fix those problems. OK. So they're not getting the money. There's desperation. We're seeing higher suicides. We're seeing more domestic violence. We're also seeing the frack that the things just don't happen by magic. So when we remember when gas becomes 40, 40 gallons of a barrel is negative forty dollars. Right. Yes. I talked to a friend who ran the Illinois Department, not the Illinois Petroleum Dealers Association. Because, Hank, guess what? There's two big supertakers at the Port of New Orleans. They can't let go of their oil. There's seven supertakers in the Gulf of Baden with nowhere to go. Nobody's driving. He goes, you turn off those wells, you ain't going to turn them back on. If you turn off the refinery, it's going to take weeks to turn it back on. This isn't snap on, snap off. Yeah. OK. And we're seeing farmers in Wisconsin, dairy farmers, spilling their milk on the fields. This is we're playing with stuff that we don't know what this will do in the future. No, this this white guy here, I'm going to be OK. But I like to have actually a coherent society and a society that works for everybody. And right now, I think there's going to be a lot of people when this is all said and done. We can look at Weinstein, the gated elite. They're going to be fine. OK. But it was the guys who were just starting to move up the food chain. I don't know if they're going to be so fine. And that concerns me because that creates societal chaos. OK, Bruno. Oh, we don't hear you. Is that a good thing? We don't hear you, Bruno. Move your move your mouse around. Now you just muted it. You might have to set on your computer what the mic is. You move your mouse around. There's this little up thing next to mute and then you select your microphone. Yeah, though, just to the right of it, that little up arrow, pull up a menu. Is that working? Yeah, it's working now. OK, well, no wonder no wonder Hank kept on talking. I kept on trying to edgewise and I was muted. So anyway, I agree that what we did early was probably necessary under the circumstance because we were all we all none of us knew exactly what it was that was going on. The problem is that I think data started coming in relatively early that we might have done too much. And the interesting thing now, especially with these governors that are maintaining these shutdowns and there is a political element of what the Republican governors versus the Democratic governors are doing. But now that now that you've got this lockdown and let's say that let's say that the the flattening of the curve was 80 percent proper social distancing and protecting the most vulnerable. And 20 percent of it was the lockdowns that were preventing people from getting into places where they could catch the disease. Well, here's the problem. How do you climb down from a lockdown? And I thought the interesting thing with one of the interviews that I saw is that while Sweden's numbers don't look as good as Norway's or Germany's perhaps, the the gentleman who was defending the Swedish epidemiologist, who was defending the Swedish model, basically was saying, Yeah, how do you climb down from the lockdown? What's going to happen when you unlock things and those deaths spike? Whereas we're not going to have that much of a problem. Whatever Sweden's spikes were are going to be lower and they've already worked that through the system. Whereas now what happens when you open up retail establishments in Illinois? What happens when you open up other establishments and then all of a sudden you're going to have these spikes? So all they've really done is, you know, is create this this artificial flattening that's going to have to either remain flat or longer or is going to have to spike back up because you can't climb down from that kind of a lockdown. And I found some of this stuff very, very persuasive. And, you know, we really shouldn't be having this like, well, you're a blue state progressive, so you want to keep everybody safe and you're a red state Republican who wants to murder people by opening restaurants. You know, we have to have a better conversation about what it is we can do. And I think on the economic front, boy, we got to get people back to work somehow, somewhere. I mean, I don't I think Hank might overstate things a little bit. I haven't seen a huge spike in suicides and a huge spike in domestic abuse and all the kind of stuff that they're talking about, which which says something about our own personal, you know, our nation's own personal psychological problems that people might be having. But I think we do have to start telling people it's like, hey, you know, we need to we need to take a great deal of care and reopening things. But we do need we do need to start. We do need to start reopening things. You know, I think there are there are a lot of different dimensions to this. One dimension is for the most part in the United States, the enforcements have not been heavy handedly enforced so that, for example, there's there's there's less traffic. I had to I had to take, you know, get go drive to Oakland and get my daughter's stuff out of her dorm because she wasn't going to be, you know, living on campus for the rest of the year. And there's plenty of traffic on the way to the Bay Area. But there were no traffic jams. And that said to me, there's less traffic. And so we've got a degree of people moving around. And so at this point, the lockdowns we've had in the United States have not been enforced to the degree that perhaps they were in some places in Europe. So there's already a degree of flexibility that's in the present policy. Number two, there's the difference between the legal mandates and the psychological dynamics, which, you know, Hank mentioned that. OK, so let's say, OK, open everything up now. And a bunch of us are going to say, do I really want to go to a movie? Do I really want to go shopping? So there's that. And and so that's policy leaders, governors, county, city mayors, they're going to have to think through these things because that's a lot of that as a matter of what are we presenting? I think Hank is right. I mean, one of the things that whatever you think about the politics of a variety of the governors, let's say we've seen the governors quite a bit more. And I think some of the better governors have majored on here's some data, here's some information. Let's at least present facts, look good or bad. And I really like it when a governor says, if there's a policy here, blame me. You know, I really like to have a leader that says, I'll take responsibility. And, you know, another element of this dynamic is in the United States, we have elected officials. And the one thing that we know about elected officials are they want to be reelected. And so they will be judged fairly unfairly, depending on people's overall assessment of outcomes in things like this. And that's a layer in this thing, too. So at this point, we find ourselves OK, we had massive lockdowns that were for the most part, you know, we haven't even began to talk about the relationship between. County, state, federal, because there's another layer in this whole thing. I mean, there's a lot going on here. And then. All of us are on one hand, citizens and via this video, we're kind of pushing our information out into the general atmosphere to be listened to by other citizens. But each of us also have areas of responsibility. I have influence over what Living Stones does, and I have influence with my congregation. We have influence with our families. And even at these layers, we know probably the people with whom we are sharing our homes. Some people are a little bit more cautious. Some people are a little bit more, I think it's OK to go to the store. I think it's OK to do this. I think it's OK. Some people a little bit more anxious. Some people are a little bit more, you know, happy to risk. So. Anything we do runs through all of these layers in an enormous society. And, you know, part of, you know, Hank talked about trust part of this. One of the things I noticed right on is that I a lot of African-Americans in my congregation, in my community. There's a very depending on where people are at, they have different levels of response to this. I noticed a lot of a lot of people initially were very skeptical. They don't watch the news much. They don't listen to that. But suddenly, when stores and offices closed, they were like, oh. You know, maybe this just doesn't shatter on the news. And some people were more dismissive. If I get the most common thing I hear from people is if I get sick, I'll be fine. And to me, that says, oh, that's kind of normal bias. Because none of us really know necessarily. So. So given all that stuff. What do we say? Where do we go? What do we what? How do we want to use this little this little bit of influence that we have to push out into the universe and and say, let's make something happen. Let's push the needle in a tiny way, one way or another. I think something that this whole thing is really highlighting is the risks and problems with how polarized politically our society, America, has become. And that this disease, like many other things in the recent past, is poking right at the crack, the divide in political temperament and political trust and stuff like that. Because like who what what do does the white collar class or the blue collar class get affected more by a shutdown? Well, that's obvious. Who is more at risk? An urban person or a rural person in this sort of thing? Well, that is also obvious. Right. And all of these things are pointing right at the sore spots that our society already has had. Where I think that and this sort of, you know, is related to Eric Weinstein in the disk and all that sort of thing. Is that our decision making class is very much on one side of many of those divides. Our decision making class is very urban. Like Illinois is a state that highlights this divide in itself. That's also in America, right? Illinois has Chicago, which is the colossus that looms over the whole state. And then there's a couple million people who live downstate. My mom grew up downstate. My dad grew up upstate. And even then upstate means Chicago area. There could be parts of Illinois that are north of Chicago that are downstate. So and the governor of Illinois is supposed to be in Springfield, right? That's our capital. And Springfield is the smaller city in the middle of the state. The governor of Illinois has been giving joint broadcasts with the mayor of Chicago. What message does that send to everyone in Illinois? Where is the center of attention? Where is the center of focus? It's in the city, right? And Chicago just has different needs and different problems during this crisis. Than Springfield, Illinois, right? And so it's just poking right at this divide where our decision makers are white collar. Their friends are white collar. They live in the city. All of their friends live in the city. The perspective that they have on this is just totally that. And I don't think that they're thinking about and understanding what it's like to be outside of that perspective and the people outside of that perspective see that. And they begin to distrust it. And it just pokes right at all of these divides. And it's really a shame. And it's making me worried about the future of our country because I think we'll have worse problems than this in the future. And if this doesn't bring us together, Ben said, just tears at our already existing divisions, then I'm worried what will happen next. I got to second that with what Sam is saying, because there seems to be no reason in the conversations anymore. I mean, if you disagree with someone, they're evil and they want to kill people. And, you know, and I don't know how you fix that. I guess the only way you really can is just to start speaking to people in a more open way and asking them, it's like, hey, I'll trust you if you trust me, but we got to do something different here. I just what's amazing to me is I don't see anybody in leadership from the president down to all these governors. I think on the surface, they're trying to get along a little bit. But the differences in what they want to do are so broad and the way they want to accomplish things and their long term goals. I mean, you know, the Democrats are salivating at being able to take Trump out in November. And that goes into every single calculation of what they're doing, even if they're intellectually honest and trying to do the right thing. And then I have people on my Facebook feed who are just like saying this whole thing was the hoax. And, you know, everything if we just if we just opened all the doors to everything, everything would be just fine, which I think is, you know, a crazy position. And I'm not saying that, Hank, I'm not saying you're saying that. I'm just saying that some of Hank and I have share a lot of Facebook friends and some of those people are just, you know, this is just ridiculous and we just need to open everything tomorrow. Let's go to the Cubs game. Wow. Well, if we go to the Cubs game, you could sit in the right field bleacher and I'll sit in the left field bleacher and I don't want anybody near us. OK. So although, Paul, if you ever come, I'll buy you a beer and we can watch the cup. Well, that's right. You don't drink. So I'll buy you a Coca-Cola. OK. But Bruno's absolutely right. And so is Sam. And that's what I've talked about policy flexibility. You know, I've lived in the city all my life, but my parents retired to rural Indiana. So I got to start to understand and listen to people. OK. And as I started understanding it, they had different perspective on things than I would have. OK. A lot. They work with their hands. Now, my dad treasured those kind of people because my dad was an electrician. My dad could. My dad built the addition on our house with his own hands. Everything. OK. He taught me how to build. He also hit me a lot because I didn't like building. I like chasing girls. But that's a whole different story. The idea is I learned from blue collar guys. They're smart. They're not dumb. They're wonderful people. OK. And when I see people just pooping out like, oh, my gosh, you want to kill people? No, they want to feed their families and they understand the risk. Your dad, Paul, my dad grew up on polio was probably. People just had to live through it. I'm not saying that we just lived through covid, but they understood the risks in the summer. That's it. Summer stunk. Friends, you know, somebody who got polio and either died or in that big lung. OK, so we we understand that. So when we're saying open, I'm not going to go to a movie theater. I get it. And I think most people won't. Now, would I go to a restaurant? Sure. If they're wearing a mask, if they have proper sanitary procedures in enhanced. And I probably wouldn't go to a public restroom because I think that's where you probably get more covid than anywhere else. But you have to start opening up. People have to start trusting each other. It's like, well, Hank's not just this greedy capitalist. There's more than that going on here. I think churches, especially in the Chicago area, may be closed down through June. I think the pastors themselves may say we're closing them down. OK, because their concern will be their older parishioners. OK, their concern is how do you stop Ethel from coming to church when Ethel is a force of nature? OK, I know our older parishioners and I know who they are. OK, and I'm sure 20 years from now, I'll be a force of nature. OK, well, that's true. But the idea is. That. People will find ways. I have a client that owns a string of auto repair shops and what he did in Joliet, he got on the radio and said, if you're a senior, I'll come pick up your car. I'll fix it at no additional cost than what I would charge. And then I'll sanitize your car and bring it back to you. He said he's never been busier. People will find ways to accommodate what Paul VanderKlaai is looking for. OK, that's the that's the beauty of the market. OK, Paul VanderKlaai is going to have a different want and need than Sam and then Bruno or I. And my job is to figure out what what Paul wants vis a vis everyone else and to get things moving, not because I want to make millions of dollars, but I would want I want a healthy society that we get an overall healthy society. I understand there's still poor and there's still pathologies and things of that nature. So why would I look at, say, Decatur, Illinois and say you got to close the town of ninety thousand people when there's not any covid deaths down there? Why wouldn't I say as a policymaker, I should be looking in one of my friends said, well, because they'll all come up to Chicago. I said, you haven't been to Southern Illinois. They all hate Chicago. They don't want to ever come to Chicago. They're Cardinals fans. They are, but they hate us. OK, I always say I'm from Northern Illinois, but I love you guys. Illinois is just one state. California is a different state. You've got the coast and then you've got you've got like Bakersfield where all the Okies went to. It's a different. It's not a one size fits all. And unfortunately, our policymakers, it's just too easy to say clamp it down one size fits all. And that's where the distrust that Sam's talking about is created. You know, so, you know, I think that's the biggest thing. Well, you know, so we all I mean, part of the way human beings work, we all have our own ideas, our own perspectives, and we sort of project them up into. Well, if I were sitting in the governor's chair, I would do this. The we hope that. Governors are doing their due diligence and we hope that they are. Not making that we hope that they are doing the best they can to make decisions. That will be for the welfare. But again, this gets very, very difficult because. However, you know, when I think about, you know, the decision to close things down, well, that's sort of sort of binary, that sort of OK, here it is. And then they're tinkering with little. But the open it up thing, that's. That's so much more complicated because if I mean, they're watching the data. Part of what we bought in this last month and a half was time, time for tests to get, you know, people to hopefully refine testing for to get reporting links. Because just as you said, Hank, there's these huge supply chain issues that are out there and the longer we go, increasingly disrupted. But. Disrupted. But. Even if you just say opened everything up, the disruption is already built into the systems and, you know, even the toilet paper, the toilet paper thing. You know, I read an article on that, which was basically saying part of the reason for toilet paper disruption is that toilet paper is a very low, low profit margin item. Very bulky. And so the way the supply chain goes is that that demand is pretty steady. So they just have the systems feeding toilet paper. Fine. And so when we go into a store, we see all these full shelves and we don't appreciate the years of tinkering and fine tuning that have gone into a system that keeps everything running like this. And just a little hiccup of a certain degree of more demand. People for psychological reasons, grabbing toilet paper and then a scarcity and then more grabbing and suddenly your supply chain is all out of whack. And that's only toilet paper. You know, milk was another great example where milk was a certain, a large amount of dairy is sold to restaurants. Well, now the restaurants are closed. So, you know, I mean, this is just, there's no, there's no one smart enough. No human being smart enough to manage this from any seat around. And what that requires then is hopefully the complexity of the systems, the political systems to actually work and to do better than nothing. And I mean, I think part of the thing, when we talk about trust, we are all going to have to try to be a little bit more gracious to our elected politicians to recognize that they're going to get a lot wrong, even if it was us, probably more so if it was us would get a lot wrong. So we're going to have to have some grace. But yet again, the question is for each of us as individuals, what can we do to address these issues, the social issues that Sam and Bruno really highlighted, some of the historical issues, Hank, that you were highlighting. What can we do to, you know, none of us are in, none of us are king to kind of help move this thing forward with the connections and relationships that we have? Well, one of the things that it was something you said, Paul triggered this. There's a really good juxtaposition that Friedrich Hayek gave. I think it was Hayek. It might have been Mises talking about controlled chaos versus spontaneous order. And what I think the and independent of all the problems we're having with polarization right now, that is very often the general debate politically, whether it's economic or whether it's cultural or social, is that we become the more sedentary we've become, the more health, the more protected we've become, the more we want to sit back and rely on controlled chaos and the less and less we trust spontaneous order. And I guess the case I would make in talking to people who might disagree with me on this is that we need to do a little bit more of spontaneous order here to get ourselves back on track. And there might be a lot of things that change in our culture because of this, but maybe there are some things that shouldn't change that much. I'm of the opinion, and I'm happy to discuss it with anybody, that all of our control organizations, our media, our government, our experts, our specialists, the CDC, I think you could make a very strong case that independent of leadership and independent of funding, they seriously dropped the ball here in America for us, the citizens. And they dropped the ball less so in South Korea and less so in Germany. And then everybody is somewhere on some continuum. So what could we have done as a people to take more responsibility for ourselves to have managed all of this better? And obviously, you know, like we're a culture that doesn't like to wear masks. I think it's pretty fair to say that whatever masks might not do to protect you, they're pretty effective at protecting others simply by blocking what's coming out of your nose and mouth. So there's all kinds of things we could have done better in terms of supply chain, in terms of being ready for something like this. And I always keep on using Katrina as an example. Prior to Katrina, there were all kinds of people said if a hurricane hits New Orleans, it's going to be chaos. Billions were spent on shoring up levies, all of which was completely wasted and they failed anyway. We don't get the government we pay for in this country. So that's that's one level. And then another level is as citizens, I think we need to be far more caring about our fellow citizens. And I think you use the biggest word in there of anything, and that's grace. We don't give our fellow citizens and we don't give our political opponents enough grace. And even as I say that, I'm suspicious of, you know, Gavin Newsom's. I mean, I think Newsom probably handled this virus pretty well, but I'm also at the same time a little bit suspicious about his, you know, well, let's use this as an opportunity to usher slash force, you know, a new progressive future for all of us. It's like that just gives me the heebie jeebies. That's true. That's true. He introduced his wife as the first partner, and I thought, what? And and she's a, you know, I just caught me off guard. And then I looked at her and I thought, I appreciate that you don't want to gender this conversation, but she's she's pretty gendered. And I think that's why you married her. That's how most of us marry our wives. I think I would call my wife the first partner. I think I get smacked. I mean, partner. I think piggybacking off of what Bruno said and kind of connecting with Jordan Peterson's stuff, like when something new happens, we start using the part of our brain that's more programmed for chaos than for order. Right. And there was I thought there was a really good video that Rebel Wisdom put out was either today or yesterday that had some clips from Verveke and a bunch of other people that when when the disorder starts creeping up to a level that we're not comfortable with, then our systems that are built on order start to fail. And we realize that and we fall back on sort of more right brain stuff. And I can join Peterson's biblical series about the flood. Right. He talks a lot about New Orleans and about the planning for the levees and how you wonderful Dutch people built such four sided levees and how New Orleans did not build four sided levees and how the judgment of God comes when the hurricane comes. And Verveke said something like, it's amazing how many people are reverting to something like an iron age. They always use that phrase, iron age mentality, where the judgment of God is upon us. We need to revert to laws of purity. We need to do this, not do this. And if you do this and don't do this, then the judgment of God will pass over you. But if you don't do it, then the judgment of God will fall upon you and stuff like that. And I think that is an interesting subject that we could talk about how how there how the religious layer is there waiting whenever something unexpected comes and that it's never really gone. Well, and I, you know, I've played this up in in my videos and have John has been watching my videos. But because. You know, I've also been listening to Nassim Tlaib. I've been listening to some of his audio books over the last few weeks. He's an interesting person. You know, people always pick him and said, oh, this was a black swan. He says, no, this wasn't a black swan. This was a white swan. That what what we are what we are dealing with is in that way analogous to Katrina and analogous. There were two cities in America that were most in danger of catastrophic flooding. One was New Orleans and the other is Sacramento, California. Sacramento doesn't have Sacramento doesn't have hurricanes. But the the rainfall in the Sierra, if you look at the Great Flood of 1865, I think it is something like that. Basically, you can the Central Valley of California is a giant bowl. And every now and then you get one of what they call an atmospheric river. And that bowl fills up. And in the last 150 years, we've filled up that bowl with farms and cities and suburbs and all this stuff. And at some point, that atmospheric river is going to come through and that bowl is going to fill up again. And you got there at the funnel bottom of the bowl. We're at the American and the Sacramento rivers are right there at the confluence. Our elevation is about 20 feet. So so, you know, now we've built levees and all of this stuff. But, you know, we have the retired chief hydrologist in this church. And if things get too scary, if you watch him start to park his car in the church parking lot because our our church is on a hill, you better head to the church. But but the part of what the the assumption, the way the cultural conversation has gone is that, well, all of this Iron Age stuff is that supernaturalist stuff that we've sort of gotten beyond. And it was Peterson who came in and said, well, OK, you can look at it that way. But another way of looking at it is this is all ancient wisdom that has been encoded and people have found it helpful and informative over very long periods of time. And the fact that we're having, let's call it a hundred year pandemic and that just like you might have a hundred year flood or a five hundred year flood, you're having a hundred year pandemic. A lot of that language gets at very much how people experience their world and the natural language they use. And, you know, for those who are watching this video, because like my mother watches these videos, she doesn't watch the other videos I make. She's curious about who I'm talking to. But hi, mom. But what we understand by God is very deeply built into us and very quickly whenever we have an event like this, people begin asking God questions. And that's absolutely normal and absolutely appropriate. And, you know, you have to sort of figure out how can we talk about this? So I think and it's so funny with purity laws. One of the things that we've also been noticing is that I think about my mother's talked about my grandmother's habits, opening up the house, airing it out, the very strict cleanliness. Well, if you just look at the calendar, my grandmother was a teenage girl when the other pandemic came through. That's right. And so she, when she was in her teens, probably learned all of these habits that she carried on her whole life. Over time, we sort of relaxed them. Boom, here we have our hundred year pandemic. All of us are going to be much more diligent hand washers in the future. And my my kids in their teens and 20s probably really will be too, especially if they begin seeing a friend or two die or become disabled by this. And that's another key thing is that right now for many of us, unless we have a family member who loses their life, it's not terribly real to us. And so, you know, we are just at the forefront of this thing right now because there's a whole bunch of things that we hear. Well, we'll have a vaccine within a year. We don't know that. Well, how well will it work? How well will it work? What will be the side effects? You know, we have to rush this thing out. I mean, it's kind of like the, you know, all the speculating about we know very little. But because the admit the admitted knowledge of our ignorance makes us feel uncomfortable, we grab on to, oh, I hear this drug is working well. I think this is and this is will be what happened. Maybe we don't know. And I think reading Nassim Tlaib is really helpful right now because that's what he keeps pointing to. He says, we don't really know. And what has been exposed have been, well, we've just had 20 years and 30 years in business of really fine tuning things. We don't have warehouses full of supplies because that costs money. And so, you know, everything's moving on trucks and we have these supply chains. We basically rung out a lot of the redundancies in our system because over time they're cost effective. But now suddenly, well, now we're sort of paying the price for it. And that's that's we, you know, we had the seven fat years. Now we might have seven lean years. And again, the Bible just sort of not now there's locusts in Africa. And suddenly the news are saying, you know, biblical proportions. Well, that's that's a 500 year event is a biblical proportion. Yeah. Well, a lot of this reminds me of that saying that my son put it on his Facebook page. He's a retired Marine. You know, hard times make strong men, strong men make good times. Good times make weak men and weak men make hard times. And it's like, you know, what we've been, you know, worldwide, we've kind of been through a that cycle has been happening like a kind of like a round. It's been happening everywhere a little bit differently. But kind of since the fall of the the Soviet Union, we've kind of had this end of history idea and that everything was going to be fine. And I think that what we've kind of done is we've created one unified. Good times make weak men cycle. And while there's a lot of intellect out there and there's a lot of really, really good things happening and we have a lot of talent in fixing and discerning problems. And, you know, one positive aspect of this COVID situation, although it's a little bit too late, is we're all of a sudden seeing all kinds of really powerful mobilization to fix this thing, attacking it from all sides, whether it's antiviral or vaccine or trying old vaccines that might work. And there's some really good news out there that you can look to and say, hey, that's what's happening. But what we also have is this and I think this is where Peterson hit such a chord and why he rose to prominence so quickly. He was kind of like sounding the alarm, kind of like a prophet saying, hey, these are good times right now, but we've created an entire society of weak thinking and weak minds and weak men. And, you know, get ready for the flood. And here it is. Here's the flood. Here's the pandemic. Here's the plague. And, you know, even though there's a lot of really strong minds and strong people doing everything they can to fix this, I think what we're looking at is a one strong civilization reacting to this, I would say, way more weakly, you know, than it should be, that we're making a lot of mistakes and we're rushing ourselves and, you know, backing into a lot of bad policy. Yeah, I think we got a little bit lucky. I think the main reason why things didn't go badly is just the nature of the disease. I know you're not supposed to say this, but it really just is a pretty bad flu that is especially dangerous for old people. I will again remind people that in my graduate studies at Harvard, I studied how flu spreads and how to predict that and how to predict who would show up in emergency rooms for it. And this is really just in the same category, but a little bit more extreme in a couple ways. It's no black swan. It's a white swan. And that the reason why we don't have people flooding, overwhelming the ICUs in Chicago, is not because we made any particularly wise decisions, but just because this wasn't the sort of disease that would have done that. And there could very well be diseases in the future and perhaps not even the long term or even medium term future that are way worse than this one. It's totally possible to imagine something way, way worse than this. And I think perhaps the only good news from this is maybe this was something of a fire drill for something worse. Maybe this will help shake off some of our decadence and the fear of the virus. And maybe this will help shake off some of our decadence to help get us into shape a little bit. And something like a Marine boot camp for a weak generation that could help us be more prepared for the next one. Except I don't see that happening. I mainly just see people trying to score political rhetorical points against or for their favorite politicians or parties. Or, you know, this disease proves that the political positions that are already held were right all along. So, you know, COVID proves that we need democratic socialism or libertarianism or whatever it is. And I don't see people really trying to learn from this and see really what we could do for when something comes along that's actually worse than this. Can I just jump in on a really quick point, piggybacking on what Sam just said? I read a few articles that all pointed to SARS-1, that all the governments, particularly South Korea and the United States, unloaded a lot of money. And they went to a lot of pharmaceutical companies and a lot of people and they spread a lot of money around saying, you know, find us a vaccine, do something about this. And then kind of SARS-1 kind of petered out and it didn't really, you know, to the extent that Sam is right, that this one is, we're lucky that this isn't the big one, like the buponic plague or something. That SARS-1 was like a fraction of this. And after it petered out, all these companies and all these organizations that were all working hard to try and find a vaccine kind of just stopped when in fact this is a SARS-2. And, you know, they could have had everything in place to, you know, had they finished that project. And they kind of like just said, oh, you know, it's kind of like the U.S. pulling out of Afghanistan after the Soviet Union fell. It's like, yeah, we'll leave all this infrastructure around here for people to pick up and do something with. But this is over now. We don't have to do anything. And, you know, hopefully Sam is wrong that what we did after SARS-1 and failed, that this one is big enough at least. Like we shut down the entire Western civilization's economy for this. That, you know, that maybe now we'll like get on the stick and at least like we can put various plans in place about how to quarantine travelers faster and earlier, how to shut travel down sooner, not because we're xenophobic, but because look what happened in, you know, 2019 and 20. And one would hope that, you know, that that's what would happen and that we could, you know, I mean, maybe for all the people watching this, and I don't know, Paul, how many people are going to be watching this, but maybe we can all, us Republicans can go to our Democratic legislators and us, the Democrats can go to their Republican legislators and say, hey, I just want to sit down with you and say, here's a list of things that some really smart people have said maybe we should do independent of whether it's, you know, Trump or Biden or Obama or, you know, or, you know, Nikki Haley or whatever, that independent of, because viruses really honestly don't care about our parties. Well, I think part of it, part of what we face is the 1918 pandemic was 100 years ago. And so our motivation slowly wanes. A seculum ago. Yeah, that's a seculum. And the difficulty is there are potentially innumerable threats to us. You know, I like it to the, just to throw another hot potato in there, the climate change issue. These are, you know, these are the kinds of questions that are being asked, you know, these are the kinds of questions that are bigger than we are. And the difficulty we face is that in many cases, there are measures that we can take against some of them. But something always takes us out. And I, you know, I'm thankful for the mention of the end of history, because we as a civilization, I think, especially at the end of the Cold War, imagined, well, we dodged nuclear annihilation. The Soviet Union imploded. China went capitalist, a little weird for still single party, but yet capitalist. And, you know, Islamic terrorism, for the most part, pretty controllable, because if it really comes to a military confrontation, there's really no question about who's going to, who can bomb who into the Stone Age, even without using nuclear weapons. So here we sat total, you know, sort of at the top of the heap thinking, well, now we're all just going to be tinkering with market forces and things, and we'll try. So we'll try to make the world better. But for the most part, we're on top of this thing. We can secure it. We're, you know, we've got some sci-fi things to worry about, but okay. And why I think our imaginations go to Iron Age mythologies is because, and I think, at least so far, this really hasn't shaken us that deeply. But at some point, at one point or another, each of us as individuals faces our own, what I call the Day of the Lord. Now we just sort of are having a global one, a fairly lightweight global one right now that's going to cost us a bunch of money. And some people, it's going to cost a lot of money. Other people are going to make some money on this or do okay. And, you know, but that Day of the Lord comes to every single human being because none of us get out of this world alive. And that's a truth about life that comes from religious systems that you can't fully mask over it no matter how much affluence we have. And we really like keeping it covered up. And whereas I think all of us agree that we would like better competence from our governing officials, you know, we're Jordan Peterson meetup. But we'd like better equity. We know that a lot of folks who have black and brown skin are really hurting from this. And we want our public safety net systems to look out for them in an important way. And so all of that is true. But there is a lesson to be learned in this just as there was in 9-11, just as there was in 2008, which is that we are not sufficient masters of this world. And perhaps we should be imagining that, well, we should have pretty clear eyes about the reality of what it means to be a human being on planet Earth, even if it's 2020. Yeah. There's a little sermon for you. Okay. Well, a good Calvinist sermon, by the way. As a Christian, I think what you said is absolutely accurate. At the end of the day, no matter how we build our structures, they're going to wither and blow away. Okay? That doesn't mean we try not to give up and not try to build structures. Absolutely. And I think that's a good point. We try not to give up and not try to build structures. Absolutely. And I think historically, you were younger than I was, but the early 70s really destroyed the faith of a lot of American people. Nixon, okay? My dad and mom were sort of Republican, Democrat-ish, but they trusted their government. That sort of started breaking the trust. And then my brother called me up, and he owns a substantial company, and we were talking, and he said, yeah, I'm watching people talking about how great Jimmy Carter was. He goes, they didn't live in the 70s. We did. It sucked. Okay? And then it builds up with other things. Yeah, there was the end of history with Reagan and Bush, but there wasn't really the end of history. And now what we had for the last 20 years, and I would argue with Weinstein, our top people have failed us continuously, whether it was the intelligence people on 9-11, the Pentagon in 2003 with Iraq, although they're going to welcome us with open arms, not. Then the 2008 mortgage crash. Our political people failed on Trump. Oh, he'll never get elected. There he is in all his orange-ness. Okay. And then we were failed by our world institutions. The WHO said, don't worry about it. We're okay. Fauci initially said, it's no big deal. Then it became a big deal. The right and the left pooh-poohed this thing early on. It's important for people to recognize that. Both of them did, right? Except the far right, interestingly. Yes. Right. And what's interesting is I'm old enough to remember when Trump said, nobody coming in from China, he was a racist. Well, maybe he saved some lives. Maybe Newsom saved some lives by shutting it down quickly. Maybe we can give the grace that, you know what, maybe, hey, thank you guys, both of you. Both of you have made mistakes, I get it. But if you're transparent with us, and more importantly, you understand the differences between people. You're in a church where you have people that are very different. I'm at a church where we have a large Hispanic congregation. And a guy I taught English was in the... You teach English? You barely use it. I teach Chicago English. Hey, old man. I got great Chicago idioms for you. I guess if he's living in Chicago, it's okay. Hey, what's your problem? Okay. You know, couple two, three. Okay. So, you know, I started learning more, right, about their aspirations. The guy who was teaching English was from Columbia. Hated coffee, hated soccer, and drank tea. And loved the opera. Okay. Wow. Okay. And he was in the Columbia FBI, and my wife asked him one time, what was the hardest thing you ever did? And he goes, well, I went undercover to get Pablo Escobar. I said, you win. But I mean, I've learned a lot from this guy, right? And he's a janitor in a high school. The guy is 10 times smarter than I am. He's a janitor in a high school. But the idea is, he gets hurt. The high school closes down. What do they do with this guy? He's furloughed. Okay. You know, you try to help out where you can, right? But the panic doesn't hurt the gated community. Okay. It doesn't, trust me. You know, I'm hearing from my friends, oh, I'm okay. Of course you're okay. You're working out of your home. You're drinking your latte from Dunkin' Donuts since Starbucks closed. And you're doing okay. But the question is, the other people around you, take a close look. The people that serve you, who do your landscaping, who do your other things, they're not doing so darn good. And when the governor just says, well, you know what, I'm saving lives. What is going on with the other lives that you're not saving? Okay. How do we balance that out? That's all I'm asking. I'm not saying there's an easy answer, but I'm saying you got to even, no one's even asking that question. And I think that's a shame. Our high priests can't sympathize with our weakness. Maybe I'll become a Unitarian. That's the closest I'll flirt with that. No, my Bible study at a Trinitarian church was doing Hebrews 4 last night. Virtually through Zoom. Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has ascended into heaven, Jesus, the son of God, let us hold firmly to the faith we profess. For we do have a high priest, we do not have a high priest who's unable to empathize with our weakness. And what it seems like is our elites aren't able to sympathize with our weaknesses because they're not subject to the same things that a lot of our most vulnerable are. And that really seems to be at the heart of a lot of our leadership crisis. And that seems to be a lot what Ross Douthat means by decadence, is the elites are drinking and partying and everything seems fine, but it's because their nervous system that is supposed to be in touch with the rest of the country is desensitized and that they don't feel the pain of their decisions. And that will only lead to populism or something like it. To compensate. To compensate, yeah. Yeah. And Chris Arnaud, another guy has been speaking about that in Dignity. Yeah, in his book Dignity, yep. So let's have a little lightning round here. If the governor of Illinois, or you could even go to POTUS if you want to, or the county health official says, I saw that video with that VanderKlay guy. He's nuts, but you made some sense. What should we do? How should we, what should we do next? What do you, what do each of you think? I'll jump in first. I think we should allow retail establishments that are not restaurants or stadia or large-scale restaurants, large groups of people meeting. I think we should allow retail establishments to open up, call it May 1st, if not earlier, leave it to them to decide how they want to do metering and how to enforce six-speed separation. I think all of that should be under the context that everybody has to wear some kind of mask. I do not have a problem with the mask mandate. I don't know how, you know, just even a bandana, just something, but it'll tell people to be careful. I think that we should start trying to think about a process by which restaurants can open and serve people far enough separated. I think we should also start telling people do not make testing. The United States at this moment in time isn't ready to have mass COVID testing or at this point mass serology or antibody testing. So testing should not be a prerequisite for this. And we should tell people, look, be as careful as you can. Expect that there might be some plateauing, if not a dropping of the curve as you're doing this. But to try and get businesses back on track to start opening again and allow people to make decisions that make their lives work better. And then let local authorities handle this stuff, not state authorities. It doesn't make sense to shut down work and then shut down rural New York. It's interesting, listening to Sam talk about Chicago, because of course I grew up in New Jersey and, you know, New York State is pretty much exactly the same, this huge Megalopolis in the south and then upstate, which is farms and all of that. Sam, is that Hank? Hank got dropped here. Yeah, that was Hank. His iPad blew out. He says thank you very much for the conversation. Let's hear, to answer your question though, Paul, what would I say? I would say it's time to just trust the people to make the right decisions. Let's just do the most American thing that we know to do and trust that people will know how to handle it. You mean trust the government officials or trust local people to... Trust the citizens. Don't less top-down decision making, more bottom-up decision making. Just because you open everything up, like me and my family, we're going to still be pretty darn careful no matter what the governor or the president tells us to do. If they say green light on whatever you want to do tomorrow, our lives aren't going to change very much and that's true for a lot of people. Let businesses make their own decisions. Let people make their own decisions and I think it'll actually, ironically, go better than heavy-handed, kind of half-ignorant, half-smart, big bludgeon decisions. Yeah, there's a couple things. I could go for a long time about hospitals and predictive models and stuff like that, but I think trust the bottom-up. The top-down is done at this point. Paul, can I add one more thing? I was thinking about this and I have no idea. One of the things I wanted to point out in this conversation, because somebody who's listening to it, it might be like, who are these four bozos and what do they know about any of this stuff? It's a fair critique, except for the fact that I would make the case that knowing enough about all four of us that we're relatively caring, thoughtful people who want the best for the world around us. I think that's a fair description of all of us. As citizens, as thinking citizens, we have a right to make these videos and these judgment calls, even if we aren't experts. We can always consult the experts and see what we think about them. One other thought that I had, and maybe this is a bridge too far, but I would actually let the sports teams start playing again to either aggressively metered audiences or no public audiences, but at least get them back on TV. Just to give America a sense of normalcy again. Let the kids play soccer. I live one house away from a park, and the kids can play soccer and the parents can stand away from each other. They don't have to ban this stuff. It's not about wanting to force some way to get back to our old decadent sense of normalcy, as much as it is to let us find an equilibrium of a decent sense of normalcy. I think you could fairly say, for all of the social critiques that you and I and Jordan Peterson and other people would make about where we are, I think Jordan Peterson would be the first person to say, we've got a really, really decent society here. It's got problems, but it's a really decent society. We've built something great, and maybe the post-modern folks have added something to that, and maybe we're just posting on what was created up to 1890 or the 1930s or 40s. I'd say that there's a sliding scale in there, but it's a good society, and let's keep it. Now, as a lawyer, if, for example, because one of the things that I've thought of is, okay, so kids are playing soccer together, professional teams are playing together. I think part of what some of the concerns are over lawsuits that, wow, you allowed this to happen, and so got the COVID because you allowed it. We've been in the reaction governance place now. We have to know in this society that there will be lawsuits coming down over all sorts of things in the future. Being a lawyer and being a guy who's writing a book on a very, very complex universal basic income idea, funny you should ask that. One of the other thoughts I've been having as I've been watching this COVID crisis transpire is that I'm not sure Trump and today's Democrats are fit for the task, but it would be really great to have what I would call a decent or a good or a well-designed kind of commission with experts and politicians and everything like that to deconstruct what happened here. One of the things that should fall out of that is a battle plan for, as Sam pointed out, the next time this happens, which might be 10 years from now, 100 years from now, or it could be this fall, depending on how the virus mutates. One of those things should be a rapid deregulation of production capacity so that drugs and medical devices can get onto the market quickly. The other thing that should be part of that is essentially you just tell the legal, just like we've been able to, we've told everybody, it's like, well, you're just going to have to lose your job and not have a job for the next six months. Ezekiel Emanuel wants it to be 18 months. We can also just tell the lawyers, shut up. The minute that a virus is, a minute a pandemic is declared, part of this legal mechanism that I'm thinking of goes into place. Part of that goes into place that nobody gets sued for anything they did unless it was reckless and egregious and intentional. Then you create a fact pattern that says, this is reckless, this is egregious, and this is intentional. But if someone walked by you in a grocery store and sneezed, no, you don't get to sue the Kroger for doing that. If all the blue collar workers in the country can be told to shut up and sit down and stay in their homes, I think we can tell the lawyers to shut up and sit down and not sue everybody for everything that happened during a pandemic. I'm glad you said that as a lawyer. Well, Hank just tried to call me, but my phone isn't right on me here. I want to thank both of you and also thank Hank for pinging me and saying, hey, let's talk about this. I've certainly enjoyed talking to you guys. I hope I'll post it tomorrow and we'll see. Hopefully YouTube doesn't get mad at us. Didn't YouTube say something about no going against the WHO or something like that? Yeah. I think you said a word about the WHO. Sam said something. Oh, okay. Sam, if my channel gets scotched because of you, I'm finding a lawyer. WHO, you could have had better biostatisticians. That's all I'll say. Well, I don't know that YouTube is paying a lot of attention to my little channel. We'll risk it. We'll see what happens. Well, Paul, thanks a lot. I appreciate it. Great talking to you. Thank you, Paul. All right. Well, have a good evening, gentlemen. You too. Bye-bye.