https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1xOOI-QoDRY

 Hi, this is Paul. And continued thoughts on this conversation. Part of what this conversation is between Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris, and Bret Weinstein, and Douglas Murray is about his moral knowledge. And I've been talking about nouns and verbs and getting this from my friend. At some point, I'm going to probably talk more about him. I'd like him to come on the air with me, but at this point, he doesn't yet want to. But the main question is how should people live? Now, remember, Jordan Peterson approaches this that he says you can conceive of the world in two different ways. You can see the world as a form for action, which is verbs doing among nouns or objects. And Sam Harris says we use reason to pursue well-being. And he construes the world more as a space with objects. And there's a sense in which well-being begs the question of should. And in the conversation early on, remember Vancouver One begins and Jordan Peterson is building his project. And in a sense, everyone on stage can say, well, we want good and not bad. Well, you know, there's something. Do we all, can we all agree on what good is and what bad is? So, yeah, we can agree that the Nazi extermination of people and the gulags, those were bad. We don't want that. Good. Well, we got that agreement. Well, can we get further than that? Use reason to pursue should. Well, the difficulty with that, as we've been talking about, is especially with respect to reason, should involves ends. And ends involve values. And good involves values. And so this is where Peterson and Sam Harris go in terms of talking about can you derive values from facts and how? And Peterson says there are a priori structures that have developed over great periods of time. And we see objects through those structures and those structures evaluate objects and the things that we're engaging with and put them into hierarchies. And Brett Weinstein talks about overcoming our assassin robot chip program. And as we talked about before, as I'm kind of going through this, Peterson goes into Jane Goodall and the chimps. Implicit in these conversations, however, as I hear often is a bias towards law. And the idea of that is if we can detail out lists of rules, now these will be cognitive and conscious. We will follow them and then we'll yield well-being. So with the Kavanaugh debates I sent out a tweet. Advice from 2018 to any of you college students thinking about a career in high office in the nation despite 50 years of dismissing Christian morality as puritanical and repressive and all of these things including some comments Sam Harris made in this. You'd be best off only having sex after you're married and avoiding alcohol and other things. Just a word to the wise. This assumes a high degree, however, of transparency and self-discipline. Why did young David Kavanaugh want to pose in his high school yearbook naming the kinds of things he named? Well, it could be that he did these things or it could be that he was trying to gain status within an in-group by bragging about things he never did. Both of those are possibilities and we know this about people because this is what people are like. People lie in order to gain status or brag about things that might be exaggerations or perhaps never happened in order to have status within a group that they are trying to stay within. People are not self-transparent and people are not self-disciplined. The most self-aware of us know how poorly we are at these things and this is the reason people go into therapy and have accountability groups and join 12-step programs because truth be told, we are not transparent to ourselves. This goes all the way back into antiquity. Conversations about this and we'll get into Jonathan Haidt in a few minutes, but the Apostle Paul, for example, in 1 Corinthians, sorry, Romans 7, talks about the good I would do, I don't do. What I don't want to do, I do. This is a common human experience and religions have been talking about these experiences for a long time. One way that we deal with is through law or rules. The law approach is basically this, that there are laws or there are rules that we can come up with and these are usually propositions that describe what we ought to do. The Ten Commandments are one of these. Sam Harrison, the debate, and I've heard him say this before, regularly suggests that if don't follow the Ten Commandments, really suggests that if don't take slaves was one of the Ten Commandments, that would have been a good thing. If the Bible were true, it would have that rule. Brett Weinstein mentions maybe one of the things that should have been in the Ten Commandments is don't split the atom even though the people at that point had no idea what atoms were. The law approach says if we consciously know the truth, we can consciously do the truth. Anybody who works in any kind of law or rules know that people are really bad at this. We almost always make laws about things we want to do but know we shouldn't do and then we go ahead to break them. Sam Harris imagines that, well maybe if the Bible had Ten Commandments that said thou shalt not keep slaves, then slavery wouldn't have happened and I think that's a rather naive perspective. The assumption is that if you keep the rules, you will reap the reward but many of us know that there are rewards that can be reaped by breaking the rules. What if you are alone? This is where Sam Harris gets into his masturbation comments because I assume he's imagining those will probably be mostly solitary experiences. What if others around you think they know a different truth? What if your rule says you shall not pick up wallets on the street because the owner might come back for them. The other rule says wallets on the street are found goods, you're welcome to help yourself to the money. Or another rule might say you should first look for ID, if there's no ID in it then the wallet is yours. Another rule might say you should put an ad in Craigslist that says found envelope with $100, if it's yours please call, ta ta ta ta ta ta. Now free speech as we've talked about it is the attempt to talk about it. One of the ways we can deal with these rules and the multiplicity of the rules and our difficulty with rules and continuing to evaluate rules and try to get better rules is to discuss the rules and hopefully as Jonathan Haidt makes note many people are smarter than one people and so if all of us use language together hopefully we'll come up with more rules. But then again have you ever talked to a human being, actually I just finished a conversation with Luke and this was one of the topics that we talked about. He said it is tremendously difficult for human beings to actually sit down and make progress in conversation and if anything these four talks between Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris illustrate how difficult this is. What are people like? We have motivations, we get defensive, we have status that we're trying to play with with respect to our speech and we are selfish and so even this dialogue based remedy for our moral confusion, our lack of moral performance is by no means a complete resolution to the disasters of our world. Now and there's a lot of motivation that goes into this. Now Sam Harris brings love into these debates and I'll often tell people that imagine the world as two lines and one is to love and the other is to be loved and I'm just for the sake of this defining love as something which should be very in the line of Sam Harris here. I've actually used this definition for a number of years. To love means to your well-being at my expense. That's what I would say to someone. I love you. I'm going to look out for your well-being and it's going to cost me something. That is love. So there's two lines, to love and to be loved and I often tell people there's no way to love other people. Other people that want to be loved, that's pretty much anyone you lay eyes on. They want to be loved. Now I'm not, I don't mean that erotically or sexually. I mean that they would love it if you would do something good to them and if it costs you something that's even a greater demonstration of what love is. Now there's a Brett Weinstein video on, I forget the name of it right now, on you know talks about zero-sum games and in fact I was in a conversation on Twitter today about anti-rivalry and when I was listening to that anti-rivalry language and if you're curious about that you can find it on my Twitter stream. My Twitter handle is hard to figure out. It's Paul Vanderkleid so just in case you were wondering. But not everything is a zero-sum game and in that way love is cheap and easy and often there's a, if there's a context of affluence and material, you know that's that's fairly easy but many issues for us are, we have to deal with status and ego and that's where this anti-rivalry conversation came in based on a post by by Andrew Sweeney that he just posted on Medium. Many issues for us are of status or ego oriented, being validated, seen as right, esteemed are all greatly prized, clutched and sought after and we have a lot of motivations that go into our actions and we might not even be terribly aware of these motivations but usually other people are at least as aware of them or suspicious of them. You might not even have a motivation or be aware of a motivation but another person who is in a context with you where there could potentially be some rivalry might suspect that there is a motive that would devalue the relationship and again C.S. Lewis talks about that with his with his vulvarisms. Now Jonathan Height wades in and in his book The Righteous Mind one of the things that I was pondering, listening to this conversation between Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris was how individualistic this is and how free from context the imagined moral solution of Sam Harris's, it's kind of me and my rationality and the world of objects and I am going to decide what is right for me and what is moral and immoral but one of the things that we know is that morality is a highly communitarian thing. Jonathan Height says this, the new atheist model is based on the platonic rational view of the mind which is introduced in chapter two of his book The Righteous Mind. Reason or at least could be the charioteer guiding the passions and that's kind of this platonic imagination of what a human being is, a human being in charge has his passions under rain and so can employ the passions towards some reason reason to end. Jonathan Height, Martin Luther, Paul VanderKlay are all deeply suspicious quite frankly of that position. I don't think it's true. I think actually the elephant and the rider are probably more true. In chapters two three and four however I reviewed a great deal of evidence against the platonic view in favor of the humane view in which reason the rider is a servant of the intuitions or the elephant and again if you go past my last few videos I've talked a little bit about this but what I wanted to do in this video was look at some real life challenges because one of the things in turn that we deal with in terms of morality is orientation. This entire conversation about moral knowledge is a conversation about orientation. How do we know what's right and how do we know what's wrong? Now Sam Harris looks at the Bible and says clearly it's wrong. I say okay Sam let's back up the word clearly here and why don't you tell me on what basis are you coming to your judgment that this is wrong? Now if you listen to Sam Harris, Sam Harris sounds pretty much like all of the youth that Christian Smith interviewed in his book Soul Searching because according to Sam Harris somehow morality is self-evident and somehow well-being is self-evident and all we need to do is apply reason and we will arrive at well-being. Well this gets considerably harder in community and in fact believing, belonging, doing there's a lot going on in terms of that belonging stuff in term a lot of what the rider is doing is trying to make the elephant and the rider the team look good in front of the other pairs of elephants and riders. We are trying to gain status and so what perhaps Brett Kavanaugh was doing as he was bragging in the yearbook whatever he did with this is the Renita alumni thing that he did in the yearbook whatever he did or didn't do all that chatter was about status. He wanted to be part of the in group. C.S. Lewis talks about the inner ring. So there's knowing the truth. Well how can you know that which is good? What is good? Application living the truth. So once in fact you know it say look take this take the second table of the law and the 10 commandments thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not commit adultery. Let's just take those. Those are about you know pretty basic things. Well you commit adultery if you're really in love and if you can steal it maybe they stole it first and you can kill it maybe they had it coming or there's some other justifying example. Living the truth is really difficult. Is truth only a noun or a verb plus a noun? Because actually if you get into kind of this Greek and Hebrew conception of truth Greek truth tends to be a little closer to say rationality rules and Sam Harris in terms some kind of some kind of relationship or correspondence to something. In Hebrew truth is much more something that you live. It's much more of an active thing in terms of the Hebrew conception of the world. And then when we're in community we are blind to most of ourselves and and we're just really acting out our programs and well and all of the gods that have been built into us and I've talked about that in previous videos. We are socialized with by these parental authorities with all kinds of odds within us and again this was exactly what Christian Smith discovered when he did this massive he did this massive project of researching young people and asking what is moral? Well they all seem to know what's moral and they all learned it from their parents and it's something that's pretty much just self-evident. That's what they imagine. But we are socialized into these kinds of things and there are actions and assumptions within our families and within our societies and as long as we don't actually try to live with someone else or have an in-depth conversation with someone else we can look around and say well we all believe the same thing until you actually begin to talk to people and discover well we don't all believe the same thing and we all have different ideas of what you should do when should you should you go over for dinner empty-handed or if they invited you can you just show up and eat? What are the rules? Well clearly and so then you write in the newspaper and the etiquette person will tell you what you should do. One of the things that is amazing me in our present cultural context is how a hundred years of psychology and sociology is so quickly forgotten because we've just spent the last hundred years trying to asserting that we are formed creatures that we are the products of our environment or the products of nature and nurture and suddenly we're in a cultural moment when we say I'm not the product of anything. Well that's again leads us back to naive young people for whom everything is just simply self-evident. That we sit in the middle and this is something that we have to something like PSJA's Equilibriated State. We are the products of our parents and our siblings, of our grandparents, of our great-grandparents and in fact we are in the stream of producing perhaps if you reproduce children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren and then we are impacted by family, friends, our thought tribe, our religious allies, our thought and religious traditions, our neighbors, our city, our state, ethnic group and nation and this gets applied in by Jordan Peterson when he talks about this in terms of the Equilibriated State where if something is good or something works it should work for me and it should work for me and my children and me and my parents and me and my family and me and my neighbors and me and my city and out and out and out and out and the more levels for which something works the more layers we can say in a sense the better that thing is and what you very quickly discover is that if you're actually doing things with other people this is not so easy to negotiate all these things and this again is why we talk. Now we are conscious beings watching and responding to the environment in terms of well-being and desire so we're both in this context of the Equilibriated State. We're talking all of these things. Well your parents say well you should do this. Well that doesn't you know there's a generation gap perhaps and that doesn't use a certain kind of language that doesn't feel authentic to my experience so I'm going to do something else so then you do that and you say well I don't think marriage is important so I'm just going to up we're having a kid great well you not marrying and you exchanging partners might not feel good to a kid whose mom is now over there and you're over here and your kid would have preferred if you had actually married and given them stability over the 18 years that they will be dependent on you really more like 21 when you include college if they go to college if you're the kind of parent that actually helps your child in college as the government assumes you will so so right away you say well everything is self-evident but everybody's self-evidence is not the same and so this is why you have a conversation where about what is moral now we might imagine that Sam Harris in his morality in this kind of this timeless contextless rational vision will be able to say well here is morality well that's an interesting thing for a person who lives in a world of objects because you don't just walk up to morality and pick it up like in fact you can pick up a book so conscious beings have been watching and responding to their environment in terms of well-being and desires and so hard structures develop snake detection systems soft structures develop thought culture laws norms we children if a parent children tend to take in what their parents do more than what their parents say these become agents in our world these these norms they we we begin to experience them as agents and this is in a sense god or the gods that which selects that which you can look at Jordan Peterson's axiomatic god for this we personify them with our speech and in fact pretty much even the most ardent materialists personify this guard these these gods with their speech our genes want to blank and they they have difficulty expressing this kind of idea in almost any other way the next moment they'll say yeah genes are people they don't actually want but your genes want you to do this so then you've got again Jane Goodall and the chimps or the gods want you to do this now here's the difficulty for materialists find morality in a space of objects from the beginning Jordan Peterson's conceptual starting point which is a form for action is already an improvement over a space for objects when you begin with the question what should we do from the beginning Jordan Peterson's conceptual starting point as the inherent advantage of understanding verbs and actions when talking about morality morality is not a fact like a chair or a table if you'd actually have to ask Sam Harris what exactly is morality well it's what we should do okay but is that a fact and now what we saw with Sam Harris in the talk was that Sam can turn anything into a fact which is terribly convenient if you need to live in this world but then he shouldn't really hop back over the line and say oh no that's not a fact you can call an observable action a fact but the value should which is what we're looking for isn't obvious from the fact and that's Jordan Peterson's big point now I'm going to play a little bit of the of the monkey business here when Jordan Peterson takes them off the trail and just notice how the language goes now another thing that that I wanted to just point out obliquely and then I want to return to outlining maybe where we agree is that one of the things that was really shocking to me I would say was that the my reading of what was originally Jane Goodall's discovery about chimp behavior you know because there was this idea that was really rooted in Rossoian thinking that the reason that people committed atrocities in the service of their group identity let's say their tribal identity was because culture had corrupted us so it was a uniquely human thing but then of course Goodall showed in the 1970s that the chimps at Gombe I think that's I'm pronouncing that correctly would go on raiding parties right and and so there'd be like four or five adolescent chimps usually male sometimes with a female in there they would patrol the borders of their territory if they found an interloper on the border near the border from another troop even if it was a member of their troop that had emigrated so to speak and that they that they had had some history with they would tear them to pieces and of course that was shocking to Goodall but and and my understanding is she had some trepidations about publishing it although she did but then that's been noted repeatedly in other forms of chimp behavior so see I've been really interested in the commission of atrocity in the service of belief and see right away mission of atrocity in service of belief what are these beliefs and you know every time Jordan Peterson gets asked do you believe in God he's like that word belief I'm not ready to go with you there with that word because he sees how complicated beliefs are especially with respect to action and so that's why he acts as if and it's tempting to pin that say on on dogma and then to associate that with religious dogma I think that's all tempting but the fact that chimps do it shows that it can't be a consequence of something like religious belief unless you're willing to say that the reason that chimps commit atrocity in the service of their troop and their territory is because chimps are religious and so they're not religious and they don't really hold a secular totality I wonder if chimps had bombed the world trade center if Sam would say chimp religion did it totalitarian viewpoint but they act out they still act out the the atrocity element that's characteristic of human behavior and so to me that makes the problem deeper than one of mere let's say surface statements surface statements yeah yeah metaphysics the obviously the problem of primate aggression which we've inherited along with the chimps is deeper or at least different than the problem of religious violence or totalitarian political structures that get the worst out of people so I mean we have we have these primate capacities that we have to correct for and we're busily trying to correct for almost everything that we've been evolved to do and we're not you know we don't like the state of nature for good reason every time I hear that I think that is such an interesting thing to say because again you have the problem this gets into CS Lewis's miracles well is there something above nature and CS Lewis and Miracle says you know it's if you're a naturalist or materialist you think this is the whole show and everything we are is a product of the whole show so but yeah in your language you can't make that work we have to somehow transcend nature now we have to somehow figure out that which is super to nature to apply it to ourselves now all agree that this is something we want to do unless we're in the food aisle in Costco and we're looking for organic food or we're working on a paleo diet but but whose system is whose but whose system better accounts for this so then we look for moral agreement we should not kill strangers or cousins who infringe on our territory so we we look at the Jane Goodall chimps and we say this is immoral what the chimps are doing now we don't actually apply this to chimps because we don't consider them moral agents but but let's assume the chimps develop this behavior as an adaptive survival technique and the adaptive survival technique makes a certain degree of sense you don't want other chimps competing for the food or the females or the other things and one of the ways you do that is by defining a territory and protecting your territory and enforcing the territory so let's assume that human beings transcended this instinct or this structure as a survival technique well this makes sense because one of the things about human beings is that unlike chimps who are probably mostly focused with in terms of their territoriality on food and sex and security human beings set up multiple hierarchies and well we certainly have interests of food and security and although our mating is different from chimps there are other issues that we would have but other also other possibilities and so one of the things that we could say happened with human beings is that semi-permeable borders were seen as superior to impermeable borders rules with no exceptions that chimps enforce with violence so semi-permeable borders chimps have a very limited number of hierarchies food and reproduction and security let's say we have knowledge hierarchies we watch each other for threats we can get other things from other people knowledge nouns knowledge nouns and verbs that improve our capacity for survival pleasure and status so here's something that in a sense we are transcending nature might call this supernatural and not doing as chimps do but doing something else now what i wanted to do in this video is play some of this book 1493 because this is a fascinating book on many different levels one of the most important border borders that we've known in human history was people coming over from europe crossing the border into the americas and we know that massive number of human beings in the americas died because of disease quite unintentionally but the interchange between these two groups was noteworthy now one might argue that the inhabitants of the americas would have been better off killing organizing and killing any europeans that came into their land acting as chimps do rather than practicing semi-permeable borders why did they why didn't the population act like chimps did they have the means well you can read guns germs and steel which goes into some of this but i'm going to play some of this and go through this and now as i play it i want you to think about morality i want you to think about the kind of thing morality is especially with respect to a survivability end or telos that peterson and i think all three of them share and ask are these people acting morally strange land on may 14th 1607 three small ships anchored in the james river at the southern periphery of chesapeake bay in movies and textbooks they are often depicted as arriving in a pristine forest of ancient trees small bands of indians gliding silent as ghosts beneath the canopy implicit in this view is the common description of the colonists as settlers as if the land was unsettled before they came on the scene in fact the english ships landed in the middle of a small but rapidly expanding indian empire called sanakamako three decades before sanakamako had comprised six small separate clusters of villages by the time the foreigners came from overseas its paramount leader powhatan had tripled its size to about 8 000 square miles sanakamako stretched from chesapeake bay to the fall line the bluffs at the edge of the appalachian plateau in its scores of villages lived more than 14 000 people europeans would have been impressed by these numbers michael williams a historical geographer at oxford argued that the eastern u.s forest may have been more populous in 1600 than even densely settled parts of western europe the ruler of this land was known by multiple names and titles a hallmark of kings everywhere powhatan the name used most often by the colonists was also the name of the village in which he was born wary politically shrewd ruthless when needed powhatan was probably in his 60s when the english landed well beaten with many cold and stormy winters according to colonist strakey but still of a tall stature and clean limbs his capital of wero wakomako king's house was on the north bank of the york river in a little bay where three streams come together the york runs more or less parallel to the james and a few miles to its north projecting from the shore was a peninsula dominated by a low rise 25 feet at its highest point which held most of the village's houses behind it separated by a double moat from the west of wero wakomako was a second smaller hill with several structures at its base that combined the function of temples armories and treasure houses generally closed to commoners they contained the preserved bodies of important chiefs and priests mounted on scaffolds and ringed by emblems of wealth and power atop the hill was the biggest structure in senna komako a great windowless barrel vault perhaps 150 feet long its walls made of overlapping sheets of chestnut bark with gargoyle like statues at each corner at the far end lighted by torches was the royal chamber inside the sovereign greeted visitors from a raised pillow covered divan surrounded by wives and advisors long gray hair tumbling over his shoulders ropes of fat pearls descending from his neck confronted with this regal spectacle colonist john smith was awed the indian men who generally had better diets than the english seemed like giants with deep voices sounding from them as a voice in a vault sitting in the center palhattin himself smith thought had such a majesty as i cannot express to the english palhattin was a recognizable figure the king of a small domain with the lofty bearing that they expected from royalty any strangeness adhered not to the man in the foreground of the picture but the background against which he appeared the fields forests and rivers of senna komako it could hardly have been otherwise chesapeake bay was shaped by ecological and social forces unknown to the colonists speaking broadly the most important ecological force was the region's different tally of plant and animal species the social force just as consequential was the indians different land management practices by a quirk of biological history the pre-columbian americas had few domesticated animals no cattle horses sheep or goats graced its farmlands most big animals are tameable in the sense that they can be trained to lose their fear of people but only a few species are readily domesticable that is willing to breed easily in captivity now this this difference in the last of domesticatable ant the lack of domesticated animals is attributed by jared diamond and others as part of the reason that the inhabitants of the americas had no immunity to a lot of the diseases that the europeans had and actually in this book in 1493 he'll go through he'll go through quite a bit more of what happened with malaria and how that then factored into the enslavement of africans thereby letting humans select for useful characteristics in all of history humankind has been able to domesticate only 25 mammals a dozen or so birds and possibly a lizard just six of these creatures existed in the americas and they played comparatively minor roles the dog eaten in central and south america and used for labor in the far north the guinea pig llama and alpaca which reside in the andes the turkey raised in mexico in the u.s southwest the muscovy duck native to south america despite its name and some say the iguana farmed in mexico and central america in recent years advanced techniques have let researchers domesticate a few previously undomesticable species in laboratory settings the silver fox is the most well-known example in all previous history though only about 40 large animals were domesticated that figure does not include domesticated insects like the european honeybee and the mexican cochineal cultivated as a source of red dye the lack of domestic animals had momentous consequences in a country without horses donkeys and cattle the only source of transportation and labor was the human body compared to england sena comico had slower communications no galloping horses a dearth of plowed fields no straining oxen and pastures no grazing cattle and fewer and smaller roads no carriages to accommodate battles were fought without cavalry winters endured without wool logs skidded through the forest without oxen distances loomed larger when people had to walk from place to place indeed in terms of the time required for pohatan's orders to reach his minions sena comico may have been the size of england itself it was much less populous of course just as most europeans lived in small farm villages most of pohatan's people the pohatan indians as the newcomers called them lived in settlements of a few hundred inhabitants surrounded by large tracts of cleared land fields of maize and former maize fields the villages clustered along three rivers the rapahanak york and james and pause here in england to tobacco sir francis drake probably brought the plant to the nation in the previous decade he had acquired it on his round the world expedition but it wasn't widely known until roanoke colonists returned with strange fiery clay tubes at their lips in a short time one courtly eyewitness moaned many men everywhere with insatiable desire and greediness sucked in the stinking smoke despite this dismal record the virginia company believed it worth trying again at its inception the company consisted of two investor groups one in plimoth and one in london the plimoth group focused on what is now new england and quickly launched a colony on the coast of maine it disintegrated within months and the plimoth investors threw in the towel the london group set its sights on chesapeake bay and in practice took a look at the colony's current status and in practice took over the entire venture its ships set sail from london on december 20th 1606 although roanoke had been wiped out by its indian neighbors the virginia company directors reserved their fears for distant spain they ordered the colonists their employees in today's terms to reduce the chance of detection by spanish ships by locating the colony at least a hundred miles from the ocean the instructions didn't mention that this location might already be inhabited true the directors viewed conflict with the indians as unavoidable but they viewed the conflict as a problem mainly because they feared indians would guide and assist any nation that shall come to invade you that is they worried about sanacomoco not because they feared its citizens would attack the english but because they feared it would help spain attack the english for this reason the directors told the colonists to take great care not to offend the naturals naturals being a then common term for native people pay attention to that word term for native people jamestown was the result all the good up river land was already occupied by indian villages as a result the newcomers toss and tosses strangers the indians called them ended up selecting the most upstream uninhabited ground they could find their new home was 50 miles from the mouth of the james it was a peninsula near a bend in the river at a place where the current cut so close to the shore that ships could be moored to the trees unfortunately for the toss and tosses no indians lived on the peninsula because it was not a good place to live the english were like the last people moving into a subdivision they ended up with the least desirable property the site was boggy and mosquito-ridden colonists could get water from the james but it was not always potable during the late summer the river falls as much as 15 feet no longer pushed back by the flow of fresh water the salty water of the estuary spreads upstream stopping right around jamestown because the colonists had arrived in the midst of a multi-year drought the summer flow was especially feeble and the concentration of salt water especially high the salt water boundary traps sediments and organic wastes from upstream which meant that the english were drinking the foulest water in the james full of slime and filth complained percy the future colony president the obvious solution digging a well was not tried for more than two years it was of little help chesapeake bay is the remains of a huge 35 million year old meteor crater the impact fractured rock at the mouth of the bay lets in the sea contaminating the groundwater with salt few indian groups lived in the salt water wedge presumably for just that reason jamestown was bordered and undergirded by bad water that bad water the geographer carvel v earl argued led to typhoid dysentery and perhaps salt poisoning by january 1608 eight months after landing only 38 english were left alive okay let's talk about morality what does morality look like in this story what did the what did the what did the pohatton owe the english death food land were they to say well it's obviously you shouldn't live there because it's a bad place to live and you're all going to die drinking bad water we all know this which is why we don't live where you live or should they act like chimps and run them off how do you tell did was the bible helpful for the english were the english using the bible now it's interesting when you look at the different colonies and sam harris never gets into much history with this you could have an interesting comparison between the phlymouth colony in in massachusetts versus the the jamestown colony and how those two cultures developed also with respect to the you know their various the indian communities that they were that they were engaging with well let's keep going because pretty quickly why didn't the indians run them off why didn't they act like chimps was that some kind of enlightened self interest was it morality live paradoxically the colony's desperation was its salvation powhatan apparently couldn't bring himself to regard the starving toss and tosses as a threat certain that he could oust the english at any time he allowed them to occupy their not so valuable real estate as long as they provided valuable trade goods guns axes knives mirrors glass beads and copper sheets the last of which the indians prized much as europeans prized gold ingots so what's happening there well they're prizing these things this is they're seeing opportunity they have semi-permeable borders because they have multiple hierarchies that they are working and they don't see the english as much of a threat they don't know what's on the other side of the ocean from the english there have been little bits of contact between them none of them obviously understand disease but there's way more going on than what any of them can know old ingots after abducting john smith this subtle old fox as percy called him learned enough from his captive to conclude that the profit from trade with the toss and tosses tomorrow was worth giving them grain today he sent the foreigner back to jamestown in january 1608 with enough maize to keep his few remaining companions alive for a while from powhatan's point of view it was a good bet suggests roundtree the anthropologist of sena comico if the english tried to overstay their welcome he could simply withhold their food and the invasion would implode on its own confidence born of ignorance the university of missouri historian jay frederick fauce has noted characterized the initial attitudes of both english and indians toward each other so was that a moral strategy was that what he was thinking was it reasonable the ins toward each other after his return from captivity john smith took charge of jamestown because he controlled food negotiations with powhatan the colony's men of consequence swallowed their displeasure in any case they could hardly point to a record of success that spring smith ordered the survivors to plant crops they would have rather looked for gold and rebuild the colony fort they had accidentally burned it down you can see a variety of hierarchies working in in these sentences they burned it down he himself continued to explore chesapeake bay persuading himself there was a good hope that it stretched to the pacific all the while smith negotiated with powhatan for food he wanted to dribble out enough knives hatchets and iron pots to sena comico to get the necessary grain shipments but not enough to saturate the indian demand for english goods so smith is playing his own game english goods complicating his task english demand kept rising two more convoys in the spring and fall of 1608 increased the number of mouths to about 200 like any good businessman powhatan responded to the rising demand by raising maize prices he asked for guns and swords rather than hand tools smith refused fearing the consequences of arming the indians powhatan responded by cutting side deals for weapons with jamestown residents who chafed at smith's autocratic rule and he kept the pressure on smith by allowing his men to pick off stragglers outside jamestown and what's lovely about this entire story is that well what is morality here is it a set of rules is there a a universal morality that that you imagine can be applied in laws here what would be the specifics of those laws thou shalt not sell arms to indians thou shalt not feed hungry hungry englishmen it's it's un was it moral to settle in the americas why was there not a ten commandment against that was it moral to allow europeans to settle was it moral to allow the europeans to live as long as they provided the benefits to your own tribal population was reason involved can reason be employed without valued ends now what were the valued ends that these individual groups are looking for well there's multiples of them there are economic ends not so much in this story with the spanish and with the the puritans there are more religious ends well what is actually religion the english had their religion the pohatan had their religion is religion just projections into the sky now now to a degree peterson weinstein and harris all agree that perhaps the kinds of things you find in the bible or the kinds of things that were practiced and inherited via stories the pohatan didn't have writing was an accumulation of the ages represented in stories laws saying practices traditions in order to guide people towards well-being as they assume it should be as you know for the colonists for the for the for the pilgrims who came over to massachusetts they were trying to set up the in a sense the kingdom of heaven on earth now in in a sense a new creation and well the the native population was on one hand necessary because you see some similar dynamics there the europeans come over and they don't know how to grow food here now what 1493 will demonstrate is that what happens is not only do the europeans bring themselves over but they bring the farming ways of europe over and actually north america gets terraformed into europe but you have the problem of context with respect to morality and so you might ask would a series of laws deduced from facts actually be the most helpful means of communicating morality and i would argue first of all what whereas let's use the bible for an example whereas the bible certainly has laws in it the book is really not that many laws the book is mostly narrative and poetry and then in the new testament some letters and and there are certainly ethical injunctions moral injunctions but the way the bible communicates is nothing like adding new things to the ten commandments it just simply doesn't work that way because contexts don't work that way now listen to sam as he wrestles with the stuff that jordan peterson is throwing at him in viewpoint but they act out they still act out the the atrocity element that's characteristic of human behavior and so to me that makes the problem deeper than one of mere let's say surface statements surface statements yeah yeah metaphysics the obviously the problem of primate aggression which we've inherited along with the shims is deeper or at least different than the problem of religious violence or or totalitarian okay political structures that get the worst out of people so i mean we have we have these primate capacities that we have to correct for and we're busily trying to correct for almost everything that we've been evolved to do i mean we're not we you know we don't like the state of nature for good reason and virtually everything that's good about human life is born of our i would argue culture-based and and you know highly intelligent and necessary effort to to mitigate what is in fact natural for us and naturally there's nothing more natural than tribal violence which of the sort that you're you're describing in chimps okay so so then it also seems like we agree that the the core element of tribal alliance which would have its roots say in in the chimpanzee proclivity to or its analog in the chimpanzee proclivity to identify with the dominance hierarchy of the troop is something that's a source of the proclivity for human social aggression that's independent of its at least in independent of any obvious religious substrate so there are other reasons for group belief and the commission of atrocity that can't be directly attributed to to religious dogma yeah but i mean and what most worries me about religion i would say obviously religion can channel these primate urges in unhappy ways so you can get tribal violence that gets amplified by religious dogmatism and that should trouble everyone but it's not unique to religion it's also nationalism and it's racism and it's all other kinds of dogma and it's just plain survival but what most worries me are those cases where clearly good people who are not necessarily captured by tribalism per se are doing the unthinkable based purely on religious doctrines that they believe wholeheartedly with without good evidence so you have the person who joins isis who wasn't even muslim before they converted you know 16 months ago and they go all the way down the rabbit hole to the the most doctrinaire most committed most uncompromising view of just how you have to live in this world if you're going to be muslim and they join isis based on the idea that salvation only goes one way and the dying and defense of the one true faith is the best thing that can happen to you there's no question that there are individuals who have made that journey in fact there are individuals by the thousands who have made that journey and there are far more benign versions of that they're people who just waste their lives i would argue converting to whatever the belief system is and just wasting a lot of time worrying about hell or worrying about the fact that their child is gay and you know the creator of the universe doesn't approve of that and so there are all kinds of suffering that strike me as truly unnecessary born not of again ape-like urges but ideas that any rational person would if believed would follow to that same terminus okay well let's look at a really radical conversion let's look at pocahontas now one thing that's beautiful about this example of the europeans coming over to the americas was that these are enormously distinct groups of people there there's very little that these people have in common in terms of their shared backstory this is these these two groups are separated by oceans and there are almost no cultural links between them and in fact their biology is so separated that the the europeans coming over are involuntary hosts to micro-orbent organisms and then later to plants and animals that are going to completely destroy the world of the natural inhabitants and you might say well how on earth could a human being cross this and and how could this work now it gets very interesting because there is no sanction given in the bible to kidnapping and in fact there is there are there are rules against kidnapping in the bible but that doesn't stop europeans from kidnapping and it doesn't stop the native americans from kidnapping in turn you know kidnapping and holding hostages is a very common very universal thing which is i would say probably you know it's in a competition with the brutality of slavery did the natives not have mirage a religion and morality too had plenty of religion and they had morality well which was more governed by reason the native americans or the europeans now almost implicit in sam harris's schema is a progressivism where you might imagine that because the europeans had more technology the and and significant technology and i don't just mean um steel and navigational technology and weaponry and animal husbandry and all of those things they also had writing and literature i mean european was well we would use advance that puts them on a spectrum from the native americans but it's very interesting how these morality games go in terms of trying to compare the morality between these two people because of course russo and others will wait in and say oh no these are these are noble savages no that doesn't really work and in other story in other in other videos peterson will talk about the different competing ways to interpret all of the facts on the ground in terms of who these very strange people are coming over and and the the story of polka hontas becomes a very interesting one so things continue to develop in the colonies and more and more english come over and the vast majority of them die of starvation because they have all kinds of problems mostly people are coming over not to farm but because they're looking to turn a quick buck and they're looking for gold and they're looking for a passage to the pacific so they can get to china and to make money and nobody wants to work and nobody wants to plant food and they don't know how to plant food and they're on all the worst land and the the pohattan are kind of keeping an eye on them and they're getting goods from them and they're trying to manage the situation and they believe that that at some point they'll be able to they'll be able to get rid of the english and and then we get into the story of polka hontas who is the daughter of the bohat of pohat of the bohatin chief and things begin to take some interesting turns with her story polka hontas probably did not save john smith when he was captured in 1608 but she did help save jamestown by marrying the widower john ralph six years later evidence suggests she was a curious mischievous child one who like all children in senna comico went without clothing until puberty after smith's return from captivity pocahontas visited jamestown colonist strakey wrote afterward the colony's young men turned cartwheels with her falling on their hands turning their heels upwards whom she would follow and wheel so herself naked as she was all the fort over her real name was matauka pocahontas was a teasing nickname that meant something like little hellion the tassantossas liked the girl but not enough to prevent them from using her as a hostage after smith's departure when powhatan had again brought the english to the brink of annihilation the colony's new leaders decided to counter attack they put jamestown under strict martial law one colonist who stole several pints of oatmeal was chained to a tree until he starved to death divided the men into military companies and sent out expeditions to bring senna comico to heel attacking without warning the col now was this chaining a man to the tree to starve to death a function of religion or was it a function of necessity without warning the colonists raised native villages up and down the james the indians repeatedly struck back picking off colonists one by one forcing them to retreat behind jamestown's palisade where they were claimed by hunger and disease it was a classic guerrilla war stalemate the tassantossas could win every battle but never obtain a decisive victory powhatan's troops could always retreat into the hinterland then reappear to deadly effect arrows rushing from the trees in a sudden cloud yet palhatan could not finish off the tassantossas either he could make the colonists so afraid to venture outside that they couldn't harvest their own crops but as long as london was willing to keep shipping replacement supplies and replacement people the indians too could not win both sides were exhausted by march 1613 when jamestown's military commander thomas dale ordered a subordinate to trick the teenage pocahontas into coming aboard an english ship then they sailed away with her regarding the young woman as having noble blood dale put her under comfortable house arrest at the home of the colony's minister now was this whole idea about noble blood is this from the bible or is this from the other cultural traditions that the english maintain minister meanwhile he sent a ransom note to powhatan to get back his daughter he would have to return all the swords guns and metal tools he treacherously had stolen along with all the english prisoners of war for three months powhatan refused to negotiate with people he regarded as criminals finally he sent back a handful of english captives with an offer 500 bushels of maize for the girl the guns and swords could not be returned he said because they had been lost or stolen dale scoffed at this claim communications ceased for another eight months during which time some of the freed english captives ran back to the indians they preferred sanacomoco with its foreign culture and language to jamestown with its martial law and famine determined to end the standoff dale led ralph and 150 musket wielding tasantasas in march 1614 to meet powhatan in an angry standoff several hundred native troops faced dale's men on the banks of the york river with both sides fearing a battle that would inflict many casualties england and sanacomoco finally began active parley ralph was on the english negotiating team sanacomoco was represented by powhatan's brother opi chancano the man who had seized john smith in the swamp over two days they put together an informal pact perhaps surprising a key tenant was that pocahontas would not return home after her abduction pocahontas had been one colonist reported exceeding pensive and discontented in addition one assumes she was bewildered by the tasantasas with their unwieldy clothes their practice of confining women to the home and garden their strangely rigid eating habits at home people simply dipped into the stew pot when hungry but over time her attitude changed perhaps she was angered by her father's initial refusal to ransom her perhaps she liked being treated royally by the english in her father's house she was but one of many children from many wives perhaps she thought that by staying with the english she could end the war with its intermittent eruptions of atrocity perhaps she simply fell in love with john ralph whom she met while she was in captivity in any case she agreed to stay in jamestown as his bride nobody cared that pocahontas was already married because she was still childless roundtree says native custom allowed her to sunder the marital bond at any time and the english were willing to overlook savage marriages they were unchristian and therefore non-existent in consequence both natives and newcomers could treat pocahontas's wedding to ralph as a de facto ceasefire a timely and faith-saving method of ending the war without capitulation a written treaty or a formal winner as faust put it in his history of the strife so there you go so how is morality playing with this pocahontas has this massive conversion conversion seems to be something that sam harris thinks only goes one way this is why in some sense sam harris is a is a hyper dogmatic atheist because he acts just like religious dogmatics do but you know what's happening here with pocahontas was it was it moral to capture her was her then decision to stay an immoral decision how on earth can you actually manage morality in all of this situation yet everyone there we would imagine who was thinking about these situations would have moral notions and ideas and feelings about all of the events that are going on now we from our cultural position look back and we pass moral judgment on things and that seems easy for us but then again our morality is self-evident as we might imagine three of the strife opi chancano the suspension of hostilities to take the levers of power from his brother powhatan retired in about 1615 and died three years later unyielding and methodical opposed to the tos and tosses from the day of their arrival opi chancano manipulated jamestown into attacking his native rivals augmenting his empire even as the english domain expanded so who's using who determined to understand his enemy the new ruler infiltrated his people into jamestown working in english homes trading with english ships and serving in english militias the indians studied the ways of the foreigners opi chancano's men acquired a stockpile of guns and trained themselves to use them the colonists were blithely unaware of opi chancano's schemes schemes nonetheless they initiated all unintentionally a devastating countermeasure the columbian exchange the constant flow of ships to virginia brought with them an entire suite of new species opening what would become a multi-level ecological assault one of the most potent weapons was tobacco even at the height of the war john ralph had been experimenting with and tobacco king james the first had initially excoriated smoking as loathsome to the eye hateful to the nose and harmful to the brain he thought about banning it but changed his mind the perpetually cash short monarch had discovered that tobacco could be taxed english smokers were relieved but not happy the spaniards kept raising prices much as crack cocaine is an inferior cheaper version of powdered cocaine virginia tobacco was of lesser quality than caribbean tobacco but also not nearly as expensive like crack it was a wild commercial success within a year of its arrival jamestown colonists were paying off debts in london with little bags of the drug the ceasefire with pohattan let colonists expand production explosively by 1620 jamestown was shipping as much as 50 000 pounds a year three years later the figure had almost tripled within 40 years chesapeake bay the tobacco coast as it later became known was exporting 25 million pounds a year individual farmers were making profits of as much as 1000 on their initial investment what's amazing about the book 1493 is that essentially it's a story of our desires run wild it's silver it's tobacco it's sugar these are all really basic drugs that we're pretty used to now but when these hit the rest of the world whoosh they went 1 000 percent and all that was needed was sun water and soil the sums skyrocketed if farmers could afford servants laborers annual pay was about two pounds but they could grow 100 pounds or even 200 pounds of tobacco in that time it was an object demonstration of the power of economic order to focus the human mind the toss and tosses whom john smith had to order into their fields at gunpoint now became intent on wringing tobacco from the soil newcomers poured in grabbed some land and planted and tobacco english-style farms spread like rumors up and down the james and york rivers so many colonists poured in that the company realized they could not be controlled entirely from across the ocean and created an elected council to resolve disputes the first representative body in colonial north america its opening session lasted from july 30th to august 4th 1619 barely three weeks later a dutch pirate ship landed at jamestown in its hold was 20 and odd negros slaves taken by the pirates from a portuguese slave ship destined for mexico about 30 more showed up in another ship a few days later in their hurry to extract tobacco profits the toss and tosses had been clamoring for more workers the africans had arrived at harvest time without a second thought colonists bought the africans in exchange for the food the pirates needed for the return trip to europe legally speaking the 20 and odd africans may not have been slaves their status is unclear nevertheless they were not volunteers their purchase was a landmark in the road to slavery within weeks of each other jamestown had inaugurated two of the future united states most long-lasting institutions representative democracy and chattel slavery now if sam harris were in jamestown how would he feel about slavery would it be so obvious to him then what is not obvious to us now one of the things that if you look at the history of things that if you look at the history of slavery you realize economically probably the only way if you were a well the book will go on into malaria and describe why even though indentured servants from england and ireland would have been far better workers beneath the mason-dixon line they died like crazy because of malaria malaria which came from europe and africa and who didn't die in droves and could be employed as labor slaves slaves are lousy human beings make lousy slaves because we're way too smart we're way too rebellious but they didn't die like the europeans including the owners die now it's certainly easy to sit back and cast dispersions that ancient years and say oh those horrible people owned slaves 200 years from now what are the people going to say about us we don't even know will it be oh well someone should have put in the 10 commandments don't invent the internal combustion engine because you will spew co2 into the atmosphere or don't kill the whales or don't fix nitrogen and mess up the nitrogen cycle or or or chances are we don't know so so much for figuring out morality in this newfangled rational way they were working on morality in all of their own ways now i'm not a relativist but what i'm saying is that morality is a far more complicated thing than i think sam harris gives any indication for let's keep going with the story it's a great story not that the colonists paid attention to these landmarks they were too busy exporting virginia leaf obsessed by tobacco some of the leadership complained the colonists let jamestown fall once again into ruin the church down the palisados walls broken the bridge in pieces the well of fresh water spoiled the storehouse they used for the church the marketplace and streets and all other spare places planted with tobacco massive celebratory drunkenness was common incoming ships brought liquor and profitably transformed themselves into floating temporary taverns dale was forced to issue an order to virginia's planters grow food crops too or forfeit your tobacco to the colonial government few paid attention are there not passages in the bible about greed are there not passages in the bible about drunkenness that doesn't seem to be helping alas the boom came too late for the virginia company shipping colonists across the atlantic only to have them die had exhausted its startup capital company officers persuaded london's powerful clergy that helping jamestown find more investors was the duty of all english christians sunday after sunday ministers urged their parishioners to buy shares in the virginia company go forward reverend william crashoff urged potential noble and worthy adventurers some of whom sat in the pews of his temple church one of the nation's most influential houses of worship if england did not seize its opportunity in virginia crashoff predicted future generations would ask why was there such a prize put into the hands of fools who had not hearts to take it the tactic worked ministers enticed more than 700 individuals and companies to put at least 25 000 pounds into the virginia company equivalents in contemporary money are hard to establish but this sum surely translates into tens of millions of dollars even that vague claim may be misleading because the pool of investment capital was then much smaller the capital raised by the virginia company was a much bigger percentage of the total available than say million dollars would be today by contrast historians believe that fewer than a dozen men were the original backers of the company and that they put in no more than several hundred pounds the new sum was enough to send over hundreds of colonists ralph and dale among them who eagerly grew tobacco but even the rush of tobacco profits could not offset the debts from the company's years of losses the virginia company was again running out of money on march 22nd 1622 when opi chankano attacked early that morning indians slipped into european settlements knocking on doors and asking to be let in most were familiar visitors they came unarmed many accepted a meal or a drink then they seized whatever implement came to hand kitchen knife heavy stew pot the colonists own guns and killed everyone in the house the assault was brutal widespread and well planned so swift were the blows that many colonists died without knowing they were under attack entire families fell houses burned across what had been sanakamako at the last minute several indians told english friends about the attack providing enough warning to let jamestown gather its defenses nonetheless the attackers killed at least 325 people the aftermath claimed as many as 700 more because the attack disrupted spring planting the toss and tosses grew even less maize than usual meanwhile the company tried to rebuild jamestown by sending over more than a thousand new colonists incredibly they were sent with no food supplies actually not so incredibly ship captains were paid by the person transported so they overloaded their vessels with passengers carrying as little unprofitable food as possible the luckless scurvy ridden souls aboard were dumped ashore where they were forced to eat barks of trees or molds soil of the ground is this in keeping with biblical ideas of hospitality and responsibility yet it was practiced anyway it was a second starving time again colonists scrambled in rags over handfuls of maize by spring the survivors were so debilitated colony treasurer george sandis wrote the living were hardly able to bury the dead all together about two out of every three europeans in virginia died that year not everything went badly for the toss and tosses in may 1623 a little more than a year after the assault they staged a counter-attack at a peace conference with sena komiko's leadership at a celebratory toast one witness recorded the english passed out poisoned sack a sherry like wine killing some 200 indians pursued by a stricken enraged crowd the colonists fled to their boats as they left they fired into the mob killing some 50 more so if a ten commandment about slavery would stop it thou shalt not kill stop that including they erroneously believed opi chankano afterward the english brought home part of their heads that is they scalped some of their victims by any measure opi chankano was in a commanding position his forces now more numerous and better supplied than the enemy they raided english settlements at will jamestown's governing council confessed that the colonists couldn't successfully mount a reprisal by reason of their swiftness of foot and advantages of the woods to which upon all our assaults they retire opi chankano predicted in the summer of 1623 that before the end of two moons there should not be an englishman in all their countries just as he foresaw the virginia company did not survive horrified by the attack james the first created an investigatory commission which issued a damning report the company's parliamentary support vanished management fought desperately to retain the king's favor its investors had sunk into virginia as much as 200 000 pounds of vast sum at the time as long as the firm existed the money potentially could be recouped if james revoked the company charter it would be beyond recovery nevertheless he revoked the charter on may 24th 1624 any responsible monarch would have been obliged to stop the reckless shipment of his subjects to their deaths wrote morgan the historian the wonder was that the king had not done so earlier opi chankano had defeated the virginia company but victory over the company did not mean victory for the indians opi chankano did not launch a final killing assault pushing the foreigners into the sea indeed a second coordinated attack didn't take place for 22 years when it was far too late the reason for his hesitation will never be known with certainty because english accounts provide the great majority of historical records and the hostilities ensured that the tasantases lost what little view they had into native life but one possible answer is that opi chankano had lost senna comico before his troops fanned out into english homes by growing tobacco the english had transformed the landscape into something unrecognizable and i'll stop it there and it's a it's a great book if you're interested in if you're interested in history you see sam's take on religion doesn't really exist in the real world morality is a dynamic complex engagement with values it's hardly like finding hydrogen in water we have a sense of desired outcomes but we change our minds conversion pocahontas goes back and forth english settlers go back and forth we are looking for orientation we justify what seems expedient in the search for ends and we face judgment in outcomes and in reputation sam harris wants to talk about slavery well what he forgets is the communal aspect he forgets the economic aspect he forgets all of this now none of this mitigates the moral atrocity that slavery is but he barely defines slavery and and doesn't seriously engage it and as i said before we are simply blind to probably what future generations will excoriate us for now i'm not saying that morality is relativistic i believe in there such a thing as moral knowledge but the actual living out and knowing and identifying and picking and choosing is a far more complex thing than sam harris seems to indicate by how he approaches this did the natives not have a moral norm not to kill well there are many stories where native communities were could on some at least to the english seem both more hospitable and more brutal well why and i'm sure the english looked the same way to the natives they had different moral values how did the english justify the killing that they did well it's how we all justify the killing we did we didn't have a choice well there's a lot that goes under that justification law is a tool and it's a good tool but it's an insufficient tool and we at least on the english side because they had writing and they had the bible and they had law and they had a long developed history in western civilization of moral reasoning and this is in fact way before the height of secularization not way before it's just at the beginning of secularization but law is an insufficient tool and i think in fact that is part of the message of the old testament that law is unable to israel is unable to wield law to bring about the kind of righteousness that god is looking for it's an even in fact the kind of righteousness that we look back upon them and judge them for they undoubtedly if they could see the other way through history would have some of their own judgments upon us now speak life is doing that a series of of videos on some of the what i think is is sort of the stock the stock village atheist objections to christianity old testament wars human sacrifice slavery is condoned but even the way often christians present these is this consumer this this consumer culture that that we are blind to which would probably be greatly evident to the indians who probably completely did not understand what was going on with tobacco as consumers we pick a source of morality based on our pre-determined moral assumptions and so in a sense sam harris is saying see there's no ten commandments that talks about slavery in the bible and christians come back and say no and then we have all these reasons for justification and in fact often we turn it on the other side but beneath consumerism the picture in our head is that individuals we select a religion and again if you watch the nt right commentary that i made yesterday even the definition of religion has changed a religion is now something of a consumer good that we purchase with sometimes with belief older religions will often force people to purchase it with actions but we purchase it with belief like we're picking a cell phone again we are imagining a timeless clean space where we have responsible morality divorced from complex life what drove the what drove the pahattin and the english to do what they did it's an enormous complex framework that even they were likely barely conscious of just as we are generally barely conscious of ours and it's often only when we cross a significant religious or cultural line that we can actually begin to see our own religion we are formed by history and we're nested in this highly complex matrix and structure that we ourselves are barely aware of and the less we're aware of it the more we imagine it's just self-evident to you you are small and clueless even of yourself and the kinds of things we do we're doing for reasons the elephant knows and the riders aren't even all that interested in often now the greatest agency is context and habit our desires pull us more than our laws because well a lot of post-hoc reasoning goes into a lot of the stories that i just read with whom will you live you are shaped by the people that you live with what stories will you immerse yourself within those stories well your conscious mind might not know the formation but the rest of your brain knows the formation what habits will you pursue or resist doubtless will you pursue or resist dallas willard makes an excellent point on training versus trying if you want to achieve something like an olympic gold medal it's not about trying it's about training but what is training training is about building a regiment of life what you experience what you do what you dedicate yourself to and this in fact shapes the elephant now a big part of the debate between peterson and sam harris will be about stories and i think harris where he seems to acknowledge that stories can be powerful communication devices i think he's naive in terms of how stories actually get deeply into us you are a story nested within stories rules help transcend story there are abstractions by which we we try to evaluate story but but even rules that seem as as plain as thou shalt not steal thou shalt not kill thou shalt not commit adultery we can see those rules get subordinated to story in many ways well normally i won't steal but we'll take pocahontas and put her on a boat and send her to england that's hardly stealing because after all we're liberating her from this savagery that that she's been exposed to so it's not really stealing well we're going to we're going to poison the pohatan at a peace conference but we have no choice so that's not really killing rules are of limited utility they orient but are still subject to story imagining religion as a set of rules is simplistic and facile persons finally colonize history we've seen how unfree or formed we are as persons well well why do religions keep getting above nature why do religions keep having judgment days why do we keep pushing them outside of the time and space world that we're in and you find this commonly throughout religions in fact you'll see for example in the in the egyptian book of the dead the soul is weighed against a feather to see what your judgment will be well why do we conceptualize this you know we can get at this from below and again this is one thing that peterson is very good at they are representations of final summaries they are crucial for world rule-based orientation i don't even think that morality given the limits of the world that sam harris is trying to point out really actually finally works without without that all materialists have as a representation of the wrong side of history and history will judge you oh my some person later is going to think ill of me because of the year i was born i can't live with myself it finally leads to violence here and now miroslav volff and i pointed this out in previous videos miroslav volff figured out that secular societies are more prone to atrocity why you must judge the evildoer here and now if they slip into death like stalin mao or hitler they escape justice and what this means is that all those who because there is not an afterlife must bring heaven into this world to get your best life now almost always drag hell in too now looking for heaven in the here and now you will bring hell secularists imagine that a divine book will yield to tyranny here and now because of divine absolutism religion is almost never anywhere near that absolute sam harris's picture of religion really doesn't even get religion right i'd argue that religions with a healthy afterlife and some kind of final judgment actually afford more compromise in the secular realm it actually manages to relativize even the what sam harris sees in the israeli palestinian complex as a land contract problem post life post heaven and earth actually allows you to relativize that because you don't have to have all your eggs in this basket it actually affords moral more moral flexibility because of religion rather than in spite of it there is space for judgment there is space for reward there is space for a perfect judge unlike any of us because again if you look at these stories everybody in these stories had their moral judgment we have our moral judgment of them but anyone with any sense of relativism will say can we really judge them can we really judge them fully well i think actually once you start getting into morality and thinking it through you have in a sense an ontological argument necessity to want there to be a judge sam harris judges it this way someone else judges it this way who decides history well we poe hatton and the jamestown people are now in history beyond us we're judging them in a different way that the 1950s judged them then the 1920s judged them then the 1850s judged them so history is a poor judge what religions obviously if you think about it from below represent is a perfect judge well that's a little bit about morality and some fun stories about the jamestown colony and hopefully we'll gain a little bit of perspective on just how complex this whole business is about morality just how bad we are at it and why in fact i think religions of all kinds of many kinds including christianity have developed what they've developed and they've developed what they've developed and it isn't irrational it's actually if you begin to look at it it's completely rational and in fact i would argue leads to greater human flourishing than these cheap attract these cheap attacks by sam harris and others