https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rmt9jp6FGDU

 Well here we are on the Van Dock porch and Job just found his original email to me and he was looking for John's original email to him, haven't found that yet, but we just had breakfast with a friend and are now watching some Canada geese fly over the lake. I just like you to see my very large deck. Very nice deck. Yes. And we had a meet up last night, which was our first meet up on this tour of visiting an established meet up. This is the third time that I've visited this meet up. We talked about the fact that, John, you have this meet up three times a month, two Thursdays and one Sunday, and you have a very stable core that meets and always a few more people when I come into town. What are those dynamics like? What do you think about that? Well, I think that the people who showed up yesterday specifically because they knew you were going to be there, have absolutely no intention of joining our group on a more permanent basis. They made it very clear that they were there to see you. So to the regulars, it seemed kind of interesting that all of a sudden our group is twice the size, but I don't actually think any one of them had any hopes or dreams that this would suddenly just kind of expand our population or demographic. And I think that they were perfectly happy to welcome these other people into their midst. We have enough regular conversations that having something out of the ordinary is interesting and nice and pleasant and we'd be happy to do that. But I think that this kind of confirms the thing that you and I talked about earlier with that article by Who Was It Again? That was Scott Alexander's article about his experience. Scott Alexander, who has a blog, Star Slate Codex, does go on tours visiting people who read his blog. It's a major blog, hundreds of thousands of readers. But it's also confirmed that celebrity status does not community build. Yes, yes. So let me ask you this question. Even though you and I enjoy coming here and I very much enjoy visiting, is it a helpful or not helpful thing? Should I maybe not do this anymore? What do you think? No, I think it's definitely helpful if for no other reason than that the guys that show up regularly get to hear some of other people's concerns and there were some new thoughts expressed that don't normally come up in our regular conversations. So I think that in every way it was helpful. We don't usually have anybody bring Dutch cookies either and that was a vital piece of the gathering to be able to consume the Dutch cookies. Thank you, Joe. No problem. The Dutch cookies. Well, what were your thoughts on the meetup last night, Joe? It reminded me here and there of the Bethany meetup that we had the day before in the sense that people wanted to discuss the things they were working on and do that in a group setting. That seems if that becomes a regular pattern in the meetup starting a week from now, that would be interesting. I wouldn't be surprised if it was, to be honest, if we'd see this at other meetups as well. There were interesting conversations, there were different subjects. There was a whole thing where we discussed the state of education in America in public and private schools as opposed to homeschooling. I find that interesting because I've seen more people homeschool in the US than I think I've ever seen in the Netherlands. That's a function of economics, by the way. It's not because of freedom being such a core value in the US. No, it has more to do with the fact that people don't approve or like the public school system and think that there are certain things missing. And then in order to put people in private school is very expensive so that the alternative is that they have the option of doing it themselves so they will do that. It's a form of parental control and the assumption that we, the parents, are responsible for our children. So let's give that shape by actually engaging with their education personally. That's also the reason why there are charter schools where there's a lot of input from the parents. It's also a function if you have a large family. We have five children. Brett Sockold, who I spoke with a couple of weeks ago, has seven children. A lot of families with many children homeschool, partly because you can manage the schedule of the family much more easily. Schools tend to pull you in lots of different directions very quickly and overwhelms the family schedule because not only do you have school during the day, you have sports at night, you have parent-teacher meetings, you have all of this stuff. If you homeschool, you can sort of manage the family calendar better. That's part of it. Brett Fair enough. Yeah. Brett Any other comments? I'm trying to think. I had some other thoughts too. And I shared those a little bit this morning. I think one of the things that I'm learning in these meetups is that a question and answer format is a very helpful aspect rather than speech giving. Now I, of course, have to take full responsibility that I have a YouTube channel. A significant part of it is me just rambling on and on. I loved how one individual said, yeah, I watch Peterson, I watch Peugeot. Your videos are kind of two hours long of you rambling. And he still shows up. Nobody agreed with him though. No, no. That was kind of an isolated observation. But I have experiments with clips, so in that regard, that's true. That's true. I do commentary on clips. But thinking about how in a good meetup, it very much is about a conversation, not here's a trapped audience for whatever it is we want to get off our chest. I think we have YouTube for that. But it is nice to have people inquiring of one another. I've got this, I heard this, I have this question, I'd like you to speak to this. I think it puts the person from whom, it gives people to participate in the different roles of a conversation, allows different people to be experts. And they might just be expert in themselves or their own experience, but it gives a certain amount of elevation and weight and authority to what they're sharing. One of the interesting things is that every meetup is different. We never really quite know what we're going to be talking about that evening. And especially with meetups like these where most of the people I don't know, many of the people are not known to themselves, there is going to be a lot of new information and a lot of discovery in the process, especially if we can optimize, I think, this drawing things out of each other instead of pushing things onto the group. I love that, by the way, because there were people, two people I hadn't seen since the last year I was here. And one of them now has a PhD. And we talked about what they do for work now. And a lot of us, oh, yeah, I'm now a Catholic. How did that happen? You get the whole story. That was just, that was really nice. I think the other thing to observe here is that this protocol that you proposed that we go for two hours and then we get up, take the picture, and then we can kind of regroup and find each other in a different way to see how long people actually stayed after that moment. I mean, the meeting is officially over at nine o'clock. And if Adrian hadn't kicked us out of the place, we have a security guy person here who knows that on the schedule it says that we reserved the room from seven to ten and at ten o'clock you're going to be out of there. And he had fun with us, so that was good. But to see how intensely people got engaged and how they found each other in certain ways. And you can really tell that a lot of really quality stuff happened after the meeting was officially over. And that was a beautiful thing. I think my experience has been that there are many meetings in which the most important conversations come in the second half after the official meeting when on the basis of what they've heard in this meeting, there's a discovery, there's a desire to know, and therefore there's the experience of wanting to be known. And I think that's vitally important. I think in a YouTube generation where we have obnoxious reform pastors spewing their stuff endlessly rambling on YouTube. Rambling is the word. I think to want to be known is a valuable piece of what we're playing with. That there's the possibility, there's the potential that when they come to a meeting they will want to be known and they will have an opportunity to share. And they might not have a PhD or expertise in a certain field or have written a book. But they're on a journey. But they're on a journey and they're an expert of their journey. And what they have learned is desired by the others in the group. I mean that's, and even in churches, that's often very difficult to experience because so often in churches there's the pastor or the Bible study leader or the authority. This gives the other people who come to the group their opportunity to be the giver and to be the generous person in terms of what they've learned. As opposed to being on the receiving end all the time. Right, right. One thing I did notice by the way at last night's meetup is there was a common pattern of people saying, I started listening to Jordan Peterson, he got me interested in the Bible. It wasn't so much a where's Peterson now? No, he did this thing and I'm still working on the effects of what that did. That was interesting. You know one of the things that we've noticed in our own Sacramento meetup too, even though we're called a Jordan Peterson meetup, we might change it to a Jordan Peterson style meetup, we don't talk that much about Jordan Peterson at our meetings. And I had one person come to one of our meetups and express disappointment that we didn't talk a lot about Jordan Peterson, partly because we've been talking about him for a while. But again the contribution has been much more that he initiated a space in which people could explore not only his work but Jonathan Peugeot often comes up regularly in these meetings. The impact of his work has been significant. But also getting into other authors, Nietzsche, Dostoevsky, Solzhenitsyn, many of the others that Peterson has opened people up to. And then others still. We often come to these, we had a good conversation with someone about the work of Nassim Tlaib in the after meeting last night and I found that very, very helpful. I almost always come away from these meetings having learned more and grown more. But we also really appreciate the Jordan Peterson continuity that you bring to the event by wearing your lobster socks. I'm not wearing them now. Oh, but this is not a meetup. But I want to thank you for creating that continuity by wearing your lobster socks. Well thank you John, I appreciate that. We should probably make them feature more prominently in a future comment video so that other people who are now watching and are eagerly anticipating these lobster socks, I do expect you to. When we're doing meetups every night, those socks could get... A little raunchy? Yeah, not terribly. I'll have to purchase more of them so I can wear them every night. Thank you. Speaking of, next meetup won't be until a week from now so these types of important videos, delightful as they are, will come to a halt now. Screeching halt. Yeah, delightful as they are. I now use my one trick of turning the camera on early to catch Vendonk and Job and... And their candid conversations. I wanted to have that conversation on because that is very much... One of the things I struggle with is for this tour, really a lot of the reasons I wanted to go on this tour was exactly for those kinds of conversations. You can probably tell that the three of us... John has a motto, good things happen on the road. Good things happen on the road. One of the things that prompted the Connecticut retreat that we did last year, I might do another one this spring, and I would like to see us also do more because there's something that happens with extended periods together, of living together, of sharing meals, of... This is the community and the bonding. We learn each other, we get to know each other at deeper levels. We open ourselves up. Obviously, having a camera on changes the dynamics of the conversation, but there is a sense of community that has been greatly lost. I would like to, in that connection, I would like to give credit where credit is due because my mantra that good things happen on the road originated with my friend Stephen Vanderhart, and that was confirmed when we together went to Burning Man. You went to Burning Man? I did. So you've done Burning Man, you've done the Camino twice? No once. You are a hippie without hair. Onto the barricade. No, but Steph has been my traveling partner for several of these kinds of events, and I'd like to give him at least a credit for originating the phrase, good things happen on the road. That was his mantra when he was a youth pastor, and he's proven that to be very beneficial in many different ways. Alright, any other things that I'm not thinking of? Thanks for breakfast. I appreciate it. You're welcome. This has been an experience for Job. Job has seen new sides of America, diner culture. We eat very healthy. Abundance of food. It's been amazing. Just the ways that this country has a relationship to food, to cars. It doesn't stop just blowing me away. It's so different. Alright, so we won't have probably any of these report videos for a little while. Once we're, you know, if in fact the northern part of this trip comes off, we're going to be, we're going to really have to be disciplined about getting these in because we're going to have a lot of driving and a lot of miles to do. We'll have to figure out a way to produce them on the road. Yep, yep. That can be done. I've got some ideas. Alright, so thanks for watching and we will, as Freddy said, we will see you on the flip side. Love.