https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8PeOih3Qj4M

 All right. Well, welcome. I know I've been in and out with vacations and a whole bunch of different things, and so I'm sure some of you wondered, are we doing it this week? Are we not doing it this week? Yes, we are doing it this week. And I should have thought of this last night and started a stream so that people got reminders, but I'm not necessarily the best YouTuber around. So I'm even trying to get it up on my surface. I was just complaining to Rick about the reality of browsers and Android versus good old Chrome on Windows, which always seems to work. So good morning for those of you who it's morning. Good Friday for those of you that it's Friday. Saturday for you folks in Australia. You're probably sound asleep or hopefully, but it's good to be back. Had a great vacation. I was in LA just last week a little bit too, visiting my son, but it's getting back into the stream of things. My wife has started. The school year has started, so her schedule is more stable, which helps keep my schedule stable and off we go. And I'm not really quite up to my usual output of videos, but I suspect by all the brain activity I'm watching myself do, I think we'll get there. So let's begin with pray for my feet and back. That dude, man, got to pray for that man's whole body. I'll pray ahead of the pain instead of just always following it. Anyway, Pastor Paul VanderKlay, thank you for suggesting miracles and the discarded image for understanding the nature of the universe. The bridges of meaning writing server book clubs on both of these books concluded fairly recently. Through discussion with the book club, I realized a trend in Lewis's writing associating the the arenic view of God with Satanism. That's interesting. I would probably want a definition of what you think Satanism is and or a definition of what you think Lewis thought Satanism is, because it's a really interesting point that you're making. Lewis stated in miracles that pantheism is in fact the permanent natural bent of the human mind. I think you see that validated in Kaufman's understanding of the Medi-Divine realm. I think all those things come together. Now, to the best of my knowledge, Lewis never read Kaufman, which is amazing because the dude read a lot. work I think was quite important in terms of understanding the broad worldviews and the uniquenesses of the Hebrew people and eventually the Hebrew scriptures. Lewis stated in miracles that pantheism is in fact that the permanent natural bent of the human mind. That German worship of a racial spirit is only pantheism truncated or whittled down to suit barbarians. I don't know that Lewis is right. So Lewis obviously was writing at the same time as Nazism had risen and Hitler was doing his thing. But I think a lot of the subsequent scholarship following the defeat of the Nazis in the Second World War has revealed a lot of what was beneath Nazism. And I think Tom Holland gets it right. I've not just read Tom Holland on this. He hasn't actually written a lot on this. But the work of Timothy Snyder, who has done a ton of work on this, and there's another Christian scholar out of LA who's written a couple of, I don't know if he's out of LA or not, but he's written a couple other books on the religion of Hitler. And it very much seems that Nazism is sort of like many religious innovations that will make the Orthodox among you smile, like many religious innovations, sort of a step towards paganism. Now this statement is going to sort of make a lot of Jewish folks smile. In some ways, Christianity has built within it some accommodations that make it attractive to pagans. And I've been thinking about that a little bit lately. So Jesus, there's a reason Christianity very much outcompetes the other religions. And it's just started. So Tripp, I did a conversation with Tripp this week, and he mentioned that his uncle is a scholar about religion in a secular university and is much more mainline. And he had written a book on megachurches. And this morning I started reading that book and it's like, ooh, we're going to be digging into this thing. So book club, get ready. Some more coming down the line. I still don't know why Amazon hasn't discovered me. Maybe I just don't sell that enough books from them because it's like all I ever do is recommend books and people do buy them and read them. So anyway, I think I'll probably make this one scholar author happy because I'll probably wind up selling some of his books anyway. At all costs, therefore, he God must not be thought of as featureless generality. And I think that's exactly right. And that's because the God of Christianity inherited from the Jews is God number one and God number two. It's Kaufman is right. It's not. It's it's God. The Christian God is agentic and areanic both. And that's not impossible to conceptualize because we do it all the time. The United States government is deeply areanic. We gentify it in our imaginations as Uncle Sam, and we act as if the United States government is an agent. Eric Weinstein has some interesting comments about that in back when he was doing Portal. So the the agent arena relationship is is a really powerful polarity and duality. But like many powerful polarities and dualities, if you create a Venn diagram, there is some overlap. And one of the things Christianity managed to do very successfully was to work that overlap space. Now Satan, Satan and Christianity, Satan in Second Temple Judaism is in some ways, and this is why I say Christianity in some ways accommodates the pagan world in a way that I think historically, perhaps certain aspects, if you sort of dissect Israelite religion along the lines of contemporary, secular religious studies people like Christine Hayes. Christine Hayes, when she's sort of trying to dissect Israelite religion and you have the Deuteronomist and you have the Yahwist and you have, you know, the JPE, the documentary hypothesis, you have all of this scholarship that is trying to discern these layers in Jewish history to try to account for the development of this very peculiar, powerful religion that has actually survived millennia and spawned both Christianity and what today we call Judaism. Christianity and rabbinic Judaism are in many ways siblings, in some ways almost twins. They're certainly not identical, but they share a lot. And Satan, if you listen to Christine Hayes, so if one of these scholars wants to be a purist, they'll say things like, well, Satan isn't in the Old Testament. And some people say, oh, but wait a minute, the book of Job, what she's referring to in some ways is the, let's call it the demonic, which in Christianity becomes satanic because demons become minions of Satan. This is what, when you arrive at, and you can very much see some of this transition in the book of Daniel, you have these, I'm going to do an anachronism here. I'm going to speak anachronistically here to say that these beasts that come out of the sea and the book of Daniel are principalities and powers. I think that's very much how they're sort of mapped onto some of that language in the New Testament. But by the time we get to Second Temple Judaism, contemporary with Jesus, you've got a full blown, you see the Jewish people very much living with an assumed full blown belief in the demonic and the relationship with the satanic and this character of Satan who is tempting Jesus. Jesus is accused that he's delivering spirits and exercising spirits by Beelzebub and Jesus addresses that directly. All of this stuff is deep into the gospel narratives. And this again gets back into history of Jewish studies. Whereas when you listen to someone like Christine Hayes, modern scholarship wants to say something like, well, the scribes and the intellectual elite who were inscripturating the books of the Bible that we have now were a pure form or were in some ways set apart from this Israelite religion, the artifacts of which we have dug up in modern archaeology. And when we get into the time of Christ, Jesus' time in Second Temple Judaism in Judea and the Galilee, it's quite clear from the conversations that full blown embracing of a demonic and a satanic world is embraced by the people and manifest by Jesus' miracles. And how does Satan relate to the Medi-Divine realm? Well, in some ways, that's easy because Satan is more analogous to Zeus than what develops in the Hebrew scriptures as the God of Israel, as Kaufman notes. Now, modern Jewish scholars and mainline biblical scholars will, you know, again, see all of these layers and want to speak very carefully about some of these things. But what wins out, I think as Kaufman is correct about, what wins out is this radical new understanding of the world in which the Hebrew God is Aaronic and agentic. And the way that in the scriptures you almost always see the Aaronic nature of God is by this, again, nearly universal human pattern of sort of the divine passive in language. If something happened, it was because if you're a Hebrew, God meant it to happen. And so when Joseph says to his brothers at the death of his father, you meant it for evil, but God meant it for good. Right there you see in this overlap in the Venn diagram between the Aaronic and the agentic. And the Hebrew God is very much Aaronic. He can't be escaped from. If I go up to the, if I go to the bottoms of, if I go to the depths of the earth, you are there. If I go to the highest heavens, you are there, the psalmist says. The psalmist deeply sees his God as Aaronic, yet he wades into and relates to his God in an agentic fashion. Oh God, why are you so far from me? You say, hey, wait a minute. Didn't you just say, if I go to the depths of the earth, you are there. If I go to the heights of the heavens, you are there. Where can I go to escape from your presence? And then, you know, few Psalms later, Oh God, why are you so far from me? And again, someone who is thinking in a fairly rationalistic, secularist perspective will say those two, those two thoughts are contradictory. They're not contradictory in terms of how you feel, because sometimes it's like God is everywhere. And other times it's like God has abandoned me. And very quickly begin to realize that, well, these metaphors of space, we're certainly using, but these might not actually apply or bind a God who can not only create the physical world around us, but a God who creates within us the capacity to actually self transcend and think along these lines. So all of that to say that when we talk about the satanic, it's become so easy for us to just talk about the satanic as evil. And that's absolutely appropriate. And to understand the satanic as an agentic representation of evil. That's exactly right. Now, it's no surprise that modern skeptics are like, well, I, I'm skeptical about the reality of a, of a literal Satan. Now, now what the word literal has to do with that, I'm not sure. What they mean is that I'm skeptical that there's an agent that, that, that an agent exists. And again, we're using that word sort of as Zeus exists, a character within an arena context that stands opposed to God. I don't know why that should be such a surprising idea, because this morning I was listening to a conversation between Michael Sherman and Richard Dawkins, and they stand opposed to God. Now, they don't in any way, in my opinion, if you, if you apply the ontological argument to, to Sherman and Dawkins, surely there must be a being greater than Sherman and Dawkins, which exists that, you know, is far beyond them. And yet, as opposed to the arenic and agentic God of the universe, that doesn't seem hard to conceptualize. Why are people so skeptical? Once you have, once you have two agents, you're probably going to have a hierarchy. And so to imagine an evil agent at the top of a hierarchy, I don't know why that's hard to imagine at all. Now, modern skeptics have difficulty imagining that there are agents in whatever this thing we inhabit that are not human beings. I think that's not hard to imagine at all either, because again, I just said before, we've agentified Uncle Sam. So you're just, you're just limiting agents to creatures like us with skin and brains. But you don't live like those are the limitations of your agents. And people betray it all the time. This week I was thinking about, you know, they get the whole abortion flap in Texas. Well, the only reason people write abortion laws is because they want to control women's bodies. OK, if you think about that thing for a little while, you have so much metaphysical assumption about agency and motivation packed into a rather glib meme that whole groups of people say, oh, yeah, that's that's really true. Now, when my daughter was two, and let's say she was walking close to a precipice at that moment, I had a severe desire to control a particular little girl's body because I loved her and I didn't want her walking off a cliff. But I wouldn't say that my primary motivation there was control. My primary motivation was love. So when you're saying abortion laws are because we or they or men or the government want to control women's bodies. It's just not a very I don't know how you would ever demonstrate such a thing. It's, you know, the kind of math to do that. It's it's part of the reason people are fighting masks and vaccines is because they say Biden wants to control our bodies. Does that really what Biden wants to do? Maybe Biden wants to have better approval numbers or maybe Biden wants covid to go away or maybe Biden wants. If you sit down with one human being and say, well, what does Biden really want? Well, there's probably you can probably very quickly put in a list of four or five things that are reasonable candidates for what Biden wants. And by virtue of our nature of having consciousness, Congress, who knows what we want? We have difficulty now understanding exactly what I am. What was my motivation for wanting to grab my daughter and and have her not walk so close to a precipice? When I remember one time when my family was visiting Yosemite and we were there with my sons were teenagers and we stopped by the side of the road to see a particularly beautiful waterfall. It was cascading and my teenage son jumps out of the car and starts scrambling on the rocks all up and down in that waterfall. And my wife is my wife becomes very anxious and starts yelling at him, you know, well, do do we put up guardrails in national parks because women want to control young men's bodies? Or maybe a mother loves her son and the older mother, maybe a little higher in negative emotion and is programmed to care for her son, sees the recklessness of scrambling around on wet rocks on a waterfall on a mountainside. Well, what's the motivation for the teenage boy to scramble on on those rocks? Go ahead and ask him. He'll give you an answer. How valid is that answer? So, you know, OK, I am following my pattern of spending a half hour on the first question, taking it every which way you could imagine. Without ever answering the question. So pray for my feet and back. You're the lucky winner to have me ramble and never get to the answer. So everything I've said now, I pour into this question of what do we mean by satanic? And I think the the heart of the heart of the Satan we find battling Jesus in the New Testament is well, it's it's absolutely seen in this character as someone who wants. It's it's it's seen in, you know, why did Christians map New Testament Satan onto serpent in the garden? Because in that impulse of Adam and Eve. To try to, in a sense, say to God, I want your stuff, but I don't want you. I want autonomy. I don't want to submit to you. I want to be my own thing. I don't want to be dependent on you. I want glory for myself. There's a lot of ways you can say that. And all of these ways of saying it are trying to get at something that theologians for centuries have been trying to articulate. Augustine says it's pride today. And I was listening. I did a video that will release probably Monday or Tuesday about rebel wisdom talking to Chris Williamson. They might say it's ego. There's a whole bunch of words that we have contending for the idea of what satanic is. I'm going to stick with Lewis and say rebellion. Now, this is where the God number one stuff gets really tricky and where the problem of evil arises. Because part of what paganism affords is our certain answers to the problem of evil. And the answers are sometimes, well, why are there bad things, things that we call bad? Why are there bad things in the world? Because there are bad agents, bad heavenly beings, bad agents who are bringing bad things into the world. Now, is that built into the story in Genesis three? This is where some of the purity that modern Jewish scholars imagine that this particular vision of biblical religion, as Christine Hayes calls it, I think starts to break down. And why Christian writers in later centuries mapped Satan onto the serpent in the garden. And why they mapped New Testament Satan onto the accuser in the book of Job. The glove fits really well if the glove fits. So the problem of evil, if God is a renek, how do we account for if God is good and God is all powerful and God is a renek? Why is the arena so dangerous? So sometimes so hostile, seemingly to our welfare. So I'm still trying to plan for a conversation between myself and JP Marceau about the problem of evil. And these are a bunch of the issues with the problem of evil. Because if someone like John Vervecky looks around and says, I don't think a good, rational, loving God would seemingly create so much, even the good things that we have seem to come out of a long process and history of pain, suffering and waste. It's a powerful argument. And I think that argument that argument flows out of an intuition that flows out of an intuition that we can very easily get when a lot of our views of the world are opened up by science, especially if that is sitting alongside of this spirit that we see in Genesis 3. That you see at the prologue to the book of Job and that you see in New Testament Christianity, this hermeneutic of suspicion that maybe the renek God isn't very good. And so what Judaism and Christianity actually managed to accomplish by doing what the Greeks were not able to, by putting together an image of a God who is agentic and arenic. The Greeks tried with the fates, but the God of the Hebrews is not faked. He's too agentic for that. And you see this tension in Greek mythology between the arenic and the agentic. And they're trying to square that and the Hebrews do it better than anybody else. But that tends to accentuate the question of the problem of evil. And so I understand why someone like John Vervecky would say, I just don't know if I can believe that the world is good. And if you go back to my conversation with with Nathan, I asked him and so I sort of said, well, is, and this is what you see in Jordan Peterson when Jordan Peterson basically says, being is the kind of thing that can be negotiated with and one again, Jordan Peterson, partially because of modernity, at least publicly sticks to God number one. That's his whole shtick. And so when Jordan Peings said, but he he he gives away little tells when he says things like when he looks at his the question of sacrifice and says, being seems to be negotiated with you can pray to it. And and and if you if you start with the assumption that being is good, better things seem to come about, which is sort of deep down gives us an instinct and an intuition that maybe being is good. But I think when I talk to John Vervecky and JP Marceau about the problem of evil, I'm going to bring this in and say, is, is being neutral. Because I think if you start with being being neutral, I think you're basically remapping the pagan, Medi-Divine realm. And I think modern secular skepticism and atheism basically remaps the pet of the Medi-Divine realm and says being is morally neutral. And but now suddenly you have a different problem of evil because if being is neutral, evil is always an aspect of agency. In other words, it doesn't have its own ontology either. And and I think it's for that reason that Christians have long in the face of this atheistic being is neutral posture suspected your morality is on slippery slope. And it's looking increasingly arbitrary. And it's arbitrary because it's always the function of a perspective of an agent within the neutral arena. And that that evil is simply something which is not to my tastes. And then it's no longer evil. And I've got a whole bunch of ideas that I have this morning that I haven't had time to develop yet. But some of that stuff is going to continue to come out. So sorry about this. I totally derailed your question. I'll get back to it right now. Do you think Lewis's portrayal of the Aaronic view of God as satanic, at least in these cases, is motivated? This question does not make sense. The less edited question is more citation here. I've just spent half hour on the edited question, so I'm not going to I'm going to resist. I'm going to resist the temptation to click on this link and take us another hour into this rabbit hole. In other words, I don't know if I can answer the question right now. But I think I did give you a mapping of what my current thinking is about. I think Satan in biblical theology connected up with ideas of morality, of good and evil, of the Aaronic and the agentic. I think Satan is best understood as a heavenly being, really sort of how Milton did. And as the New Testament does, a fallen heavenly being. Satan is a heavenly being. God is not a being, but I got to be really careful about modalism here because I know Sam is listening very carefully to everything I say. And Sam is every every time I talk in some reasons, I got a little Sam on my shoulder. You know, you're going to betray your Trinitarianism? You're going to betray your Trinitarianism, VanderKlai? Tempt me, get behind me, Sam. But, you know, the I think in some ways part of the reason the divinity of Christ and the doctrine of the Trinity developed the way it did is because at some level the church fathers were wrestling with these issues. Now, they might not have used the language that I'm using, but I think Kaufman is right that this is fundamentally the boundary line between the religion of the Bible and paganism. And Christianity gets, I think, to a higher resolution on these issues. And now, again, some people who are really over on the the the agentic side get very nervous. And people who are on the on the arenic side get very nervous because Christianity, I think, says Christianity in some ways deconstructs the agent arena relationship. And so the best way to understand Satan is a being of light that rebelled and led other beings, led other agents, other spirits in rebellion. And in Christianity, God is categorically different from Satan. And you see this, you know, I was reading the we're doing the We were doing the the Temptations of Christ in our Adult Men's Bible Study. And that's such a fun place for me because I love doing I love doing Bible studies with with my friends who are just sort of reading the Bible. And I don't mean this pejoratively, reading the Bible naively because they haven't read everything I've read about the Bible. And so but but yet they are bringing fresher things to it in some ways. And they are they are I can hear the culture resonate in how they are resonating with the biblical story. So I was going through the Temptations of Christ and I came and of course I've I have read this story many times and I've studied this story many times. This is a preacher. You you get that, especially as in the last number of years, I've been doing the lectionary more than I have in the past. And so like the Temptations of Christ is a text that you come around to with great regularity. But but this time when I was reading it, I noticed at the end of the interchange between Jesus and Satan. Jesus is so dismissive of Satan that that it's clear that Jesus is not talking to an equal. You know, it's like when a good parent, one way to know the difference between a bad parent, a good parent is watch that parent deal with a toddler. Because a bad parent will either be tyrannical when there's no need to be tyrannical because they're not going to be able to deal with a child. Or a bad parent will be deferential to a toddler. And that just reveals the inner weaknesses of the bad parent. The good parent will engage the toddler with seriousness, but knows that the toddler is absolutely no match. And the toddler will play all sorts of games with the parent. You know, I don't love you. You're bad. And the bad parent will start sucking their thumb because the toddler just trigger their insecurity and that parent is going to have a bad time, as will that child for years to come. Because the parents triggers are all over their body and the kid is going to lay waste to the home because of the parent's weakness. The tyrannical parent also works out of an insecurity. The good parent will deal with the toddler. And then when the toddler starts making threats, the parent will, what you going to do? You're too. You're going to throw a tantrum? Have at it. You're going to hold your breath? You know, I love the story of Jordan Peterson when there's some unruly toddler and some inexperienced parent. And he hears about this in his practice and the parent says, my kid will hold his breath long enough to pass out. Jordan's like, I want to see that because there's a strong willed child and you don't find many of them. And so he gets to watch this kid pass out. And I heard that. I'm with Jordan on that. If you got a kid out there that will hold their breath until they pass out, please take a video of that. And it's kind of like going and seeing Yellowstone. It's kind of a peculiarity and you want to see it. But we went from Satan to kids holding their breath and passing out. This is the tragedy of me. ADHD. Can't walk a straight line. I'm a child. I'm a child. I'm a child. This is the tragedy of me. ADHD. Can't walk a straight line. Anyway, how did we get there? Jesus and Satan are at two totally different levels. Jesus is not. And this is this is part of the reason I'm a Trinitarian. Jesus is not merely as, let's say, the Jehovah's Witnesses would say. Jesus is not merely sort of like Satan. No, Christianity says Jesus is Christianity says the most audacious things. And so I have a lot of understanding why Jews and Unitarians and non-Trinitarian Christians of all stripes say I've got serious objections to this idea. Understandable because it's a whale of an idea to try and get your mind around. But like many good Christian doctrines, we sort of embrace it. Not because we necessarily grasp it wholly. But because we can see it's better than the alternatives. So I didn't plan this morning to give do a lot of thinking about Satan. That was kind of on my mental list. Like, I really have to think more about the satanic. So thanks for the opportunity to do that. There's 40 minutes of not answering your question. Sorry about that. But I'll pray for your feet and your back. And I'll pray ahead of the pain, too. All right. Altice. Alt House. How do you think about modernity with my brain? Many people, me included, feel the modern world took a bad turn or the world took a bad turn in modernity. But where to turn to? Back to the 90s, back to the 50s, back to the 1900s before the French Revolution. Exactly. And in that way, modernity for Christians is sort of like can't live with it, can't live without it right now. Because like the microphone, the computer, the nice electricity, moving my fan, the electric lights, Rick over in the other room, you know, anticipation of Job, you know, giving me a super chat and running Rick across the building. And that being a fun joke. Thanks, modernity. Oh, yeah. And reliable food and medicine and and then all the downsides of all those things, too. Or maybe the Reformation was the problem. And the gift. But if we believe Tom Holland, isn't the Reformation heir the consequence of the philosophical development of the 12th century that founded the West? Yes. And if you read, you know, he's playing with those ideas and Millennium. But when he gets the dominion, he begins to realize, oh, gosh, these ideas go all the way back to the Hebrew prophets. These ideas go all the way back to these issues that I was just talking about in the first question. These these ideas go all the way back to the. How do you even say this stuff? When the Hebrew prophets mock. The gods of their neighbors. Not as. Let's say a Babylonian viewing the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem would mock. A Jerusalemite say, my God's better than yours. When the Babylonian said that. Marduk and the Lord were two contenders. Standing on level playing field within the meta divine realm. But when he when Ezekiel sees the vision. And is like. Why would the Lord be above this irrigation canal in Babylon? Weren't you beaten by Marduk again in the imagine the spiritual imaginary of the Babylonians? Part of the reason that Israel's God can't go there is because this is Marduk's territory. And you know, you get some of this language in the Book of Daniel. You know where the heavenly messenger tried to get to Daniel, but he was a pro. He was opposed by the Prince of Persia. And so, you know, read Frank Paredi. And so the messenger had to get a bigger angel to come and push the Prince of Persia away so that the messenger could come to Daniel. That's all this stuff goes all the way back to the Hebrew prophets. And Christianity is a development of that. And I would argue, as Tom Holland does, that when the Hebrew prophets stay, say, your idols are stock and stone. There's a demythologizing that they've done. That set modernity. That that that that almost made modernity inevitable. So this morning on Twitter, I was mocking. Shermer and Dawkins. Because they're saying things like. We got rid of religion because of the Enlightenment. These people that say the Enlightenment is a Christian idea or a Christian heresy, even they're foolish. It's like, oh, so the Enlightenment happened in a Christianity free clean room. That idea is historically untenable. And it is easy to see later on in their little conversation because. They go on to say, well, what about Islam? Well, Islam. So first, first Shermer asked Dawkins. Well, do you think religion is really going to go away? And Dawkins says probably only in the Christian West. You just you just gave up your answer. Why would Christianity only go away in the Christian West and not in the rest of the world? Because it's a product. Of the Christian West. Atheism is a product of the Christian West. And I made a couple of mocking analogies on Twitter. It's like the person that comes away from a beautiful, pristine, now mostly empty California reservoir. With a beautiful glass of water and says. Don't drink water from the clouds, only drink it from the lake. Where do you think the lake got its water? Well, I don't think I think Islam is going to stay. I think Islam is going to stay religious, but not Western Christendom. Well, where did Christian Western Christendom get its get its atheism from? And I'd argue with Tom Holland, it goes all the way back to the Hebrew. To the Hebrew prophets when they said. This is your your gods are stock and stone. Stock is English way of saying wood. So there's a little American English question there. But and not only when they said it, but when it was understood in a very Barfieldian way as a loss of participation. You know, initial participation was gone and you have this you have this space in between that affords us modernity. And that has been carried through. Jesus, Jesus does it when Jesus says. Which is astounding thing that he says it's it's not the food that you put into your body that makes you unclean. He is right there with the Hebrew prophets, and he is basically saying. Day gone is a god of wood and stone. The Lord is a living God. Now you can understand that within a meta divine realm, so to a degree, but then Marduk is going to protect his borders and not let the God of the Hebrews sneak in and talk to his people. So. I think the Protestant Reformation and modernity. Now, again, you're saying, well, you darn Calvinist was in some ways inevitable. And it was seeded by the Hebrew scriptures and the Hebrew prophets. Maybe we should think of the modernity as an old dying king. Yep, because the king is dying right now and. So then the last way that I mocked Shermer and Dawkins was. I found on YouTube this great clip. If you've ever watched Arrested Development. And you watch Tobias. I mean an ongoing joke in that show is is Tobias gay. And at one point, his brother-in-law says, you know, if you just record everything you say, play it back and listen to it. Because everybody else is seeing Tobias in a certain light. Tobias doesn't see himself in that light. So Tobias goes and actually records himself and plays it back. And he can't see it then either. That's exactly the way it is with these guys. I think religion is probably going to go away probably in Western Christendom. OK, Mr. Science and Logic. Why? Don't drink water from the sky, only from the lake. Your fresh water comes from the sky. Go ahead, Tobias, record everything you say. So no, it is a dying king now. He's he's not that weak and he's not that senile. And. You know, this is this is where. You know, this is part of the reason why I continue to think about the question of Julian versus Peugeot. On is Christianity revolutionary? Or. A monarchy. Modernity isn't going away. And you watch because, you know, even radical postmodernists who. Who want to deconstruct everything. And again, this morning, I pinned on Twitter, your religion is the thing you refuse to deconstruct. I saw that first when James Lindsay was talking to me. Your religion is the thing you refuse to deconstruct. You need to not deconstruct something in order to be someone sort of in the way that you know how random numbers are generated by computers. And the reason computers can't random can't generate random numbers, the only way computers can. Attempt to approach a random number. Is by grab is by trying to grab something that to us seems arbitrary and the law and you know, run, let's say the date. Through some elaborate algorithm, but what you need, you need just you need just that seed of randomness. In order to compile your randomness. So, modernity isn't going away. Because. The, because the level the propositional truth that is correspondence with physicality is an essential aspect of this creation and modernity. Is in some ways and intensification and the the the king of modernity has OCD about physical correlation. Truth as correlation with physicality. Just this morning I was talking to Rick and we were talking about the fact that for some people a certain degree of craziness is helpful. And I mentioned if you have a cleaning person. If they have enough OCD to be really careful with cleaning that sort of makes a good cleaning person, because they'll see stuff they'll see dirt that you won't see. They'll certainly don't see dirt that I don't see because anybody who's been to my office knows. That's not what I got. Rick will agree. I haven't vacuumed this carpet in probably 20 years. I know I just horrified a whole bunch of you but one of these days I'm gonna have to empty out this carpet and empty out this office and tear out the carpet because it's really getting pretty gross. Anyway. Modernity isn't going away. Yes, he's an OCD king about correlation to physicality. But you're you're you're never going to get rid of that. In this realm of existence, it's just too important and too powerful. So, but but modernity is in some ways, an obsessive compulsive, an obsessive compulsive preoccupation with that sort of truth. And again, back to Shermer and Dawkins. That was an attempt to correct corruption that had built into the culture in the church where, you know, suddenly everything is symbolic and part of the weakness of symbolism is, if you're not doing it right, anything can mean anything. And, you know, you just deal with enough BS in your world that you say, give it up. I want, I want something to correlate. So, where am I? But that does not erase what he has once good and strong king. That's right. And that that king is not going away. You know, I liked in the movie, the mate, the movies, the Matrix, where the old program stuck around. And so it was kind of cool how they represented the key maker and a bunch of these other old programs. They still have value in the Matrix. And that's why the king is going to maintain, maintain a degree of strength. And this is where sort of the spiral dynamics people, I think, have a point that the old stuff. It gets incorporated in the new. Now, what's what the spiral dynamic image doesn't quite put together well is that we're also forgetful and we're also limited. And we're also foolish. And so we ignore and forget a lot of the old stuff. And you get that in Tolkien, you know, where the ring is forgotten. And, you know, when in even the lousy movie, The Hobbit, when Saruman and and gladriel and Gandalf and Elrond are discussing what the council should do. Ah, that old ring is gone. It was flowed out to the sea. What if the ring has been found? What if what if in Dol Guldur, Sauron is attempting to reinstantiate himself and is drawing an army? So the old code is still in there. And a lot of because we have so much old code now, and partly because we have so much we're so good at information now. So much of the old code is accessible and hasn't been for a while. So you'll get, you know, new temples to Woden put together again. That's old code reasserting itself. How to respect the memory of the old king and prepare ourselves for finding the new one. That's exactly right. Especially when there is no clear heir to the throne. And this is where we get into is Christianity revolutionary or, you know, so if you look at, I think, again, Peugeot's my favorite video of Peugeot's, which is parasitic storytelling. He ends with the return of the king. And that's, in fact, how the Bible ends with the return of the king. The second coming is the return of the king. Now, the return of the king and Revelation is not. So you have Revelation, the book of Revelation is in many ways an updating of the Hebrew prophets with from the disciples of Jesus. And so the king returns with a new heaven and a new earth. That's all I've got to say about that. Next question. What was that a question? I don't know. I have a lot of explanation parts in there. That's a good question. These are just all prompts for me to rift and get stuff off my chest and figure that out. Yeah, that's why it's such a bad question. Answer. Anyway. Hey, Paul, first time question or a long time listener. Welcome. What is the difference? Erigene. Interesting name. What is the difference between the meek and humble and being pathetic or a failure? It's the same difference between I talked about the toddler and the good parent. A good parent is humble even with a toddler because the toddler might have a point. Here she is a toddler, but they're not dumb and they are witnesses. CS Lewis has in his book, Miracles, a great chapter on horrid red things. I think it's one of the best chapters of the book. He talks about a little girl that thinks that poison is stuff with horrid red things in it. Lewis talks about the fact that now most of us adults aren't going to think that way. But if you go into the girl's house and the girl says don't eat that, that's poison. And you might say I'm going to dismiss what she tells me because she thinks poison is horrid red things. Lewis says you'd be wise not to think that way because although the little girl has pictures in her mind of horrid red things, at a deep level she knows what poison is. So the toddler does too. And I think actually humility and meekness have much more to do with the spirit of finesse. And arrogance has a lot to do with the spirit of geometry. Because what geometry, for those of us who know only a little bit of math, geometry can puff us up with visions of our grandeur and with delusions of certainty in some cases. And the more knowledgeable mathematician will, by virtue of all that they know, on one hand be able to manage certainty with algebra and arithmetic, but also understand the limitations of their knowledge. And so the pathetic person is the parent who is being controlled by a toddler. That person is not humble. That person is weak. The tyrant who is a tyrant over the toddler has sort of a same opposite weakness because the secure person can be humble and meek with a toddler because they're not threatened by the toddler. The tyrant is a tyrant because the tyrant feels threatened. And so, you know, we're talking about Mark Driscoll. It sounds terribly trite. But my guess is inside Mark Driscoll, there's a scared little boy who maybe saw his mommy got beaten and so decided, my friend Rod has this great little idea about these little vows that we make. That scared little boy maybe seeing his mom get beaten or some woman get beaten and feeling himself too small to defend her, somewhere in his mind made a little promise to himself, I'll never let another man beat a woman again. Now, that's not a bad wish. That's a good wish. But the humble and the meek are actually far more powerful and know their power than the tyrant or the panty waste. So, yeah, I said that word. I'm sure the live chat is blowing up right now. And I'm sure Joey is very happy he disabled memes and images because, yeah, I... So anyway, that's the difference. If you won't mind me explaining my reason for this question, no, I'd love to hear it. I recently found myself going towards agnosticism or Christian atheism like that Nathan guy that was kicked off from the Discord. What put me down that path was more of moral weakness and willingly choosing sin instead of practicing my beliefs and my relationship with Christ rather than theology. So being in a weak state, I didn't have the moral character to handle criticism of Christianity. Yeah, that's right. And that's why humility and meekness is actually far more powerful because this is a strange dynamic that Tim Keller says better than almost anybody I know. You have to be tremendously strong in a certain way to be tremendously honest and open and vulnerable and meek and even weak in another way. God could send his son to become our victim and to become Satan's victim because God knew Satan was in a completely different category. Jesus could be tempted by the devil and the temptations be real. And that could be done responsibly because Jesus was in a completely different category. Now, right there, you're caught on a whole bunch of issues. Well, then was he really tempted? And those issues don't go away. Those issues will always be with us. But again, something like the Trinity is nested in this entire economy of those kinds of issues. So you're right. In some ways, I got to be careful here because in some ways, I don't worry too much about deconstruction with some people because I think for them, it's going to be the path towards reconstructing a better faith, one that is more robust, but also more pliable. The reason we don't build bridges out of cast iron is because it's brittle. Part of the amazing strength of steel is that it is both strong and has flex. And that's what strength is like. And that's what meekness and humility is like. And that's why Jesus is so powerful because on one hand, he stills a storm like he's telling a little dog to go sit in its corner. And on the other hand, oh, thank you, Vixen Dixon for tacos. Thank you. On the other hand, the bruised reed he will not break and the smoldering wick he will not snuff out. That's power. So you see that with a doctor. If you come in and say, doctor, I have a pain and he smashes your foot and says, how's that other pain feel now? That is not a good doctor. A good doctor is both strong and gentle. It's again, as Tim Keller pulled this out from Jonathan Edwards, it's these, I always forget the exact words. It's these incongruous discord and excellencies. And when you play games, Rick was talking to me about World of Warcraft. So he was explaining you have these tanks and these healers and then, oh, shoot, I forget that, the damage doers, the shooters. And so the good squad in World of Warcraft has someone to take the damage, someone to inflict the damage and someone to sustain the two. There's three. And part of the reason again, Christianity is so powerful is you say, well, we'll have limited and if not, limitless won't help you. It's you've got to be strong and flexible. You've got to be confident and humble. You have to be powerful and see meekness can be like weakness, but it can also be like nuance. So I'm still moved by Christ in particular, the Beatitudes in Mark 9 35. Does moral scrupulousness bring you closer to God? Even if you lack belief, it may. But like with so many things, moral scrupulousity can be an expression of insecurity and weakness, because what you're doing with that moral scrupulousity is you are trying to be your own savior and lord. Or moral scrupulousity can be a witness of great strength because moral scrupulousity might manifest the fact that you love and care for others. In other words, is your morality a strategy? Is your morality a self preservation strategy? Because finally inside you are a tiny little creature that is insecure and terrified of the extinction of your own existence. Or is your morality a testimony to the fact that you believe that the being of this world is finally good and in the end God will win? There are two different motivations for moral scrupulousity. And this is why I every week almost will have in my sermons misery deliverance gratitude. Because if your morality is motivated by gratitude, it is far safer and far stronger than morality motivated by fear. Because morality motivated by fear will often in the end betray itself because this satanic, because in some ways self preservationism will finally trump it. And it's those questions that we deal with in morality all the time. How can God give us strength to help this world and why should we love our enemies? I'll answer the second question first. And the answer is in the Beatitudes. Or after the Beatitudes actually. Go through the Beatitudes and then the end of that section before Jesus gets into the three main expressions of piety of prayer, almsgiving and fasting. God sends the rain to fall on the just and the unjust. God sends the sun to shine on the fields of the just and the unjust. Be perfect as your father in heaven is perfect. Now, it was a number of years ago when I read that because again, you wind up as a preacher, you wind up reading these texts over and over again, often in different contexts and with different people in mind. Before I used to think of this be perfect as moral scupulosity. Do this, don't do that. Do this, don't do that. And okay, fair enough. But what I failed to notice was that the context of that command, be perfect, was not in moral scrupulosity, but in generosity. That's why you should love your enemies because Christ does and did. If he's are Philippians too. And because he loved his enemies, he's raised to the highest place. Now you can see this in Peugeotian terms because Jonathan's idea of Christ filling out the hierarchy, I had never thought in those terms before until I listened to Peugeot and oh, there it is. So that's why you should love your enemies. Also why is because while you were God's enemy, Christ died for you. In other words, he goes first. And again, back to the toddler and the good parent. The toddler says, I don't love you. And the good parent smiles and thinks, but I love you. And however you're feeling about me right now, you're a toddler. What's critical in this relationship is how I feel about you. And you can hold your breath and you can throw a fit and you can smack your brother and you can throw over the plants and you do all manner of things to try and be my enemy. But in the end, my love counts. Now, if the toddler continues to live in this rebellion all the days of that toddler's life. At some point. The parent, as Louis says. Well, you obviously don't want me. So I won't bother you. I was listening actually, YouTube served up conversation between Larry Elder and Ben Shapiro. And I listened to it and Larry Elder told this beautiful story about how Larry hated his father, hate couldn't stand his father, angry with his father, went away to college and law school and got a great degree and all. And then at one point something happened. I don't remember exactly what it is. He saw his father in another light. And so he flew home and he sat and he sat down with his father after his father was done a long day's work and just spent, you know, told his father everything he hated about him and everything that was wrong with his father. And afterwards his father said, Is that all you got? And he was dumbfounded as you know, and now a young adult. What do you mean? Is that all I got? I just I just rained down all the most horrible things I could against you. And his father said, Let me tell you about my life. And his father started to tell him a story about how he grew up in the Jim Crow South and and what he had to face. And then when he moved to LA, what he had to face there and how hard he worked and everything he did. And then suddenly Larry Elder saw his father in a whole new light. And he loved his father. But the critical thing was not Larry Elder's feelings for his father. The critical thing was through all of those years of Larry Elder. And he said, I literally did not speak to my father. I avoided my father. I loved my mother, but I avoided my father. The critical thing was not Larry Elder's rebellion against his father. The critical thing was the enduring love the father had for his son. So the strength God gives us to help the world flows from that enduring love that the father has for us while we are yet sinners. And so we are his children and we are like toddlers. We get upset when he says no. We kick over stuff. The only thing is we're bigger than toddlers and we're smarter than toddlers and we're longer lived than toddlers. So we make way bigger messes than toddlers. And whereas if you watch toddlers play, they sort of play side by side. At some point, if you listen to Jordan Peterson talk about childhood development, at some point little children learn to have negotiated play, which is more satisfying because you can play bigger games. Well, we have played far bigger games and have messed up the playroom in really dramatic ways. But it's the enduring love of the father. And sometimes the father will say, oh, you're going to hold your breath. All right, I'll watch. No, I want a negotiation. Oh, the humble and meek parent will to one degree or another negotiate with their two year old. You will get ice cream when you finish your dinner. I want ice cream now. I understand that. You will get ice cream when you finish your dinner. There might be a time when the wise parent will, because of what happened in that little child's day, bend the rule and say, usually I don't give you ice cream. And again, the kid can't understand all the words that are coming out of the parent's mouth. But let's let's have ice cream before dinner tonight. It's been a tough day. And you and me will sit down and we'll have ice cream before dinner. And that'll be a special day. Most of the other days, it's first dinner, then ice cream. So that is how God is with us. And we are his toddlers. And sometimes we throw fits, have tantrums, push over the plants, smash our little fists against the door, throw our toys. And sometimes the parent says, well, you're going to set a time out. I don't want to set a time out. You're evil. That's how we are. All right. That's how we're doing for time. Yeah, let's see. Oh, gosh. You keep adding. OK. No more questions today. All right. And it's my fault, of course. Gosh. OK. Hi, Paul. I was wondering what your opinion is on dirty language. I have noticed that you tend to use words that would be considered cuss words. I find you a really interesting thinker, but sometimes I can't get over the fact that you use some language you do since I don't normally respect people, especially Christians who talk in such ways. Nothing against you. But I was just curious about it as a part of your speech. I use it. So Mark Driscoll and Nadia Bolz Weber are just a little bit younger than me. And the boomers are just a little bit older than me. So I've got a little bit extra in me and I got a little bit of boomer in me. So sometimes I use these words for effect intentionally, and sometimes I'm just expressing. It's just expression. And we should use our speech to build up. Now, it's funny you asked this question today because I'm preaching on the book of Galatians this week and the book of Galatians quite famously has the Apostle Paul using some pretty unrestricted speech. I wish those I wish those people demanding circumcision would take the knife and go all the way and emasculate themselves as the nicer NIV says. Megan Oita, Greek. How do we translate that? Hell no. So yeah, it's something I think about every now and then I'll say something I think. What I don't want. So here's here's a dilemma that I face. If I never use a cuss word. Certain people aren't going to have any respect for me because I continue to reinforce in them. The idea that preachers are the kinds of creatures you see on stupid comedy shows who have I watched stir crazy again that I saw Gene Wilder and Richard Pryor. And there's a scene early in the movie where there's this young handsome Catholic priest sitting next to a very attractive young woman. And the joke is that the cook has accidentally cooked Richard Pryor's pot stash into most of the meal. And so everyone is there a little bit high and doing stuff and and they're thinking it's the wine and this very attractive woman is coming on to the priest and the priest has no idea about human sexuality. That's just dumb writing. Because any man who would take a valve celibacy probably has a better awareness of the temptations of the flesh than those who have opportunity to indulge themselves. So every now and then I'll sprinkle a word in for emphasis because I want to communicate to an audience for whom these words have set different resonance and tone. But yet at the same time, part of my audience like yourself, and there are a few commenters that I know by their comments on the YouTube channel that whenever I drop a word like that I hear about it. So we have these two competing cultures and in some ways cultures about the use of language. And so I often sort of straddle that line. I want I want to use these words for effect as the Apostle Paul did. Look at I don't I don't know what swearing looked like in Aramaic. But when you look at some of the images Jesus threw at some of the people around him, it's pretty rough. But if you read broadly primary sources in antiquity, they talk to each other in some pretty rough ways that today we look at and say that's not terribly kind. And C.S. Lewis notes that kindness is one of these prevailing values in our culture. And it's good kindness is a good value. But you can idolize kindness so it's good question. I'll sometimes drop words like that. But I appreciate your input. And I think what we're dealing with are cultural things. You find this with immigrants. Immigrants can cuss like a sailor sometimes because those are the English words they use depending on where they picked up the language. I had some of the same issues when I started learning Spanish. I most missionaries went down to this Spanish language school in Costa Rica for a year. And they learned Spanish in a very structured setting very well. When I went to the Dominican Republic, the people there said, we don't have to send you to Costa Rica. Let's have you learn language in the country. That's why when I speak Spanish, some people look at me like, Spanish you speak. And part of it was I was learning Spanish sort of in the streets. And so I was using some words and then I'd have sometimes have some of the missionaries sort of pull me aside and say, because they had a much more educated level of middle class Spanish and finer Spanish. And I kind of learned Spanish from the streets. And so they'll say, my Spanish isn't particularly good, but they'll say, you probably shouldn't use that word in church. I didn't know. I obviously know in my language of origin, but I also know because I'm also living between cultures like the word shit. There are a lot of Canadians in the Christian Reformed Church. I went to college with a lot of Canadians. And the word shit south of the border has a different resonance with the word shit north of the border. I was joking with John Van Donk the other day that my friend Gary Van Veen, who was a missionary with me in the Dominican Republic, he would sometimes speak a little bit of Dutch to one of the missionaries who came to the Dominican Republic through Canada, but grew up in the Netherlands. He had great Dutch. He would listen to Gary, who was the son of an immigrant who grew up on a dairy farm, listen to him tell the jokes that he told and use the phrases that he looked at. This good Christian Hollander looked at him and said, you shouldn't talk that way. Gary didn't know. He grew up on a dairy. And if you listen to the Last Friday in Paul show and you listen to the kind of songs and saying John Van Donk sports, well, there you have it. So but Job has a far better understanding of that about John Van Donk than I do because Job speaks the language and I don't. So all right. Hey, Paul, can I get off on that? Yeah, go ahead. Can you possibly differentiate maybe which which words there are? Because I think there's a lot of confusion between using the Lord's name in vain and poor language. And can you maybe tell us a little bit of how you decide on which ones are OK and maybe which ones are still pretty strictly against biblical teaching? Thanks. I don't like using phrases like, oh, my Lord, or oh, God. I don't like saying those things. And maybe I slipped in some places, but you'll almost never hear me say those things because I think that's taking the Lord's name in vain. And when I. If you followed me enough, you know that I'm really careful about masking offense. It doesn't mean that I don't feel offense. I work very hard to mask offense because I don't often find that expressing offense is productive in pursuing the kinds of outcomes in the conversations I want. So I get far more offended. When people use the word Jesus as I get far more offended by that. Well, why? Because I love Jesus and Jesus is a very real person to me. And so I'm I'm very careful about those things. And in a similar way, if if your wife is named Nancy or your daughter's name, Nancy or your mom is named Nancy, I'm sorry, not Nancy Karen. There's a whole bunch of people who are there's a whole bunch of Karen's out there in the world right now who are really offended about the way that their name is being used. I understand that. You know, the word the name Adolf was ruined for a few generations by one man. So no, that's a really good point. I'm much more. Using coarse language, as I would call it. I think that's what Paul does in Galatians. And now dropping F bombs, I think increasingly has just become de jure in a lot of places. You see it on movies. The problem with using language like that is. Some of these some some coarse language cuss words. Have rhetorical impact. And if you use them all the time, you lose their rhetorical impact. It's the same problem with the way the word racist is being used. If everyone's a racist, no one's a racist. And the distinction between a racist and a non racist is a helpful distinction that ought not to be lost in the economy of our language. So. We should use language carefully and to language should be used for building up. And but yet Jesus and the Apostle Paul use language harshly against their critics. And so, yeah, but now when it comes to I love Jesus. Why would I use his name like that? I love my God. Why would I use his name like that? So obviously that comes through Christianity. And but I think it's easy for almost anyone to understand. So good point. Hello, Paul. I hope this is a typo. Your fiend, Eric Dirksen. I call him my friend. I don't think he's a fiend. Posted a tweet today about being a consultant for elected officials as a joke about Biden's recent use of use of Isaiah. It prompted me to ask him. And now you are perhaps silly question that's been lingering with me for a while. Revelation singular. I get very picky about that. I don't know why. Revelation, because it's not a book of just revelations. The book is the revelation of Jesus Christ. The book is the revelation of Jesus Christ. Really, the Old Testament prophets poured through the revelation of Jesus Christ. That's what that book is. It's why I'm particular about it. Said they could not buy or sell unless they had the mark, which is the name of the beast or the number of its name. Right. Now I know the mark isn't the vaccine or the passport, which is, of course, where everybody's going to go. The argument of a vaccine passport to buy things in California fall under a symbolic microcosm of that system in Revelation. Sure. Just like our Social Security numbers do, which was when the Social Security administration was created in the United States and it was rolled out. A bunch of Christians said, this is clearly a mark of the beast. How about the license on your driver's license? The number on your driver's license. And therefore it would be best for us to not participate in the system that requires a passport on principle. Maybe. I think there is a place in the Christian ecosystem for outliers. So we're going to take our symbolism thinking and we're going to take our hierarchy thinking and we're going to hold them together. I don't believe Christianity requires me to be a pacifist. What do I mean by pacifist? Someone who will not participate in the state's agency of the sword. I believe as a Christian, I can be a police officer. I believe as a Christian, I can serve in the military. I believe as a Christian, I can hold elected office. Now there's a tradition within Anabaptists of very strict pacifism. And well, how to apply that? Well, a percentage of the money that you give to the United States government and to your local government and to your sales tax. Goes to police. Goes to prop up the state's monopoly of violence. Should you not buy anything in the store that requires sales tax? How pure are you going to be? So my thinking is that if there are some Christians who decide to make a stand on this, okay, I can respect that. I'm not going to take that stand. Because there's combinatorial explosiveness about moral issues and purity all around us. And so part of wisdom is deciding when to take stands. And nobody mastered this better than Jesus. You know, again, on one hand, they come up to him and say, the Pharisees come up and say, we've noticed that we fast and the disciples of John fast, but your disciples are not fasting. Are you going to pay that temple tax? I mean, there are all these little cultural gotchas that if you understand the context and the Gospels, there are these it's like, oh, you're a pacifist. Do you pay sales tax? Because if you were a pure pacifist, you would object to paying sales tax and bucking up the state of California's violence at the hands of the police. The same thing goes for for woke ism and all kinds of purity is is a is a very rare commodity in this world. So I think in the microcosm, how do we read the snake in Genesis, the serpent manipulating language with Eve? Yeah. And from what he could say, something like we shouldn't manipulate what people say to us to deceive or to win arguments. And manipulation is a really what, when is it manipulation and when is it convincing? It depends on the frame. Because if you know, as right now it's being parlayed in the Washington Post, if you believe that. A horse backs, a horse dewormer is better than a Pfizer vaccine. Well, it depends on your frame, because for some, the medical industrial complex is evil incarnate. And they feel much more comfortable getting a veterinary drug. Not me, not me. The vaccines available, I'll take it. If they want to put another one in, I'm OK with that. I've had tetanus vaccines. I'm supposed to get the shingles vaccine. I've had vaccines for measles, some ways in for a penny in for a pound. One of these vaccines going to kill me. I'm probably going to die from what I willingly put in my mouth more than what the doctor wants to shoot in my arm. Now, I think a government, you know, we see this in Australians and some other places. I think governments need to be very careful about how they go about these things. There are deep psychological reasons. It's amazing. Any of us allow anybody to come at us with a needle. And, you know, we talk about, you know, bullshitting. Oh, if they're wearing a white coat, then then they could stick a needle in me. You know, if if I came from work and my wife said, I got naked in front of a man and he put his hands all over my private parts. Who went why? And she said, I went to the doctor. Oh. Framing. So. Is it reasonable or am I just making a distinction? No, I think these are I think these are valid questions to talk through. And but but it's all in the realm of possibility and probability and framing. I feel like 21 plus ID cards or credit cards could be seen as the same microcosm as well. Absolutely. And and so when you talk about, let's say, a cashless society, I mean, there's real reason for the government to love to get rid of cash. And there's a real reason in the United States that the government doesn't produce bills larger than one hundred dollars. And there's a real reason why if you come into the United States with more than ten thousand dollars in your pocket in cash, you have to declare the government doesn't like cash. The government likes Bitcoin even less because the government can't track and control it. But we all sort of have this hazy compromise with the government about tracking and controlling because the government, you know, and again, it's like all the memes on the Internet. I don't want anyone tracking me. Would I like a smartphone in my pocket? Yes, please. Well, you're the government isn't tracking you. You're bugging and tracking yourself. And not only isn't the government mandating that you carry it, but you're paying for it to happen. And the reason you're doing is because you're getting other things you want out of the exchange. And so when I got the vaccine, it was an exchange. And part of the reason I was OK with it is because a lot of other people got it. They seem to be doing OK and they are testing and seems to be efficacious. And part of the reason of it was social. I wasn't particularly scrupulous about covid. You know, I'll talk to Freddie without a mask. I deal with homeless people without a mask. I would rather talk face to face without a mask because the value for me of us seeing each other's faces is higher than the risk that I was taking with respect to this virus. But I'm sharing a home with other people who were much more sensitive to it. And so on a way to get to take the vaccine just kind of got family and friends off my back and made everybody feel better. So so I took it and I'm happy I took it. And if they have boosters, I'll get another one. Now, I've had all the children I'm going to have. I'm in my late 50s. I'm relatively healthy. All of those things are factors as well. They should. And I I think it's reasonable. In certain situations to say, you know, well, if you're if you're unvaccinated, maybe you shouldn't come to this meeting or maybe you should wear a mask. That sounds reasonable to me. Can the government overplay it and use it to control us? Absolutely. Is the government always trying to control us? Again, I've been reading more of Jacques Loul's propaganda. This is an incredible book. That's the world we live in and it ain't pure. So at the same time, I see I feel sort of like Tom Holland when he says, you know, if the churches are all just standing up as shills of either the medical establishment or the government. We have a government. We have a medical establishment. Let them make their own noises. I don't need to make noises for the government. I don't need to make noises for the medical establishment. I mean, I need to make church noises because, gosh, we're just inundated with there's all bunch of people who anytime they're in front of a mic, they say, wear a mask and get a vaccine. To me, that's sort of analogous to the guy who wins the Super Bowl and says, take Jesus as your personal savior. What? You're in front of a mask. You're going to you feel that this is now the time to make everybody a Christian or have everybody put on a mask. If all of our microphones are clogged with everybody saying, wear a mask, all you're going to do is intensify the conspiracy fears of a great number of people. So I think it's in the government's best interest to be savvy about this. But I think governments that get tyrannical about it in the long run. Defeat themselves because there's a real sensitivity in a population to have concern about government tyranny. The United States was founded on it. I mean, the people who founded the United States were a little bit anxious about governor government tyranny and hence built the system they did. I think it's wise to be cautious with government tyranny because governments get tyrannical. So do churches. So do parents. So are there symbolic resonances with some of this stuff? Absolutely. They're always going to be around us. Symbolism happens. It keeps happening. So, yeah. Hey, Paul, what do you think of patriotism in the context of Christianity? Do you think that right wing evangelicals are a threat to society? They're part of society. So, you know, a lot of this comes out with. You know, so a history professor of my alma mater. I had her on the channel. She wrote a book, Jesus and John Wayne. I had no idea. Well, actually, I feared the book would have the kind of resonance it does. Now, on one hand, happy for her. She's going to make a lot of money with the New York Times bestseller book. For a Calvin College professor to have a New York Times bestseller book doesn't happen often. And I enjoyed reading the book in. In a certain way, because she's talking about a real thing and she's talking about a thing that is a problem and she's talking about a thing that isn't good. But when you take a problem and you make it the ultimate problem, you create an idol. I'm not saying she's necessarily doing that with the book. But what the book in our present political climate, especially during the election. And after the election, when Trump just wouldn't seem to go away. It just throws fuel on the fire. And as I've said many times in my videos and then certain aspects of evangelicalism just decided that just like the book, it's not about the book. It's just decided that just like everybody wants to get in front of a microphone and say, wear a mask and get a vaccine. Certain aspects of progressive evangelicalism got in front of a mic and said, dread Christian nationalism. Have you not read George Marsden? Do you not know the history of evangelicalism and a modernism and fundamentalism? That's why I've spent some time making some videos about it, because. Issues of national identity and religious identity in some ways occupy the same spectrum for us as human beings. So right now, Rick is sitting in a little room at Living Stones and just to his right, there's a weird little antenna that is plugged into that is attached to a suction cup on the window. I don't know if it still is there. Yep, it is. It's still there. And if you walked into Rick's little room there, you'd say, what's that weird antenna for? You guys listening to the radio or watching TV? Rick has a little gizmo that he can just basically read radio wave traffic. Why does Rick have that here? Because we were using wireless mics and getting terrible results. And Rick's a really smart guy. And so Rick says, I wonder how much traffic is on these channels. And so like $25 on Amazon buys this little gadget. And we start to look at the radio spectrum that's going on all around us, invisible to us. And try to and begin to figure out why these kind of expensive mics we bought to try and have better sound quality during the pandemic. We're getting such crappy results. And Rick says, I don't know where all this traffic is coming from, but there's a ton of interference on these frequencies. Let's return these mics and get some other mics that are on a different frequency and we'll get better performance out of these. What's this little illustration about? Nationalism and religion have for most of recorded human history occupied the same spectrum in the bandwidth. And so my response to Kristen Dumais' book is sort of, oh, people have their religion and their nationalism all mixed up? You don't say. Yes, of course, because until the Enlightenment and until the American experiment, it was the same thing. England has a national church. The Queen is the protector of the church. Good luck with Prince Charles. You know, God, church and state get differentiated partly because they're almost the same thing. Read the Hebrew scriptures. This differentiation of church and state, I think Jacob is right, sort of flows out of the differentiation between prophet, priest and king. Gosh, prophet, priest and king, executive, legislative, judicial. The American founders were classicists and classicists deeply steeped in the history of medieval Christianity. So and the Protestant Reformation. Nationalism. So I don't think there's anything wrong with loving your country. I don't think anything wrong with loving your city, loving your state. But I think, again, part of what we see seeded in the New Testament, when the Sanhedrin tells Peter and John to stop preaching, they say no. And when they did that, you had the seeds of the differentiation between church and state. You had the seeds of religious liberty. No, religious liberty. Tom Holland likes to point out that in some ways Christianity's earliest religious competitor was not really Stoicism or Epicureanism, but is in some ways the cult of Caesar Augustus. Because a lot of that language Christian preachers were able to sort of map and in that way in some ways topple the cult of Caesar Augustus. There's lots of religions in Sacramento. I don't find anybody worshipping Caesar Augustus in name. Now, do a lot of Christians get sort of fast and loose between their patriotism and Christianity? Of course they do. But here's a dirty little secret. All of this hand wringing that we saw when Biden left Afghanistan. That's our Christian internationalism, and that has a long history too. And one of the things that I see on the left when, you know, through the United Nations and through a whole bunch of American programs, it's neocolonial. Do you think that the anxiety that Victorian Britons had about slave trade, and it's after it's before the Victorians, but do you think the anxiety about British Colonials had about slave trading or polygamy or in India? You know, the burning live wives of dead husbands. Do you think any of that was not moral, like certain people's ideas about the gender binary that they wish to extinguish in other countries in Africa and Asia? And Rod Dreher just wrote a piece recently that part of the reason the West is losing in Africa is because Africans are a little sick of moralistic nagging coming from supposed secularists. So gambling? Is there gambling? Sheesh. Of course, nationalism and religion go together. That's where they are in the spectrum. Now, it's going to take some care to weed them out and to figure out, give to Caesar what is Caesar's, give to God what is God's. And Jesus puts it just perfectly. And he throws the question to us perfectly. Oh, I'm going to have to figure this out. Yeah, it's okay to be patriotic. Right-wing evangelicals have a problem with this. Here's a big surprise. Left-wing Christians do too. And here's another big surprise. The sins of evangelicals are more obvious to the sins of right-wing evangelicals are more obvious to left-wing Christian progressives. And here's another big secret. The sins of left-wing Christian progressives are more obvious to right-wing evangelicals. And that's why you get this feeding frenzy of, oh, there, see? We have to colonize and occupy the Islamic nations of the world so enforce them to treat women and gays the way we think they should be treated. Isn't that colonial imperialism? Yeah, it is. So, I think I answered the question. Mandy, how are we doing for time? I got a shorter answer, shorter answer, shorter answer. I'm going to put a thing in front of here. I got a shorter answer, Paul. Mandy, hi, I've recently been reading Surprised by Hope by N.T. Wright. I like that book. And one of the basic ideas is that Christianity, especially modern Protestantism, has replaced Christ's return, the coming resurrection, God putting things right, etc. with die and go to heaven and get out of here forever. Yeah, a little bit of Gnosticism. Now that I can see it, I can't unsee it. See what's so fun about education? It seems everywhere I look that the general focus of my own Christian circles is about how the world is not our home and will go home someday. His concern in this book is how this impacts how we live now. That is sort of Gnostic and ignores the purpose of taking part in God's restoration plan on earth, including caring about the actual earth. Do you think that this is a big problem? I agree with Wright in his critique. I am a little more nuanced. And, you know, this is something that I probably would have a conversation with Wright, and I don't know if we'd have a lot of difference between us. This gets into some Peugeotian things too, because to what degree are Christians supposed to bear witness to the kingdom? And to what degree are Christians supposed to participate in the coming kingdom? And to what degree are the Christians supposed to enact? And now we, there's an agency question in there in terms of a lot of nuance. Because that gets right into the question I just asked. Well, if part of the fruits of God's kingdom is that women are no longer abused and disrespected and mistreated, well, then certain shouldn't the superpower America send its armies to Afghanistan to ensure that all the little girls receive the kind of treatment that we think they should? Is that then a kingdom enterprise? And so, you know, there's a lot of finger wagging by atheists about Christians use of power in past centuries. Well, and power itself has become sort of a meme. Well, number one, you're not going to avoid using power, just like you're not going to avoid using words. If you're going to live in this world. Power is part of it. Oh, we use power for good. Yeah, that's what everybody thinks. I have all the right ideas, because if you thought you didn't, you'd change them. So it's not a terribly helpful thing to look at in these cases. But the question is, how exactly do we realize, participate and bear witness to the coming kingdom of God while we're still living in the age of decay? In other words, it's this idea of realized eschatology now and not yet. And that's a big theme in Paul. And so. And this this looks different in orthodoxy. It looks different in Catholicism. It looks different in an a baptism. It looks different in various reformed things. And it and and this is part of when it comes to politics and religion, part of the continual theological undercurrents beneath religious political actors in our sphere. So. When the one conversation I had when the individual said, yeah, when Trump won the election, they read the Book of Lamentations at Yale Divinity. Oh, and you're saying these guys are Christian nationalists. Your definitions of Christian are just different. And your and and and your ideas about how this is to be instantiated and the relationship between religion and politics is just different. But you're playing the same game. And to a degree, we all have to. And the radical idea of the Anabaptist is sort of a withdrawal and be pure. Well, you're paying sales tax. And, you know, I probably annoyed some Anabaptist out there and they're going to explain to me why paying sales tax is justifiable. And OK, I'm not going to fight you on whether or not you pay sales tax. It's not my deal. But these issues are all around us. And and so that's where when I when I read NT Wright's book and I think we should bear witness to the kingdom, I'm much more comfortable with that witness because. There's a certain tyranny that fills Christians imaginations when they get power. And the Anabaptists are right in that that doesn't always go well. And the Anabaptists know that really well, because, you know, first, the Lutherans were the bad guys and Calvinists or Lutherans and Roman Catholics were upset. But the Anabaptists were right there on the scene pretty much at the same time because their stuff had always been bubbling up. And, you know, one of the few things Lutherans and Catholics could agree on is that the Anabaptists were bad. Then, of course, the reforms came along and the Catholics and the Lutherans and the reforms could agree that the Anabaptists were bad. And so they were at the bottom of the hierarchy for a long time in Protestantism, and they were pretty severely treated. And so they're they're quite understandably a little gun shy about Christians getting all up in politics and state power. Yeah, I get that. If if you had generations of the kind of brutality, just like Jews are get real nervous about anti-Semitism and more so than the Anabaptists, because that song has been playing for a long time in the West. I was just reading Eusebius and it's like I'm uncomfortable with the way Eusebius put some things together. I understand why he did. And, you know, this is going to be an issue as, you know, right now, the Orthodox are a tiny little segment of American Christianity. And part of the reason Roman Catholicism is so different in America than it is in Latin America is because Roman Catholicism has never really held the stick in America. Say, well, wait a minute. We had JFK and we had Joe Biden and they're both Roman Catholics. I just opened up another can of worms. But I don't care how many Supreme Court justices you have and how many Roman Catholic presidents you have America is deeply Protestant and Roman Catholics know it. And that's different from their history in France or Spain or Latin America. So these are big issues. Are there ways that you can see of impacting the church negatively? Yeah, I find many people I know in this focus, probably the whole church, but still seek to live holy lives, which seems to take part of the restoration plan by loving sacrilegious. Absolutely. And this is where I go back to the horrid red things. Because if you go back to my conversation with Sarah about the difficulties that a theological education will give you for being a churchgoer. Preachers, retired preachers are often terrible churchgoers because they sit in there and they're listening to someone write a sermon, they're listening to someone handle a text, and they think I wouldn't have done the sermon this way. I wouldn't have done the text this I wouldn't have treated the text this way. I wouldn't be running the church this way. And so to be a retired sermon is a big effort of shutting your mouth and learning to encourage and appreciate and speak positive things to help and encourage the church flourish. And some ministers when they retire, kind of get a bitter lesson in that by the rest of the church that says you're retired now it means you have to sit and participate in a different way than you did before. So once you see this, and you see this all over the place, immediately you might want to go up and just keep talking about the resurrection and you know, I'm not I'm only going to go to a church that really gets this right. Oh, good luck. Because there's whole bunches of things that you want to have a line with you in the church that you go to. And this is one of them, and it falls within a hierarchy, but you're going to have to figure that out. And just like if you go to the Hoard read things with the little girl if you go to the house with CS Lewis, and the little girl says, don't eat that. That's poison. And you say, hey, there's no horrid read things in this and you pop it in your mouth. You're a fool. Part of Lewis's point in his chapter and horrid read things is even if people can't articulate correctly in a certain spectrum. They often know more than they can say, and we see this all the time and people. There are some Christians that I know that their IQ might not be real high. They don't read books. If you sit if I'd sit down and give them a theological test within their own tradition. They would do very poorly. But when I watch how they live their life. I say, that Christian is beyond me. And you might say, well, Paul, you're on YouTube talking theology and you've read books and you're articulate and you do all these things. Certainly you must be a better Christian. No, absolutely not. And on Judgment Day, the Lord might elevate this person. And we might look at them and say, them? What are the metrics? Read the New Testament. Have they loved the Lord their God with all their heart, soul, mind and strength and their navel as themselves? Have they sacrificially given and denied themselves and done all of this for the love of Christ? And this is why. No, we'll talk Sam. Sam's just so much fun to pick on because he's got his own YouTube channel. He's on the Discord. Everybody knows who Sam is. Sam and his little non-Trinitarian Sam. Athanasius was pretty rough. In that Athanasian creed. Do I want to do I think Sam would benefit from improving his theology by embracing the Trinity? Absolutely. But is the Holy Spirit not working through Sam? I'm not ready to say that. So I we we we have ways of evaluating each other. And I think it's quite clear from the scriptures when when the Bible says God looks at the heart. It's because God, its relevance realization. God knows what the heart is better than we do. And we always try to approximate it and get at it with our theology and our rules and our institutions and our structures. And all those things are good. But a Christian who might in my mind get lots of theology wrong and maybe not be terribly articulate or all kinds of things may be far better disciple of Christ than myself. And so, yeah, you know, I got my list of problems. And if the more contact I have with someone or something, the more problems if I go looking for problems, I'm sure to find them. But I am not the judge of the world. I'm just in charge of me and some of the few things I'm in charge of. So I try to stick to those things. And so, yeah. So when I give a funeral and I do a liturgy, you'll hear a lot about the resurrection because, hey, it's my talk to give. I'm going to frame it the way I want to. And I'll often have the case after a funeral service, someone will come up to me and say, you know, they don't quite know what they heard exactly. But they'll say, I never you said things in a different way. I never thought of it that way before. It's accomplished. So and so NT right in his quest to correct the church's lazy theology and maybe get rid of a little bit of Gnosticism out of the church. I'm down with that. So, oh, boy. What would St. Paul's letter to Mars Hill say? Oh, boy. Oh, boy. This week, China called video game spiritual opium. Hey, guess what? I got a great conversation coming out next week. Guess how the Taliban feels about music. All right. I'm going to take I'm going to. I profit Zacharias. Wait for the podcast. They'll come out. I'll take Shosh jewels one next week. You know, I. I can talk all day. And if my channel doesn't demonstrate that, then you're not paying attention. So anything anybody wants to say before we close out while we're still on the air? I know you all get Gabby once Rick turns off the YouTube feed. Hey, Paul, this is Aaron. I just wanted to thank you for answering my question. My pleasure. Was it helpful? I think so. I'm just in kind of a weird place spiritually, but gratitude is something I wasn't thinking about. But I was talking to my mom about being perfect. And I said, it says in the Bible to be perfect. And she's like, no, it doesn't. It was really good. Thank you very much for what you said. Thank you. All right. Well, maybe let's end the live stream then. And maybe Rick and I will get tacos or he or maybe we won't. It all depends on what Rick wants. We'll get tacos one of these days. Thank you.