https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MMWt7ZCC_wA

 Hi, this is Paul and those of you who watch my channel already know who I am. I'm the pastor of Living Stone's Christian Reformed Church in Sacramento, California. And besides doing all the videos I'm interested in about religion and theology and philosophy and Jordan Peterson and what's happening with atheist conversations, I'm also doing some videos about the Christian Reformed Church. The Christian Reformed Church is the denomination that I grew up in. I'm a third generation minister in the Christian Reformed Church and some of you who are my Twitter friends wondered what this CRC Synod business was that I kept hashtagging for the past week or so. Well this conversation is going to be all about that CRC Synod. Once a year the Christian Reformed Church in North America holds what we call a large assembly where we have four delegates from each classes which are regional assemblies where local church delegates are sent and we gather in one central place in the United States and Canada. The Christian Reformed Church is a bi-national denomination which means that we have churches in the United States and Canada and we are one body that way over both countries. And we gather this year, Christian Reformed Synod gathered in Grand Rapids, Michigan on the campus of Calvin College and they deliberated and debated and made decisions about the Christian Reformed Church and the agencies that it owns. And so what I would like to do is have a variety of conversations, this is the first of them, with some delegates who went to the Synod. And part of the reason I want to do this is that there's a lot that happens at a Synod which isn't easy to write about and let's say put in the magazine of the denomination called The Banner. Some stuff you can pick up from Twitter. You can actually watch the deliberations on YouTube, the denomination posts that, but in my opinion it's very helpful to talk to people who were there and get the sense of what happened on the floor, what the spirit of the meeting was, what they thought are important. Now a number of people have asked me questions about how Paul do you pick who you have these conversations with? Some of you who know there's a little listserv that's been around the Christian Reformed Church for a long time called CRC Voices. And I often pick people that I know from CRC Voices, partly because I have a long history of having conversations with these people and I know that they'll be good conversationalists and I trust them. So that gets into a little bit of the selection in this. And so today I've gathered three delegates from this year's Synod and I'll go around and have them each introduce themselves, tell us where they're, where they, in this case all of them are pastors, where they pastor, a little bit about themselves and then we'll jump into the discussion. So Richard, I've never done a video with you, I've done with Rob and Rod, but why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? Just so that I can trip and fall and they can clean me up afterwards. That's right. My name is Richard Bodini, I pastor the Holland Marsh Christian Reformed Church just outside of Newmarket, Ontario, north of Toronto, about 40 minutes north of Toronto. And Professor Peterson lives south of where I am. I have never met him. And so I will use that as a claim to fame. I've been pastoring for 14 years, I was a teacher before that. And yeah. How many synods have you gone to? Exactly, yeah, three. This is my, I just finished my third synod, but I have watched at least 10 or 12 online. Okay, all right, very good. And Rob, why don't you tell us a little bit about yourself? Okay, my name is Rob Torinstrup and like Richard, I grew up in Canada. Unlike Richard, I didn't stick around. I moved to the United States to go to college. Since 2006, I've been pastoring at church in Salem, Oregon, about 45 minutes south of Portland. And I was a delegate from our region, our classless Columbia, and this was my fourth time attending synod. So yeah, it was another very good experience on the whole. Good, good. And Rodney, why don't you introduce yourself? Well, my name is Rod Hugen and this was my actual 10th trip to synod. So I feel like, you know, everyone should just listen to me. I pastor a church called The Village in Tucson, Arizona, a church that I planted some 18 years ago. And prior to that, I was a chief financial officer of a big auto parts company in Phoenix and kind of had a midlife crisis that ended up sending me out into ministry as a commissioned pastor and have been doing that for these last 20 years. It's been an interesting journey and I love our little church out here in the middle of nowhere. We're in part of Classes Arizona, which is the smallest classes in all of Christian Reformed Dome. And so we're struggling with that. And that may be one of the reasons why I get to go anytime I want is because there are so few warm bodies that are inhaling and exhaling and willing. But I do get to go regularly and enjoy it every time. And I've learned a lot over the years. It's always a great experience. Let's begin. One of the big discussions at this year's Synod that everyone anticipated was a lot of conversation about politics and the church. And Rob, you were in a video that we did before Synod where we talked about Overture 14, which you were partially responsible for authoring. Rob, would you just give us a brief sense of what motivated your, well, maybe I should explain what an overtures is. An overture is a communication by a classist, which is a regional assembly or a local church or an individual member of the Christian Reformed Church that is sent to Synod asking for some opinion or some change in policy or some change in how agencies run themselves or some change in doctrine of the Christian Reformed Church. And every year, a certain number of overtures come to the Synod, and first they go through an advisory committee process. And then what comes out of that advisory committee then goes to the floor of Synod. And now, Rob, you and in that video, we had Doug Van de Green, who was also a voicer, participates on CRC Voices. We had a conversation about that, and I'll put a link to that conversation in the notes of this video. Rob, why don't you tell us a little bit about what prompted you and some others to send that overture and what it was about in your opinion? Yeah, in a nutshell, we were concerned with what we judged to be oversight by the denominational, certain agencies within the denomination. One of them was what's called the Office of Social Justice, Office of Social Justice and Hunger Action. And it's their mission to promote the cause of justice in this world or concern over issues like poverty or immigration or abortion, pro-life, et cetera. And we felt that some of the ideas that they were promoting were going beyond talking about specific principles and they were going to dictating how to vote on certain issues, for example. So rather than just- Who to vote? What do you mean how to vote? Members of the denomination. So- How do they vote on what? I mean, I- Yeah. So how they might, how they should vote on specific issues or telling members of the CRC to contact their congressmen and urge them to vote on a specific issue. OK. And we felt that that was overstepping because it's one thing to talk about specific principles. It's one thing to say, Christians ought to have a real concern for the needs of the poor and they ought to do what they can to address those needs. It's another thing to say, therefore, contact your congressman and tell them they need to vote this way on the farm bill or on this piece of legislation. And so what we were asking for is really that we make a distinction between what we use the language of advocacy, which is articulating those principles, and lobbying, which is calling for specific and very particular action on a piece of legislation. So you were asking- So you were just being pushed between those two ideas. That's correct. That's what we did in our overture. And we were asking that the agencies that are involved in these kinds of activities, that they refrain from lobbying, that we- and we encourage them to advocate, meaning we encourage them to speak about these principles. But we asked that they would stop short of lobbying when they do articulate these principles. So that was it in a nutshell. There's a little more to it than that. But that's the main meat of the overture that we make. Okay. Now, what happens with these overtures is that they first go, someone dreams it up, and they write it down and it goes to the classes. And this overture was approved by your classes, correct? That's correct. And that's Classes Columbia. Correct. And then that was then sent to Synod. And then once it gets to Synod, before it goes to the floor of Synod, it goes into what is an advisory committee. And what Synod does is the first couple of days of Synod, the whole meeting breaks up into these small little groups and everything that comes to Synod gets kind of pre-chewed in those advisory committees. And then those advisory committees then formulate a proposal that then goes to the floor of the whole Synod. That's right. And now, were any of you on the advisor committee that handled that? No, none of you were. No. Okay. No. All right. So, Rob, why don't you comment a little bit on, so that went into the advisory committee along with Overture 12, which was again one we discussed on another show that we did. Overture 13, which was from Classes Minn Kota, that was a little bit more dramatic. What did the Minn Kota overture say? The Minn Kota overture really, I think, was asking for no more. I don't remember exactly, but I think they were asking for an end to even advocacy. They were asking for more. They were kind of trying to curtail the activities of the Office of Social Justice more than we were asking. And so their language was a little more restrictive. And so when the committee, the advisory committee gets these overtures, they might get the series of overtures on the same topic. And it's their job to kind of bring them all together and come up with some recommendations based on all the overtures that they receive. Okay. So then, so now I'll open it up to the other two of you if you guys want to jump in. So then the advisory committee report came to the floor. What came out to the floor from that committee and how was that received at least initially? Well, I can start and then I do want to hear from Richard and Rod as well, just because I have the perspective of the one that was kind of watching this from the beginning. Originally, there are a number of recommendations that this advisory committee made. A couple of them were that our denomination, that our churches remember the importance of seeking justice and reconciliation wherever we are. So it was just emphasizing the need for that, which we were, I was happy to see that. And then praying for these things as well, praying for justice and reconciliation to take place. Those were important, but those were not, that was not really surprising, if I might say. I don't want to diminish the importance of prayer, of course, but the real, the one that generated the discussion was that a committee be formed that in a sense would function like an oversight committee of the Office of Social Justice so that they would hopefully keep in check some of these tendencies to issue broad prescriptions about calling your congressman and telling them to vote this way or that way on a piece of legislation. So that was that was the recommendation that they made, at least as I was seeing it. Now, when you say reconciliation, what do you mean? Like if I'm I want to be reconciled with my marijuana stash that, you know, is that what do you mean by reconciliation? Those are big words. Yeah, they're there when they use that kind of language, they're talking about they're referring to the way that there are fragments in our society. They often it's used in terms of the racial racial tension and racial divisions within our culture, whether it be in Canada, where the context centers on the indigenous peoples, the First Nations people of Canada, or whether it be in the United States where depending on where you live, it might be the tension between African Americans and white or where I'm from, it's more Hispanic and white. And so it's talking about how do we how do we bridge those gaps and how do we address maybe might include addressing past wrongs or past hurts for the purpose of coming together again? OK, OK. So now I know the two of the other Richard and Rod were also watching this because this was this was one of the real hot issues to watch. What did you think when you saw the advisory report? I was impressed with the work that they did. So I guess to back up a little bit, Committee 4 essentially did the work of two committees combined in this Senate. They they were just overwhelmed. So they had overtures 12, 13 and 14 to deal with. And they had overture two, which I think we might get to at some point. So they had two very distinct, big topics that they were talking about. They had all the hot topics in the Senate. They did. They did. They did, which was really unfortunate. But that's just the way these advisory committees get structured. And so then they were given those those two topics. I was really impressed with the work that they did to really go through all of the data in overtures 12, 13 and 14 and try to come to some middle of the road consensus building recommend or set of recommendations that could be used to bless the entire denomination. They could have easily went and picked sides. They could have picked sides and said, well, this is what we're going to do and set up the fight. Or they could have went the other way and appeased the authors of the overtures and worked it that way, which I think would have set up for another fight. They chose to listen to Minn Kota, to Classes Minn Kota, to Classes Columbia. They listened to the staff from the Office of Social Justice. And they tried to form something that would be broad, yet just certainly a blessing for the entire denomination. And I think they did it. I think they did it, which I didn't think it was possible before Senate. And to see it sort of play out on the floor was just impressive, but also to see it being played in conversations around supper tables, conversations around the coffee pot, conversations after the meetings or the evening session was done around different tables and different establishments. And I think all of those conversations brought these recommendations to a point where people could say, yes, yes, let's move on this. With a qualifier, I think, but it wasn't spelled out. And the qualifier is the Office of Social Justice, as Rob said, has been taking liberty with some of the material they're sending out. And I think this is the shot across the bow. And either they heard it or they didn't. And we'll certainly see as they produce their blast emails over the next few weeks and certainly into the coming year. And if those emails don't demonstrate a listening response or pose or position, then, you know what, let's jump on the bandwagon with Minn Kota in Columbia and reel back in the staff members who are not listening and who are posturing towards one political faction as opposed to the other. That's the biggest thing is there's no balance between the attacks on Republicans as opposed to the Democrats. I'm Canadian. You're Canadian. What do you care? I don't understand your political system. I think it's a ship that's sinking, but we're struggling too. But California has more people than Canada. I just want you to know that. Hey, Richard, who did they elect in Ontario just last week or the week before? Another Ford? It was a Chrysler. I think it was a lemon. Bird's going down, though. You know, I thought Rob was a brother. But I was just so impressed with the work the advisory committee did and how it was presented on the floor. And how there was a spirit of unity as the conversation went on. And I think there was certainly humility by some of the staff members that not so much from OSJ, but from other agencies and ministries that are very close to advocacy work and justice and mercy work. And so it was just really cool to see God's spirit working amongst 200 people on that floor. You would have missed it watching by video. There was just this spirit that was moving. And for me, that was the biggest thing watching that happen. I really agree. I think it was just such an ironic spirit throughout all of Synod. But the most peaceful one I've ever attended. Well, some pretty controversial issues. I think it's interesting the polarization, right? Because Canadians and Americans can't get along, apparently. But that whole idea of we live in such a polarized society. And so you either are for me or you're against me. If you don't agree with me, I unfriend you on Facebook and we never talk again. And so we don't hear alternative voices. We don't ever. And if we do, we don't like them. So we don't answer the charges often that are below what's initially said. And so real conversation happens pretty rarely in our society anymore. And particularly thoughtful conversation where you can spend time thinking through the nuances of stuff. To OSJ's, the Office of Social Justice's credit, they also view themselves, and I think rightfully so, as a prophetic voice for the church. And I think the church often has to have that voice that stirs us to action and that forces us to think outside of our box. I live 60 miles from the border with Mexico. So my view on immigration is incredibly different than someone in Canada, for instance. I think at one point they were saying there were approximately 350,000 people in Arizona who were here without documentation. And there were maybe 250 in all of Canada. So you have a very different view when you're close to the border. I remember being part of a gathering that our previous, Gabby Giffords, our previous representative, put together where she just got all the voices in the room. So there were 40, 45 people with very differing perspectives on the whole idea of immigration. And then you start realizing the complexity of the issue. And so a lot of times an email blast from the Office of Social Justice, I just think that's nice, but you're only identifying one little tiny part of what's a huge problem. And how do we solve that problem? And yeah, it's easy to say, oh, we should have completely open borders and forget about those restrictions or completely closed borders and totally restrict. And then there's real impact on people. I know several of the hospitals that have closed because of the amount of free care that they provide for people coming across the border. Well, then that affects medical care in this whole area. And then is that good or is that bad? Well, gosh, who wants to turn away someone who needs medical care ever, right? We would never do that. So how do you find a comprehensive path forward? And I think society is wrestling with that. The whole North American culture is wrestling with that. And then what's our responsibility as Christians? Well, and if I could piggyback on that too, Rod, and also on what Richard said, I think you hit on something really important. And that was the the Irenic spirit in which this went forward. One of the things that was a highlight for me was sitting down to lunch. It was kind of a spontaneous thing. We didn't really, I mean, we planned it out kind of the day before and just said, hey, we should sit down. And so it was myself, it was three delegates from Classes Minn Kota, the other classes that helped write an overture about this issue. And then it was three staff members from the Office of Social Justice and Hunger Action and in Canada, the Committee for Contact with Government. And something changes when you sit down at the table and you start to talk and you actually have to listen. You know, some of those suspicions start to disappear. It's not that you suddenly agree on everything, but it's that you actually, you work towards working in the context of relationship and, you know, as, yeah, as brothers and sisters in Christ. And so, you know, when it comes time to discuss the overture, which I think came later that day or maybe the next day, I don't quite remember, you still might disagree and you still maybe don't, you aren't wild about what they're doing or you don't, you're not on board with their position, but you do so with a little more respect and a little more, hopefully a little more, yeah, care and attention to the person. So that was a very good experience for me, having that lunch. Now, you all have talked about the fact that there was a tangible sense at the synod of hearing each other. Now, and again, all those intangibles don't come through a video. They might not come through on paper. And obviously, a denomination of a quarter of a million people, you had, you know, 250, 300 people involved in this whole process that might have felt that groovy feeling, but people out there are going to be asking questions, well, what changed? So I think email blast probably in this context is not the best choice for a description of, we're blasting things. So someone who wasn't at the synod, didn't feel the feels, and they say, well, Rob, you wrote that overture, are they going to tell us to write my congressman on this or that or this or that or not anymore? What would you say to someone who asked that question? I was asked that question sort of last night. For our evening worship service, we just did a here's what happened at synod, and I kind of shared because we had people in our church that were sort of vested in this. And it is, you know, it is, that's the difference between, like you said, you're at synod and you get all the feels there, and then you come home to people that weren't there. And their questions haven't gone away and their concerns don't evaporate just because you felt good at synod and had a good lunch with people. You were hoodwinked. Yeah, right, right. Well, you know, in all seriousness, for some, that's a concern, right? You get taken in and are you being played? My answer to that is a couple of things. In terms of what changed, number one, I don't think we'll know for a little while. I mean, structurally, we can put in place this oversight committee that's tasked with hopefully keeping in check some of these pronouncements that they want to make. The success of that committee will be tied to who's on that committee. How well have they heard, like what you were saying, Paul, how well have they heard some of these concerns? If they take to heart what we've raised, then I think we'll see fewer of these email blasts, and we'll see maybe a more willingness to focus on articulating principles rather than narrowing it down to specific positions that you have to take and that you have to get behind. I don't think we're going to know that for about six months. I think that's all going to take time and ultimately the change is only as good as the implementation of it. We'll just have to wait and see. I did emphasize even to the people that I spoke with last night that there is something and there's something important about learning to listen and learning to have these dialogues with other people in our denomination. But again, that doesn't yet fully answer the question about what changed. We won't know that for a bit, I think. The church always moves very, very slowly, right? We forget that. We think, oh, we make a decision and now it's implemented and it's done. It's not. It never is. That's not the nature of church. Matter of fact, Senate itself by its nature is a deliberative body. It's thinking through these things and it makes incremental steps. Now, there are those who, to counter Rob, would simply say, it was a horrible decision. We need more email blasts. We need very specific legislation followed and voted on and we need to replace those legislators who would not do that. That's the nature of a very diverse church and a church that sees things very, very differently. And part of that is the polarization of our culture. Part of that is out of our own experience, right? My experience of immigration issues is very different from someone else's. Can I listen to them and hear them and then not immediately say, yeah, well, you're going to hell because you don't think the way I think, right? It is because you're ignorant and I'm the smart one. This is going to take a lot of time. I think, yeah, will this change something? It might and it might not. And then again, we still have to go back to the idea of a prophetic voice that does irritate me. There are times when I get irritated because somebody accuses me of something and I feel falsely accused or I think you don't know me or whatever. But often that works in me and says, well, maybe I haven't really thought that through and maybe that particular farm bill is the appropriate farm bill. That will make a real impact. So I think, yeah, given time, and time doesn't necessarily bring everyone to... It brings everyone, hopefully, it brings everybody to good conversations around the table. Right. Even if it's not consensus. Right, exactly. So you're saying it's going to be some time. I think you're going to see changes already happening in three months' time. By the time September hits, I think you'll see changes happening with the information that gets sent out from the Office of Social Justice and Hunger Action as well. Part of the change that was invited and certainly urged was to have more biblical rationale for teaching, for providing information about this particular topic rather than write your congressman or your senator or your president or the dog catcher. You vote for dog catchers, right? So an American thing or a Canadian thing? Yeah, it must be Canadian. I don't know. And I'm a cat person anyway. So catch all those dogs. Well, you got to spay and neuter your animals. So I think the education component is going to get rolled out very quickly. And if it doesn't, then there will certainly be some responses that they didn't hear it. And as Rob said, when you have a conversation with a person about these particular overtures or about any points or really anything in society, when you actually sit across the table from someone, they're not two dimensional. They're three dimensional. They're flesh and blood. They're real person. And suddenly everything changes. And certainly Rob and I had a conversation in the early days of Senate about the overtures. And I didn't put it out there, but my picture of what was being said and what wasn't being said changed because suddenly, oh, that's right. Rob is the author of 14. And Rob is a friend. I may not agree with everything that Rob is putting forward on 14, but I listen. And I changed a little bit. After Senate, I sat down with at least three delegates from Classes Minn Kota just to get a sense of where they were at and to share where I was on some of the issues. And suddenly they're real people because before that it was Classes Minn Kota and, okay, that's just Minn Kota. Now they're real people with real names and real churches just like my church and with real challenges that they have to go back and have the conversation, the hard, hard conversation with their people that could very well be my people. And so I heard their concern. And if OSJ doesn't change how they do things, you know, part of me is like, let's jump on the Minn Kota bandwagon because something does need to be done, especially on the American side of Office of Social Justice. And how do you have those conversations with government officials? So in Canada, it's a little bit, well, quite radically different. There was a committee established 50 years ago that dealt with contact with government, gave guidelines and recommendations. How do you have the conversations? We have a staff member that actually has an office on Parliament Hill in Ottawa. And with the guidance of the contact with the government goes and has conversations with MPs, our members of Parliament that represent the various regions across Canada. In fact, our staff member gets invited into cabinet ministers offices for conversations about very specific things that are coming as legislation or some other bill. And he's invited into the conversation. How should we hear this as Christians? How do you hear this as Christians? How do you hear this as a Christian reformed Christian representing a denomination Canada that has traction because of our connection with Aboriginal people across the country? And so we have a voice in Ottawa that speaks into these things. It doesn't mean they're going to change the legislation to the way we want it, but they're invited into the conversation and you see subtle changes. Part of that is the way you want it, right? You want it, right? And that's where the issue becomes. And I think that was kind of the stuff behind a lot of the overtures was you don't represent me when you send out this thing and say, I have to support X, Y or Z. I don't agree that that's the way to solve the hunger problem, or I don't agree that that's the way to solve the immigration problem. So you're not speaking for me, yet your salary is being paid by me, you're provided for by me, and yet you don't speak for me. And I think that underneath all of this is when you have a denomination as diverse as us, we can't have a single person or a single agency or an agency head speak for all of us. Unless they get off the, I like the distinction between advocacy and then, here's a specific thing you have to do to say, hey, we're all, everybody in our denomination can rightfully say that immigration is a huge issue and we ought to be there, or hunger is a huge issue or abuse or whatever those things are that they send out, we can agree on the principles without necessarily saying, and here's the way to solve the problem. So, yeah, and that in a nutshell, that was our position. And, you know, so we'll see, we'll see what happens with it. When is this oversight team named and by whom? This was given to the executive director to do? Yeah, I don't recall seeing a date on it. I don't know if anyone else did. I think it was handed over to the COD or the Council of Delegates or the executive director. We have a fish running things in Grand Rapids. They have a fish ladder in Grand Rapids. I do know that. Right. It will be under the direction of the executive director and the Council of Delegates when they have their meeting. October is their next meeting. End of September, early October. My sense is that the executive director will already have things in motion. At least he will invite someone to get things in motion, whether it's the Office of Social Justice or the director of denominational ministries, who is the oversight for those agencies and ministries, whether it's those two in conjunction, sort of working that out and having conversations with the Canadian ministry director and are taking a look at how the Canadian committee for contact with the government works. So I think it's doing a lot of field work to figure out what's the best system that is ultimately going to work in the U.S. That, I think, is going to take the longest time, is to figure out what's going to work there. I think the nuts and bolts stuff that's happening now, the day-to-day stuff, that will change. But getting this committee into place, that's a big task. You know, and if Doug were here, Doug Van de Greene, who's been at some of our other videos, he, you know, one of the things he often reminds, you know, I joke about Canada's population versus California's population, having a staff person dedicated in an office. I mean, in the United States, that would be like having the Christian Reformed Church maintain an office on K Street and, you know, interfacing with, you know, senators and legislators. And the California state legislature, I don't know the relative size between the CRC in Canada and the CRC in California, but, you know, if we looked at that, some people might be very surprised. They'd also be very surprised at how diverse the Christian Reformed Church in California is, and quite actually how conservative it is, because you have Central Valley farmers, you have not too many dairies in Southern California anymore, but you've got a whole host of Korean churches. That are a significant number of churches. So these, and if you would say, okay, well, let's find out what the Koreans would like to have happen in American politics. I think a lot of people throughout the Christian Reformed Church would stop and say, would pause, because the Koreans have a completely different perspective on many of the conversations that we're having. So I want to transition, go ahead. Personally, I think having this committee that's going to be an oversight for doing this, you're not going to have someone on K Street, you know, knocking on the door of the Senate. It's just not going to work. And I don't think you'd be able to get 175,000 members of the Christian Reformed Church in the United States to send a letter off. And really, 175,000 letters is not going to do very much. And so, OSJ has, and you can't see my hands, they're trying to do all of this, and that's great work, but really, maybe we can only do this. So let's start with this, and let's do this really well, and then maybe we can add something. But let's get the education out there. Let's get people connecting locally with their politicians and speaking into that locally, and the Lord willing, it will expand. It's taken us 50 years to get where we're at. We're not going to recreate that in the United States by 2019. Maybe it will be 50 years, unfortunately. But it's like trying to overhaul a car while you're flying down the freeway, and you start taking off pieces, and so, oh, I needed that. And so let's start small and then expand out a little bit. Yeah, yeah, great. And I think your point, too, about locality of government. I mean, I'm on a first-name basis with my city council person. Many of the issues that I deal with, and you can talk about race relations, you can talk about race issues, you can talk about race relations, you can talk about homeless, you can talk about immigration, you can talk about, I mean, cities and states in the United States manage so much, yet so much focus is on the federal government. And at some point, you just have to say, well, how can we gain perspective? And I think part of the difficulty that I see is we have become so mesmerized by this media vision. It's kind of like the Eye of Sauron and Lord of the Rings that now we're focusing on these children who are separated. Then it's South Korea, then it's, I mean, and so we're kind of like zombies following the media stories, whether they're from CNN or MSNBC or Fox, and we're just all following along, and we're in our two little groups and we say, yep, that's what we are. Nope, that's what we are. And so then that whole division just then comes into the Christian Reformed Church and here we go. And to have a denominational agency doing this, following that, to me says, let's take a step back and have some real conversations about this. So there's my little two cents. Let's transition to Overture 2. Now, maybe Rod, you might give us, Bev has been on Voices for a long time. She's written about this on Voices quite a bit. Rod, would you give us a little background to Bev in this conversation? Sure. Bev Sturk lives in Oregon and is... She's in Washington. I'm sorry, in Washington. Everything north of Rod. I knew that. Right, yeah. Canada, California. The West Coast, who really cares? She has a passion to deal with sexual abuse in all its forms and particularly, I think, she's just been someone who... She visited our church last year and I just watched her walk around and she's talking to every woman in our church and hearing story and listening. She just has a passion to help and then also a passion to do something about it. And so she wrote an overture and she listed some very specific things, which I can't enumerate, but that the church ought to do to deal with the power inequities, the abuse issues and those struggles. And she wrote this overture, brought it to her church and it did not get forwarded as they often do by the church with the local church's blessing. They liked parts of it, but they didn't like it in its totality. It got forwarded to the classes and the classes also did not forward it with their blessing, but with also liking parts of it and wanting parts of it. And therefore, it came to Synod as an overture from an individual. In the 10 times that I've been to Synod, I don't recall that ever having happened before where it really got a voice or where someone really... Where we really listened. It might have gotten shoved into a committee and then the typical language of we... Synod does not exceed to this request or to this overture. And this was very different. It was very different in that I think it struck and obviously this is in the midst of the Me Too movement and all these other things that have been going on in our world as we discussed this. So maybe the specific timing was right, but I've never seen anything impact a Synod quite the way that that did. And I sat through some pretty contentious Synod things. And this wasn't in contention. Actually, did this go far enough? It was almost like we need more. We need to have more of a discussion. And I know that there were parts of it that people struggle with and will. It was just an interesting thing, a phenomenal thing to see. And I love Bellows' passion for this. And she and I have had lots of conversations over the years. And there are times, she's zealous for this, right? And like any zealot, she can push my buttons sometimes. She'll say, the Churches never talk about pornography. And I'm thinking, gosh, our Church does it all the time. So sometimes I feel like this disconnect because you're like, really? Your Church doesn't do that. Our Church does that all the time. But her zealousness, I just admire that. And that it is a singular focus for her. And because of that, I think what she wrote and what she offered and what she pushed forward just caught the attention of Synod. And I think was just a powerful moment on the floor and in our decision making. Just coming to grips with the reality of the horrible pain that happens. When you talked about abuse, Rob or Richard, what did she bring forward? I'd read the overture. And so what happened? I'm not going to try to even dive in and quote stuff from it. Very long. It was long, but it was just so wide. There was just so much good stuff, good data. We aren't doing this. We aren't doing this. We aren't doing... Okay. The one that jumps out, a code of conduct. I have a code of conduct. I haven't signed a code of conduct. Will I have to? Possibly. Would I be okay with that? Probably. And would it get me to rethink some of my relationships and how I conduct pastoral care? Possibly. Is it going to prevent me from doing some pastoral care? Probably. And is that going to have a significant impact on ministry? Most definitely. But is it protecting myself and is it protecting our parishioners? Yes. So what are you talking about? Is this like the Mike Pence rule that's going out over the CRC? I mean, what are you talking about? A Billy Graham picture would be the code of conduct and really expanding upon that. So you don't put yourself in a position where you're going to be with a person of the opposite gender in a closed room. So you're going to put up barriers that are going to protect each of you from any infidelity happening. Or at least any allegation of that. Which is just part of our Safe Church policy. You know, I want to move away from what was there and to, I think, touch upon what was felt. People shared stories, personal stories of abuse on the floor of Synod, which were significant. One woman, I have never spoken about this to anyone ever before. And she felt safe enough amongst 250 people, plus a video live stream, to share this story. Wow. Because what Bev had put forward and what the committee was putting forward, she felt a place of protection for the community. A place of safety, of blessing, and she shared it. And significant healing even happened in that. And I think for us who heard many of these stories, we were suddenly, that's a person. That's a person. Getting back to our previous conversation that, oh, when I sit across the table from them, it suddenly becomes real. And it suddenly became real. Abuse is happening in our denomination. It is happening everywhere, but it is happening in our denomination. And it became very real when we were asked how many of us know of or have experienced abuse. I think it was 100% of the delegates put up their hands. That was telling. That was so telling. And I think change… Does anyone? When I hear that, I think… But when you pause and you all put up your hand, it just became very real. And that's when the story started to come out. And so, yeah, there's a lot of work that needs to be done in our denomination regarding abuse response teams, safe church policies, having a safe church policy even in a church. There are numerous churches that don't even have it. I think they said, don't quote me, I think half of the classes do not have a safe church response team. Across Canada, I think all of them have it. For us to get insurance, we have to have a safe church policy. So that means 250 churches across Canada have a safe church policy. While a whole bunch of churches don't have that, so it's a significant thing. And so Bev is really pushing us to get it in place. You know, and kudos to her to be just a force to make this happen in order to protect even one person. And she would go that far just to protect one person. Any thoughts on this, Rob? Yeah, so I think that's right. I mean, one of the things that stood out to me is maybe a little bit ancillary to the main issue. And that's just an appreciation for our church polity and our church structure that says one individual can actually make a difference. And our polity allows that and creates that system that says, if you have something you're concerned about, if there's something that you're passionate about, you can actually bring that change all the way to Synod and have an impact. And I was just reminded of that. But to the main issue, I had mixed thoughts on it. And it's tough to say that because obviously when you're dealing with a topic like abuse, there can be that tendency to downplay it or to minimize it or to pretend that that happens somewhere else but not here. And it was a good reminder that this is a real issue. It is something that we have to be paying attention to. And those churches that do not have a policy in place and those classes that do not have a team in place, I think they were rightly, I don't know if I quite go so far saying that they were chastised, but I think they felt the communal pressure to get their act together and to get that in place. And I think that was important. I think we needed to hear that. Part of the challenge for me, I guess, was if you... is being in that position that if you want to raise any kind of question or concern or even any sort of pushback that says, well, we already do a lot of this stuff. We already provide some of this training at Calvin Seminary. We talk about abuse of power. We talk about how to avoid abuse. And to say maybe that we don't need to implement another layer of structure, which is kind of how I was feeling a little bit. It's hard to articulate that because right away then people begin to sense that, well, do you not care about protecting the victims of abuse? And of course, that's not the case. It's just more of a... It's a logistical question, but it's such a charged issue that... My concern, and I'm not saying this did or did not happen. It's just my concern with issues like that is that sometimes objectivity gets lost. And again, I'm not saying that it did. I'm not saying that it was pure emotionalism or anything of that sort, because I don't think it was. But there were just kind of moments where I thought, oh, I wonder if this is really the best course of action or if we're just doing this because we feel like we have to based on some of the stories. So... I find that interesting too, because at my church at one point, four of the people in our church were on the registered sex offender list. Right? So I'm dealing with people who have offended, who have abused children. Do they not need the gospel? Well, of course they do. Right? And do I shun them? No. Do I push them out? No. Do I watch them carefully? All of these people with integrity said, hey, here's what happened. Here's who I am. Here's my story. Here's what I did. And so at various times, these four people, we didn't put them in places where... But their mere presence. You know, forget the fact that they're not teaching Sunday school. They're still hanging around in a church. We eat a meal after every service and people hang out. And there's proximity and there's something about that that means that these people are okay because they go to my church and these people aren't and blah, blah, blah. So I always kind of bristle at the idea of safe church because that presumes that we can make a safe church and we can't. You know, and I've talked to Bonnie about, Nichols about this, the director of the safe church stuff. And, you know, I said safer church is good, but a safe church, we always need to be on guard and we always need to be aware of the impact of what we do and say and the impact of the people around. It's like, oh, we have this policy where we look at only those teachers and only those Sunday school teachers and so forth. And yeah, we put glass on the doors and people can look into the room and we have three people back there with the children at any given time for two people. All those things are great things to help make it safer and beautiful things. And if you're not doing them, you're just kind of nuts, you know? But then to say that sin will not out, that's where you start realizing it will and how it will. And I think the other big thing that she brought to the attention is how easily we protect powerful offenders, right? Like, that the offenders, the powerful offenders, no one believes that about them. My son is godparent to a little girl who was abused and by a relative that was higher up in a church. And, you know, it's a horrible thing. It's terrifying to think what happened to her. And then it couldn't be because this person is a, you know, highly respected and honored person. It's that kind of thing that I think that recognizes and sees the other story. But then I have also seen the opposite, which is where I talked to a lady who said, hey, I was so mad at my ex-husband that I made up this story about how he abused my child. And it was in a second marriage. And I did it to get even with him and I ruined his life. And now she's repenting of that, attorney from that. But meanwhile, his life is ruined. So it's always like the facts of these things are always hard and something we need to deeply pay attention to. And I guess maybe to tie these two big issues that we've been talking about together, if I see a commonality, it's that temptation that we have to rely on simple external solutions as opposed to getting down to the real nitty gritty hard work that needs to happen. So, okay, I can send this form letter to my congressman because the Office of Social Justice tells me and I need to care for the poor so I can do this. And I feel like I've done something. Or I can sign a code of conduct that says I'm not going to abuse anybody. I'm not going to be alone with another woman or whatever else. And okay, those may or may not be good things to do, but they don't bring about the real change and renewal that I think we're looking about. Now, that's not to say scrap them and get rid of them, which is sometimes the approach that there are some that would take that, right? We don't need any of these policies. We don't need any of these procedures. Just be good kind of thing. But the real work that is needed is me getting to know my neighbors and the people that live on the streets in my home city and getting to know them by name, getting to know their stories, getting to meet a guy named Steven that lives in my city that I've kind of started to a little bit build up just a connection with. Or making sure that I'm checking my own heart and my own motivations and that I'm conducting myself with integrity, not because it's a policy, but because I need to protect myself, I need to protect others, and so on. And there's the difference, right? And no external thing can drive us down to doing that real work of the heart. And I guess that's what I want to push for, is for that renewal. I'm not saying ignore the other things, but I'm just saying don't rely on them entirely. They're only good insofar as the heart is changed. And the great thing about our denomination, the Cursory Informed Church, is that we don't have a cookie cutter approach to everything. We have this document called Church Order that some people understand, and it's a great guide, especially when the wheels fall off and you really need to use it in order to help and bless the local congregation or individuals involved. It also gives us guidelines for doing so much, but you can't just take it and say, okay, that's how we're going to do church. Well, there's a local context, and so we have to then use that in order to build that local context. Same with the Safe Church policy or a Code of Conduct. It's not going to work in every context, but we have this as a base and then we build upon it. And I think Bev would agree. I think Bonnie Nicholas would agree as well. I think almost anyone would, but you need those building blocks in order to build up protection, to build up a form for doing ministry in those local contexts. I think that's just the great beauty of our church. But it's not just us. We, within our original bodies of classes, then get to hold each other accountable within the classes and not having someone come from outside and say, oh, this is what's going on. I'm glad that Overture didn't move forward because I think that would have been damaging to our whole structure. We, within our classes, keep each other accountable and then, at the synodical level, we can have those accountability problems. So just all of this has been a great picture for doing this local contextual ministry that then works into a larger denominational context of doing the ministry that we can celebrate and hear together. There is an irony in this conversation, Rob, that you bring out where, especially when it's become fashionable to use power as in the word power as an abstraction. And so often it becomes, it has an evil association that, well, this person has power, therefore they're not held accountable, and they can get away with sinning, with impunity, so on and so forth. And so the remedy to this is more power. And nobody stops to say, now, wait a minute. We just said power was the problem. So we're going to create a structure, and it's similar to the zero tolerance policies. While we're going to have a zero tolerance policy, we're going to imbue the structure with power and have bright, clear lines. And then when we have those lines, then we will have a safe church. Then pastors won't sleep with parishioners. Then no one will be above the law. And to me, I listen to this and I think I thought that's what a lot of the Old Testament was about. So let's say, okay, so a woman comes to my door, she's a homeless woman, she's a person of color, and I look through the little window in my office door and I say, oh my goodness, as a woman, I'm all by myself. And so I pull the shade or I'm sorry I can't talk to you until I have, you know. And so, well, now I've just done injustice to this person of color because I've been what Rod said, I think is so beautiful, a safer church, absolutely. How can, well, we're going to use power and make sure that everything goes this way. Oh, but I thought power was the problem with what we've done in the past. And so then, of course, you wind up, you have then these swings where, okay, we're tightening everything up. And then we realize, well, we had a situation in our classes with a pastor who confessed to some things that were very much conduct on becoming a minister. And whether or not he signed a code of conduct, the things that he had done, it was clear within the classes that, you know, this was outside the boundaries, okay. This was outside the boundaries. But this person wasn't caught. This person struggled with their conscience and they came to their local council and they came to the classes. And this person said, the gospel is about restoration. Can I be restored? I'm submitting to the classes and to the church for restoration and I wish to be restored. And I would hope that someday I could once again serve the church in this way. And I'm not making that decision myself. I'm giving it to the church and I trust you. And then classes suddenly is in a position where it says, but we have these new zero tolerance policies. And because you did the right thing, we will have to do this thing. We will have to use the power that the centralized power of synod has mandated to us. And we are going to use this power against you and your life will now be irrevocably changed in a way that almost all of us in the classes feels betrays what the gospel is about. This in the name of. And this is the kind of thing that we that we wrestle with. It becomes in its worst form. It becomes a form of legalism, right? Where where that becomes what we default to. What are the policies and procedures and rules and codes of conduct that we have in place? That has to be our governing principle. That's not to say that we must never have those. It's to raise that tension and to say if we really are people who live shaped by grace, how do we hold together truth and grace together? How do we you know, and that's that's not always best done by looking to the rule book. And I don't you know, I don't know what all this what the answers are. I don't think they're simple. But I just don't want us to be lulled into a false sense of security because you know, well, don't worry, we've got windows on our Sunday school room. So we're not there's not going to be abuse here, right? So I accompanied a man in our church to the sheriff's office because he had not registered and was a registered sex offender and was required by law to do that. And so he was shaking like a leaf and terrified that they would take him into custody. And he said, and I'll go to jail. And because I was registered sex offender, I will get passed around in prison like, like, and not in a, it'll be a horror thing. Right. It's an awful thing. And so he's terrified. So I'm praying with him in the parking lot. And I went into the most depressing room I've ever been in in my life, which is the sheriff's office where they deal with registering sex offenders. And you see these people sitting there. And then I asked the sheriff deputy, what do we, you know, he didn't, he hasn't registered. And, and the sheriff's deputy was kind and registered him and said, you know, don't let this happen again. And, but he doesn't have an address. He's homeless. So he has to give an address, his brother's address or something, because he doesn't have a, and so I said, is there a way to, for him to not be homeless? And the sheriff said, well, there's these three places where he can go possibly get an apartment, but there's usually not any openings there. And I said, well, what about jobs? He says, are you kidding me? He's never going to get a job. And that's exactly what happened. He would get hired. Somebody would run a check on him and he would be fired the next day. So here's a guy. And I think where's Jesus in this, right? Is Jesus, is this a modern day leper that he can never be redeemed? Because he can't ever be clean. But is it true that often that's true? Like they can't ever, like, so then what do you do with all that? And I think those are the frustrating things around this whole discussion. And so I think it's always individual. I think it's always personal and I think it's always relational. And I think that's also then lends itself to the problem of, well, we'll surround Pastor Joe over here, Pastor Harry over here, Pastor Sam over here, because we know that, you know, he's really a good person underneath the horrible thing that he just did. I think one of the powers of having a lot of women come to Synod at this point is that we hear the other side of that, the victimizations that happened. And those struggles with those others coming around the person who was the perpetrator and protecting them rather than exposing their sin and calling them to repentance. I also, with fair regularity, go and help people get registered. And I remember having a conversation, you know, some of the people that I helped, they got on the list back when the laws were such and then the laws changed. Now they're swept up on this list. They never did anything that really requires them on the list. And I'm talking and the people that work, these are dark places. But I often find that the officers there are patient, they have common sense, they, you know, and many of the people I go in with have mental illness issues. And so I talking to the guy and he says, you know, you wouldn't believe, I have to go to nursing homes and people who are practically comatose. And I have to go there and, well, here they are in the bed and I'm writing them in. And, you know, then I have, you know, I have a son who was working in the state legislature. I was talking to him about that. He's, you know, he's telling me, yeah, the system knows, the system knows there are crazy things about it, but politically, it's not going to be changed. Okay, well, now we're talking about power again. I mean, the church is concerned about this. State of California is concerned about this with more people than Canada. And so they have nailed this down. And so suddenly these people with mental illness who are often people of color are now again victims of power and they get incarcerated. And now we've got the social justice conversation. And I watch all of this happen and I say, please Lord Jesus come quickly. Amen. So one thing about the power in your comment about equating California to Canada and the numbers, the president of Senate kept harassing Canadians as well. And I put it out there because I know a lot of the YouTubers that are going to be watching this, they're going to think, oh, this is another Canada bashing thing. And the lone Canadian of the group is just going to be meek and lowly, is not going to say anything. I'm going to pull a Justin Trudeau and call you out on the carpet and say, we are not going to stand for any of this. You need to clean up your business and treat Canadians as they need to be treated with respect. I don't feel the least bit sorry for you, Richard. You know what, you betrayed your citizens and moved to the United States. I talked to your father and he grieves deeply that you've moved down there. With a beverage one night because you know, bemoaning the fact that his son had left. I did it all by due process. Whatever process you want to follow, you know, you do. I may or may not have mocked Canadians. I don't know. I don't really have any recollection. I didn't exhale when I was mocking. That might be able to prove that. Rod, I want you to, you mentioned a little bit about your committee. No one was on committee four. Committee four had all the work and all the turmoil and all the action. Rod, you mentioned something on your advisory committee that impressed you. Why don't you talk a little bit about that? A concern raised from an overture and I should have looked it up because I didn't. The overture dealing with the desire to form a standing committee to deal with Bible translations. There was a lot of concern about that. A lot of desire for the church to know which Bible translations are approved for worship and which are not. It just engendered a great deal of discussion, not on the floor of Senate so much, but certainly in our committee. I think primarily around the fact that translations are evolving, for lack of a better word. For instance, I think the originators of the proposal, they had the 1984 NIV, but now it's been updated and upgraded. When they wanted to replace it, somebody said, hey, it says this in the 1984 version, but it says this in this other version. Concerns about all of that. The committee, I think, felt it kind of went back and forth between, whatever you want to use for your personal devotions is one thing, so it kind of got sidetracked by that. As committees sometimes will. But then the church itself does have to say, were these changes substantive so that it actually becomes a different translation? Or is it more pure now than it was before? Or were there changes? And I think just a recognition that the Bible industry, and that's a sad phrase, but the Bible industry constantly comes up with new translations and upgrades to ones that have already been translated or changes to those. And it does then present a problem to the church. I think in the committee, there was the sort of longing that there would be a committee, a standing committee that could give advice to the churches on that. But then funding of that and financing that, and is it such a big deal that we should put out a lot of money to make that happen so that every time there's a nuanced change or a different version coming out of, for instance, the NIV, should we go back then and what does that look like to constantly do that? And it becomes way too expensive. I thought it was interesting only, well, to the extent that the controversial idea that there are, it is a translation that then gets changed, right? So the language gets changed. Well, if we went back to the original languages and we all agreed on this one word and now we've changed that word, what does that mean? It also engenders a lot of discussion about how it is that scholars come to an understanding of what words to use and then also just ever evolving language. We basically dump it on the committee, Council of Delegates. Council of Delegates, that's the word, Council of Delegates. In true-cited fashion. You don't know what to do with this, here's CCOD, and then after we give it to them and they do something, we're like, what are you doing? Usurping your authority? Well, we realized we don't have the money to do this. I think it might have come out of committee if money were no object, I think there was enough interest there that it might have come out and said, hey, let us form a standing committee of trusted folks that can look at these regularly. But it was fascinating. And I think it says something about, hey, the Bible industry, that I can now get a Bible that fits my particular peccadilloes regarding if I'm a motorcyclist or if I'm a, I want the pink Bible because I'm in favor of whatever. It's just, it is kind of crazy. Press cancer researchers. Exactly. Right, and there's a Bible with little footnotes and all the other wonderful things for whatever category you want. And I think as that proliferates, and it is proliferating massively, it does become problematic for the church, I think. Well, and there are regularly, I regularly hear calls, a church will say, we need, we expanded our sanctuary. We have the NIV 1984, but that's out of print, so we can only get the NIV 2011. And the NIV 2011 went from valley of the shadow of, the 84 had valley of the shadow of death, that when we hear that, we think, oh, which is of course the RSV and the King James. NIV 2011 says dark valley, where's the poetry? Where's the song? Right, right. Valley of the shadow of death. Dark valley? But in, you know, in Eukaryonic, I think it's the valley of the shadow of death. I'm almost positive. I have to check with Rod. Rod is the expert on unirritic translations and translating words that come from. And so, listen to Rod on it. There's a story that comes out of Calvin Seminary. Basvin Elderin was, you know, John Steck and Basvin Elderin of the Christian Forum Church, Calvin Seminary, were on the first NIV translation team. And so, Basvin Elderin would give some of his best Greek students some passages to study. And I know some of those students, this is a generation before me at seminary. Bas wasn't there when I went to seminary. And they, what I've heard is that basically these students would do their best work and give it to Bas and Bas would say, yeah, that's how we're going to translate it. But, or that's how, that would be the best way to do it. But let's just go with the King James. You're not bothering people. The difference wasn't that much. Well, Bas isn't there anymore. So, now we live with the dark valley instead of the valley of the shadow of death. No, that's a great point. And that gets into all of these complexities that you have in the life of the church. And, you know, Zondervans is no longer in the Christian Forum Church. Zondervans used to kind of be our house, but they were bought out by a multinational publishing company. So out of Canada, probably. Well, let's have one more go round and any final thoughts that you might have. And if there's something you want to plug, go ahead and plug it. And yeah, go ahead. Well, I'll start. So, our synod was the Christian Forum Church and we met jointly with the Reform Church of America. And that was a big sort of side piece to it. And we're trying to figure out how to work together. And the Reform Church of America, RCA, went and decided to form some committee to talk about how they're actually going to do things, whether or not they're actually going to be a denomination, whether they're going to divide upon theological lines, or if they're going to do something else. And so we were meeting to try to figure out what we can do closer together. And then this sort of popped up Saturday night. And we're like, or at least I was like, oh, okay, well, sort of put all of our conversations that we had jointly together on the shelf. And we'll cautiously step forward and we'll see in two years' time whether or not the Reform Church of America will be in existence or if they're going to come banging on our door. Let us in! You want in with us? You know, Dad's mom is finally coming back home to the... To live with the kids! Kicked out or left 160 years ago. And now mom's finally coming back home. And are we going to feed through the little thing? Oh, we can't let mom back in! No, you can't live with me, Mom. Swam! So for me, that little portion was like, you know, this balloon, it's looking good, and suddenly it got popped. And I'll be watching what sort of happens with the Reform Church of America in the next two years and what kind of directions they're going to be moving in. And so it'll be kind of fascinating, especially with some of the conservative congregations, because they're anticipating 2021 and our report on human sexuality. And so there's lots of waiting and looking and waiting and posturing. And part of me is like, just toss it out. Let's sit around the table with 10 of us and let's hammer something out and get it done. And maybe by 2020, we'll have something in place. But that so that was my thing. Best Synod ever, I think. Personally, just from the collegiality, the Holy Spirit movement, and I've seen other synods, but this one certainly was all over the place. And I think building bridges for better communication, being able to sit across the table and not wanting to lean across it and beat the crap out of our brother and sister. Which has happened in other synods, physically and just in words. I too was deeply touched by the, as I said, ironic spirit. It was just such a peaceful, but not peace in the sense of people not hearing each other. It's just that we literally, I think, laid polarization aside. Like we just decided we're going to listen and we're going to not assume that we have locked down truth on any given side. And so I appreciated that. And then to see that bear out in the RCA, the Reformed Church of America, to see that, the division there. But even that, I think, at least from people that I spoke with, there was a, hey, maybe we can't live together, but how do we then not live together well? And I have some appreciation for that, a good deal of appreciation. I have a very diverse church and I have people all over the political spectrum and all over every other spectrum. And it's easy to make your little Facebook stand about whatever it is you want to make a Facebook stand about and drive a wedge between people. Or you can all sit down for dinner, which we often, which we always do after our evening service. We always have dinner together and sit down with that person and have to look them in the eye and say the things that we want to say. And then it becomes a whole different world. And so I think that's a good thing. And then it becomes a whole different world. So yeah, I just appreciated it. I agree. I was the best Senator of the 10 that I've attended. It was the best. Wow. Yeah. And I don't have a lot to add to that, but maybe just kind of to echo some of those thoughts from just a slightly different angle. I just finished reading a book. It came out 17 years ago, so I'm really late to the party, but it was Putnam's book, Bowling Alone. Some of you guys may have read that. And in there, he talks about, well, he talks about a lot of things, but one of the things that kind of stuck with me is he talks about the loss of schmoozing, that old art of just talking to people and maintaining those informal relationships and how important that is for the health and vitality of community. And there was a lot of schmoozing at Synod this year. And it occurred to me that a lot of the work done at Synod was done after hours over a cold beer or a glass of Coke or Pepsi or something like that, watching the Stanley Cup or watching the NBA. You could look at that and just dismiss that as, well, everyone just kind of needs to decompress for a little bit. But I really recognized how important that informal connecting really is. And I think that's what contributed to the overall tenor of Synod this year. There was a lot of that just hanging out. And, OK, you don't see eye to eye, but I was sitting and watching the Stanley Cup final game and Mike Hogaterp was next to me and I didn't even realize until later who the guy was. But we were chatting and just having a good conversation and then all of a sudden, oh, I see who this guy is. OK. But that's the point. The horns? The horns? The horns? Right. Right. Exactly. Exactly. So just to see that, because I don't think you'd necessarily find that everywhere. But we had that. And I just was, I enjoyed that. I think it was to our health and well-being as a church that we still had some of that going on. You know, I wonder in 2017 we had Inspire, which was in Detroit, where the denomination had, I was really happy to see the denomination do this, where we had an event where there wasn't an agenda for the conference in terms of we're going to do business here. And I think this Synod 2, you never quite know how full a Synod is going to be. 2016 was a very full agenda. This agenda wasn't terribly full. And that, I think, could possibly also play a part in it. And I wonder if we have, you know, Thursday to Thursday, or Friday to Thursday, this is Synod when we do it. I do wonder if we couldn't, now we've got this council of delegates, and then we're going to throw more stuff on them and blame them for acting on it. But, you know, I wonder sometimes if looking ahead at the agenda we might be able to say, and it's terribly difficult logistically, I get that. We don't want to make D. Wrecker's life any harder. D. helps run the whole Synod thing. There you go, D. Name out. D. might watch this. So hi, D. Love the job you do. But I think there is something about a little bit of intentionality where you've got a Synod to adjusting its pace so that you do have time to be together off, you know, out of the advisory committee, off the floor, and get to know each other person to person. Right. There is no substitute for that. Especially, I've been reading N. T. Wright's biography of the Apostle Paul, and it's a wonderful book. It's nicely pitched so that you can enjoy it as a pastor. You don't need Greek or Hebrew or a theological education to enjoy the book either. It's a lovely book, and one of the things that comes through in that book was, you know, this dynamic new thing that the New Testament church was where you had slave and free, Greek, you know, Jew and Gentile, you know, Scythians and those from Antioch coming together and breaking bread and building those interpersonal connections while, okay, we're going to have a lot of things to fight about. But if we've got this thing together, well, maybe we can make a way forward. So this, I think, is part of the initial genius of the church, and I think in our context where we do business, we ought not to forget some of these foundational things of the church. And I hear that. That didn't come through from the agenda or from watching the video. You're watching on a screen and you don't really know, but I'm so encouraged to hear the report from each of you about how this was manifest at Synod. That's a terribly encouraging thing to hear. Yeah, that's right. Well, I want to thank each of you for taking the time to do this, and I will render this. That means it all gets compressed and I will post it up on YouTube, and I'll send each of you an email. And, you know, the spirit why I do these videos is exactly what we're talking about, because in my experience, often in text, now on social media, it's even worse. We can get like this over important issues. These are important issues, and they're worth debating and deliberating. But I, even in this medium of YouTube where we see each other's faces and we hear each other's voices and we look at the silly things on our walls, maybe we can love one another even while we disagree, and perhaps even find then structures and even use power in a way that doesn't violate the God of power who delegates power to us to use on behalf of Shalom and the flourishing of his kingdom. So there's my little sermon for you. Well said. So thank you all, and just stay on the line. I'm going to stop the recording and we can do a little debrief after. Okay. All right.