https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=0h_6xrLP4Ac

 Well, I'm here today with Christopher. Your last name Maestro Pietro, is that correct? I wish. Maestro Pietro. Maestro Pietro. Is that Italian? It is Italian, very much so. Okay. I get all variations on it. Do you come from a very Italian family? Well, it depends what you mean by very Italian. I mean, I'm, my folks were both born here, so my grandparents were the immigrants from Italy. Okay. So, you know, I think we're fairly Canadianized at this point. I didn't grow up in a, it wasn't fraught with Italian-ness. But yeah, there's, I certainly have some connection to it that's, that's meaningful to me. But, but yeah, it's not the first thing I think of. Did you grow up in Toronto? I did. Okay. I did. Yeah, my, my family's originally, my family grew up in Montreal, actually, which isn't too far from Toronto. And then they, they came here in the 80s. So I grew up here. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Now, now you've, now obviously your claim to fame, at least at this point, is you sort of pop into, pop on the radar screen with John Vervecky. How did you get to know him? Well, I was a student. I mean, my, my story with John kind of typifies John's, John's relationship with many of his former students and, you know, turned friends and collaborators. I started as a student. This would have been back in, I think it was 2010 when I first took his course and I first met him. You know, unlike so many that came before me, I was, I was, I was awed by the course and I was awed by the way it recast so much of what I had already known and studied ostensibly into a very new light and elucidated things that I had never been exposed to before. And I can just say that in brief, because again, that's the story of so many people who have encountered John. I wasn't the first, certainly not the last. So that happened back in 2010. And then, and then I, and I went away for a while on exchange when I was an undergraduate and I came back and all the while, you know, John's, John's course had, had been, had been gestating and I had been thinking about it and thinking about it. It was so, it was, it was so meaningful to me, the relation that I had struck with it, not so much with John as a person, because at that point I didn't know him except as an instructor, but the relationship I struck with the course and its content was, I was deeply impressed by it. And so when I got back, I went and approached John and I, I prostrated myself before him and I said, John, I'd like to be involved. It was, it moved me and I don't know what that means in practice. All I know is that any way I can be of service to it, I would very much like to. So what I really, really wanted to do is to apprentice him and that sort of old Academy way that doesn't really happen much anymore at universities, or at least not as much as perhaps it used to. And John, this is obvious, certainly to you and to probably any people who watch your videos and John's videos will probably know this already, but John's very intellectually generous, right? His MO is to share his work because he sees it as a concerted effort, as a concerted project, right? His phylia, etc. So I didn't know that at the time because I didn't know him well as a person. But of course he was, he was, he was, he was very welcoming. He was welcoming of assistance. It took, I think it took some months before, between the time that I approached him and the time that I actually became a proper collaborator. Because I think he wanted to ease me in. He wanted to test both the degree of my interest and my comprehension of his argument and my capacity to contribute to it. And so we went through a period where, you know, I would, I would help to annotate and provide sort of editorial support to his work. And, and then eventually that turned a corner and he offered me co-authorship on the book that at the time he had just started, or I think he had written, I think he had written a preface to it. It was going to be his book on the meaning crisis, right? His sort of his definitive work on the topic. And, and that would have been probably 2012 or so when we started that. And, you know, eight, seven odd years later, here I am. We've been working together more or less continuously with some breaks now and again, but we've been working more or less continuously since then. Obviously the project, the figuration of the project has changed profoundly in the intervening years. You know, it looks very different now, both in content and in style than it did then. So it's transformed a lot. And of course, my relationship with John has as well. We've become very dear friends. So, but yeah, that's, that's the story in brief. Perhaps not so brief. Are you, are you employed by the university? No, my occupational life is actually not at all really coterminous with my vocational work as it as it relates to my, my work with John. I work in public policy by, by day, as it were. I moonlight as a co-author with John. I work for the civil service here in Ontario, and I do work related to privacy, etc. So very, very, very separate compartments of life. Okay. A lot of cognitive dissonance. Okay. Well, that's, but you know, that, that little tidbit of information is really helpful for, because if you're part of the, part of the challenge of learning through YouTube is that there's very little context. And so people just pop up on a screen. And so this is part of the reason why I, you know, especially if I, you know, I'd like to have people share their story because I think the context of your life is very helpful in terms of understanding your contribution. And that's, I just think of a fact of life. Now, why do you think you found his, his course so meaningful and why, you know, why was it, why did it impact you in the way it did? Do you think? Um, well, that's a big question. Well, I think it managed to, if I can use a metaphor, John was, John's course was kind of like, it was a way of irrigating seeds that had been sown years prior, but that had never, never had the opportunity to grow properly. It was like my, I had latent, well, they weren't latent, but they were certainly underdeveloped interests in both philosophy, particularly that of the ancient Greeks, particularly that of Plato. And then alongside that, I had, I had a prevailing interest in, in, in, in religion and Christianity. And I had a very, and have, I should say in the present tense, a very ambivalent relationship with, I grew up Catholic, but I have a very ambivalent relationship with my Catholicism. I shouldn't say my Catholicism because I don't, yeah. The question of religious identity is a very tricky question. Maybe we can get into that later, but I grew up Catholic and I had a very ambivalent relationship with it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, that's what I do. That's what you do. Well, I'm looking forward to chatting about that with you because even having seen a couple of your videos already, I, I enjoy the way that you interrogate this matter of religious identity. I'm kind of looking forward to doing it with you. Okay, okay. Because I have a couple of questions for you. I'm genuinely curious to get your take on a couple of things. Okay, well, let's focus on you for the first little while. Sure, yeah. So I had this, despite my ambivalence practically, I had a persistent academic interest in religion and then burgeoning in theology and in philosophy and all of these things were really entangled. And I had been pursuing that interest in my degree up to that point, but I had found with few exceptions, I had found that the quality, I had found that the depth and the tenor of the instruction was not speaking to me. There was something wasn't connecting. And, and it was almost like, I don't know, it's funny when I think of my, my university education up to the point I met John, there was sort of a listlessness to it. You know, it was interested and it had its moments, but there was something less than ultimate about it, if I can put it that way. And it wasn't really getting to where the heat of my interest really lay and, and my, the course with John changed all of that. Because it is, it was as though I had been trying to access the meaning of this central project that lay in succession through the spine of all of these different epochs and disciplines, right? Right? Being, for instance, Platonism and Neoplatonism, right? And the succession through into Christianity and Christian thought, etc. That there's the central project that burns at the heart of those traditions, a symbolic project. What I now know or what I now conceive to be a symbolic project that I find deeply meaningful and stirring and moving. But that, but that the academic conveyance of those traditions and those topics at the university was not accessing that somehow. And John did. And John knows that about himself. In fact, I think he and you spoke about that to some degree in your last chat together. He knows this about himself because enough people like me have told him that he has a way of representing that project. It's such a way that he depicts its essence accurately and with all due importance, because that was the other thing. It was like minutes. It's he'll probably enjoy me saying this because I'm going to use the word relevance. And of course, his relevance realization is very, very fundamental to his work and students, virtual students of his who are following his videos will know that. But he also had a way of testifying to the relevance of that content, the relevance of philosophy, the relevance of the Christian project as well, despite not being a Christian, which is a wonderful irony about John that I never ceased to enjoy. That it took a non-Christian to convey, to convey, you know, the the essence of the project of Christianity to me, even though I grew up ostensibly as a Christian. So he had a way of he had a way of of of expressing and exemplifying, you know, both in his deportment and his passion for the actual content, but also, of course, in the lucidity of his of his lectures, he had a way of conveying its relevance, its import, why I should care, you know, in a way that few other people did. And because for him, it's a practice, right? It's it's something to be assumed and embodied and enacted. It's not it's not simply a series of interesting or uninteresting propositional facts. So anyway, that that's what really that's what it was at first. And then it all unfolded from there. OK, what was what was the practice of of your family growing up with respect to the Catholicism that that you experienced in your in your home growing up? Well, I think we were Catholics nominally. Maybe we typified Catholics, at least Catholics, you know, Canadian Catholics of a certain of a certain profile, because, you know, we didn't go to church very often. So we had, I would say, a cultural relationship to Catholicism, perhaps as opposed to a deeply religious relationship to Catholicism. I that was at least true of me. My parents both differed, I think, in their relationship to Catholicism. But but the kind that I inherited was a cultural, a habitual one, a respectful one. It wasn't like I didn't abjure. I mean, I didn't abjure my Catholicism and disavow it and rebel against it. I had a few moments in adolescence, but I was never harmed by it, certainly. But I also wasn't whelmed by it when I was young. And and we went to church, you know, we went to church pretty infrequently. But despite so I never as time went on, you know, certainly in early adulthood, I stopped identifying myself as a Catholic or as a Christian because I felt that it was and I don't mean that gleefully at all. You know, if anything, I as I've gotten older and older, I've developed a deeper, deeper, deeper connection and relationship and respect sounds too dissociated. So respect is not the right word, but involvement with it. So I don't mean that I that I shoot it gleefully or anything like that. But I never felt like I could authentically call myself Catholic or Christian because I was a Christian. I didn't frequent service. I didn't partake sacraments. I didn't, you know, I didn't pray. Certainly not not in any, you know, not not in any any way discernible way that not in an ecclesial way, I should say. So I disidentified with it because I didn't feel that I could wear it and be genuine. And I still feel that way, despite my my deep intellectual appreciation of it. And despite the work that I'm doing with John, in which it figures very importantly, I still feel somewhat dissociated from it. But on the other hand, it's funny that, you know, I say that. But I think in some ways, it's also kind of an endogenous feature of me. Like, you know, you can take the person out of the Catholicism, but you can't take the Catholicism out of the person. I do feel that's I do feel that that's true. Yeah. And I can feel it's I can feel it working through me at times, you know, especially as I've gotten older. I see it surfacing in my behavior. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. More and more. So I know it's there. It's like baked into my tissue. Yeah. And that's sort of what I was alluding to at the beginning when I said the issue of religious identity is such a fraught one for me because I identified by practice and identified by by any formal affiliations or, you know, involvement in the liturgy, et cetera. I am I am not clearly not a Catholic or a Christian. Right. I don't practice. I don't practice. I don't practice. I don't practice. I'm not a Catholic or a Christian. Right. I don't practice. I don't partake of the rituals. What did you study when you went? What did you study when you went to university? A myriad of things. I veered into all kinds of things. I settled on doing semiotics, which was the study of signs and symbols, but in and around that was a mixture of philosophy, of a little bit of political science. And then a miscellaneous kind of panoply of different things that I could whatever whatever I could grab and tuck under the semiotics umbrella because administratively it was very permissive to be able to take courses from various disciplines and then fold them into a semiotics major, which was convenient in some ways at the time, although I think it's been in the sense then because you end up being an enthusiast of many disciplines and a master of none of them. So I think that that became my lot a little bit. But semiotics nominally was my major. And that was a way of framing my interest in these other topics, these other disciplines. What do you think is at the heart of John's project? One of the things that I've learned in talking to students of, you know, some students of Jordan Peterson is that I've discovered that some of his students, sometimes the student knows the master better than the master knows himself. Because because one of the things, you know, coming from the inside, we've got all of this, we're all bound up in ourselves and and those watching us and listening to us. They sometimes know us better in certain degrees than we know ourselves. So what do you what's what if you could summarize John's project? What do you think it is? That's a really interesting point. I think that's true. I think that's true. I think that's true. And I think that I'll answer your question in a second. But I just wanted to jump on this thought because I think that your point, which I think is well put, speaks to the importance of cultivating intimate relationships that are very comprehending such that you can trust people to tell you things about yourself that you might not have known. And I think that's very true. Yeah. I think John's well, so reductively, John's project is both his intellectual project and I think fundamentally his personal project because for him they're continuous as are the relationships right there's a reason that many of John's close colleagues are also close friends and vice versa. Because again, his he believes deeply, deeply in in this platonic sociability and platonic intimacy, whereby discourse becomes a way of interpenetrating perspective and interjecting, you know, other selves to to in order that all involved may identify with the process of knowing. Right. That they become they become you become continuous with that process of revealing and unfolding things and that the best way of doing that is in a concerted process. And that's what the deal logos right the Socratic deal logos is about. And that's why John is such a an ardent apologist and advocate for the Socratic deal logos because it's it's not not community for the sake of community with which I think is important to say, but it's community leveraged for a kind of I'm always I'm always. I'm always tempted to use an instrumental metaphor because I think the tuning using extrinsic melodies to tune and then to tune in concert in order to actually synchronize and harmonize, which is a very ancient metaphor, obviously, but I think that's really apt when talking about John and when talking about John's his his sort of the tea loss if there can be said to be one of his project. Certainly, that's what I think he would aspire to. I think John's I mean, I don't want to talk talk about it too personally, but I think this much will be out. This much will be out. He'll watch this. Watch this. Yeah. But I certainly won't say anything that he hasn't already said in one form or another itself. I think that John has said in these various these various conversations he said publicly that, you know, John is I think were he not so harmed by it early in life, John has a what can be said to me to actually be a very, very deeply, deeply religious instinct and attunement. And I think that saying that is completely commensurate with with his definition of non theism as as he self reports it. I think that's true. I think those things can be simultaneously true. But that's why John appreciates John has this appreciable comprehension of religion and the religious project and the religious and religious experience as few people that I've met do. And there's obviously a reason for that. And so I think that at in his heart, you know, he feels it very, he has a he has like a he's he's he's like it's almost like he's afflicted by it. He has a very, a very almost a he's he's he's possessed of a certain. I don't know, a certain perspicacity when it comes to religious thinking and and his relationship with it is very ambivalent to but I think he he feels. And I can say this also because perhaps just by proxy to him and in my own right, I feel some version of the same thing. He feels burdened by his comprehension that there is a problem of such a high order that it appears insoluble and that the only way of addressing it is to is to is to is to take very, very, very close examination of it and to be dissected properly. And I think he sees it. I think he sees it and I think he feels it. And I think that I think that his awareness of that problem, I kind of think about it as, you know, imagine and I and again, I know that you're a Christian pastor, so I'm aware that I'm talking to a I'm talking to a Christian as I say this. But again, I'm, you know, just as he would say, I mean it very respectfully. You won't hurt me. I know, I know. I speak the truth. I value, I value frank communication. I have more than adorned and embroidered communication. Yes, well that's that's and that's one of your virtues as an interlocutor. That's been that's been clear to me just watching a couple of your videos, which is why I'm so pleased to be talking to you, Paul. Because by the way, this is me breaking the seal. I mean, I don't do. This is the first time I've done a video such as that. And yeah, it is. I'm extremely, you know, this is a whole other topic of conversation. But when it comes to like online, like extemporizing about these kinds of topics online, especially about topics of such like these are dizzying stakes to me. You know, these are we're talking about things of an ultimate value. And and so talking offhandedly about them in a public forum in a very unpolished way is a scary thing. I'm always afraid of like being an excess of my expertise, which is bound to happen a lot. And and I'm like I'm very, very wary of that. It makes me nervous. But but it's also perhaps for the same reasons. It's it's so important that I need to start loosening the, you know, loosening the knot on that that kind of taciturn instinct a little bit. As you can see, I'm clearly at clearly my issue with it isn't that overwhelming because here I am talking to you and enjoying it. Well, you're very articulate and you speak well. So why? But but it's but it's actually like it's a it's a pardon. We are getting some feedback. We are getting some delay. Are we? Yeah. OK. Is that is that an audio thing that I should resolve with some headphones or if you plug in some headphones, it'll probably help. It's part of the delay in the communication. OK. All right. Give me a second. I'll do that. OK, Paul, how's this? Sounds good. Sounds good. Oh, wait, you're still it's it's still coming out your speakers. If you look at if you look at the if you move your mouse, possibly recording. OK. So yeah, I was saying you're you're very articulate. You're really well spoken. And in the in the two kind of ancillary videos that you did with John, you know, I was very impressed with, you know, I could see you starting to run with some things in and the zombie video and in the symptomatic video. And so I I wanted to, you know, I wanted to pick your brain a little bit. And again, as I found with as I found with Jordan Peterson, it's talking to talking to Jordan, some of Jordan's students. And I mean, probably some of Jordan's exceptional students that have worked with him, not just been in his class, but been partners with him. You can get a you can get a better sense of, OK, what's this project? What what what what is he really doing? Because, you know, like your reticence, anybody with any sense at all would say, yeah, to just go on YouTube and start spewing ideas, especially if you have things to lose. It's not necessarily the most there's risk involved in this. So and I appreciate that. But I'm I'm a little older. Yeah, absolutely. I'm at the point in my career where it's like, all right, I can do this. And my, you know, my sons who are in their 20s. Well, you do it well. You've cultivated it very well. Well, that's that's just age. You learn how to do stuff as you get older if you're if you're blessed with it. So, you know, part of what's in, you know, a lot of a lot of my lot of people who listen to me don't I don't think necessarily understand my project. I am I am fascinated by I am fascinated by people's religious behaviors, especially those that have happened, I think, in some ways because of the failure of the church. And one might argue that, in fact, the entire Protestant Reformation is part of that. You know, almost almost every Protestant in some way could say, you know, I'm a Protestant because the the Latin Church failed me. And even the division between the Latin and the Eastern Church is is a demarcation of failure. But in all of that failure, there's at least the potential for. Okay, well, what what has the church failed to learn? What has the church failed to failed to grow? And so, you know, your story. So then it's it's very interesting to me and very believable to me how, you know, okay, grew up nominally Catholic, went to university and here. This professor who himself has, you know, had a an experience with the church, a different church that that set him on a course in some ways parallel to it. That really interests me. And so that's part of the reason why I'm very interested in talking to you and and really discovering what you've learned. Because, you know, I think I think we are, you know, we are seeking in a sense, Paul in Athens in the Book of Acts, you know, we're seeking something that we don't know. And or we don't know it enough. Now, some again, I have a whole bunch of people who are going to jump on me for saying something. Well, your pastor is certain, you know, God, yeah, but to know God more. And basically, by the definition of God and Christianity, he by virtue of our size and his size, he is not something we can ever exhaust. And and what I, you know, I originally that's right. I originally was interested in, you know, the Jordan Peterson phenomenon. It's like, why would this why would this guy? Yeah, there's kind of the whole political side of it, which is which is certainly part of the rise. But to me, the the the more fascinating element was why why are so many people at least religion curious because of him. And then when people started then pointing me to John's work. Right. Right. And and whereas Jordan, Jordan's kind of doing his thing, I noticed with John a much more careful walking through of an argument, paying careful attention to the philosophy and then learning. I didn't know much about cognitive science, but learning that. And so I thought, well, this is a this is a project that interests me because I'm going to be able and I found myself learning, reflecting on experience as a pastor and saying, oh, here are some psychological reasons for the things that I see in people. And so that's that's part of what sort of drew me into this this corner of the conversation. Paul, if I can, if I can just before you go on, if I can say I think that that especially as a pastor at this point in your career, at this point in your vocation, turning to such a voluminous and weighty conversation and diving headlong into it in the careful way that you've done, I think is an extremely existentially courageous thing to have done. And I mean that like I mean that very sincerely, because a person can be can can hold fast to to his, his, his set of propositions and and and you know, and and and and and loathe the idea of being dispossessed of them. Because because to be dispossessed of them is is a very destabilizing thing, right? That aporetic experience of suddenly facing a disclosure that undermines the you know, the scaffolding of your belief systems is an incredibly incredibly dangerous thing. And I mean that it's like it's a dangerous thing to do. It's important, but it's dangerous. And I think it takes a certain amount of courage to do it. So I just wanted to say that I'm very impressed by that. I and I applaud you for it really. Well, thank you. Well, well, so you went to university studied semiotics, you got into you got into John's class, you, you in a sense, you know, presented yourself as an apprentice. And again, in his I've been I've been very struck by his generosity, his openness, his willingness to engage that that's been that's been quite remarkable to me. Yeah, but but now how how has first are you married? No, okay. Okay, so I'm not because that's a that's a dimension, you know, if you're if you're married, spiritual spiritual journeys with a partner are different than because because they're so foundational and they're so deep and and many things, you know, that that very much changes people. So, so what? I can imagine. What, what changed you about what how did john's course change you. Not only in terms of thought, but also in terms of emotion and practice. That's a good question. Um, how did it Well, I think the course, I mean, the value of the course, the course just impressed me it sort of it. I was I was I was shell shocked with wonder by the course because it just took so much of what I had been been interested in and and and and put a light underneath it. And so the the the value of the course really, but in the end, the value of the course was the entree to john and to his work, you know, that was my it was my way into his world. So the value of the course is just at this point is just instrumental. It just got me to it. And it was and it was also an accident, right? I had I was very unfamiliar with him beforehand and I took the course because it kind of sounded interesting and and and in a very Socratic way, he framed its thesis very unassumingly. So it was a great deal more than than I bargained for. So the course just got me to him the practice of working with him, though, and getting to know him well and and and and collapsing together the professional and the personal dimensions of the relationship has available kinds of things for me. I mean, it's put me it has shown me well, for one thing, it showed me what I'm it has. It's revealed my own skill set, I think, to me more clearly than I think I knew it before. I was very I think I was for a long time I was very insecure about what what exactly what things I was I was I had an affinity for and which things I didn't and and identifying too closely with those things but but identifying with them again, sort of in the wrong way. So I think working with John gave it gave me practice, you know, especially the practice of of of of working on the book with John, I was just writing all the time and with him, you know, I was I was writing in volume that I had never written in before and then the process of actually fashioning the material with him right working on working with him on the editorial process working with him on the arguments and we spent so many hours and hours and hours and hours over the last several years that the practice of doing that. I mean, it made me it well it made me a better writer for one thing but it just it made me a more perspicuous thinker and communicator because the main john had I'm not trying to aggrandize john by saying this I mean john's a dear friend so I have no you know I don't worry about. I don't worry about there's no risk of me in vaguely him or anything like that when I came a compliment it's true that john has had the kind of effect on me and my thinking and my constitution my intellectual and and in some ways my emotional constitution that the figure of Socrates is supposed to have on the constitution of his interlocutors you're supposed to internalize the process you're supposed to internalize the figure and the figure's way of operating and you're supposed to have the way of operating. You're supposed to assume it and it helps you to elasticize the way in which you identify and and and adopt and change perspectives. And reflexively that also means that it changes the way you identify with yourself you identify yourself as kind of for the know. Good one. I wish I could claim it is technology is the God that limps. Yeah, that to the notes. I'm not a note taker. I get interested and I stopped taking notes when I get interested. Oh really seems funny. I'm the opposite. I can't I can scarcely get through a video or get through a book sometimes because I'm so busy with my marginalia that I have to stop and just follow the stream of consciousness. I'm not sure where I cut out but but I guess what I was a gal I'll be briefer but what I was trying to say about about my rapport with John is what it did is his his his method his dialogic method. Which is very Socratic in nature because he has I think both by disposition and by practice cultivated a very Socratic discursive method. I've I've internalized it and over the years and and and identified by means of it. And so I have a very close sense of identification with John and that's why we have an easy shorthand is because are we have a shared vocabulary both literally and otherwise that allows for a very It did just allow us for a very interpenetrated way of thinking and communicating. So where was I going with that the other but so so just understanding my own interests orienting better to my own interests and also distinguishing from them from john I mean you know for a long time, all I did was essentially put my myself in service of his work. And then what happened over time is there was a process of individuating from it and participating in the work as a as a full participant as opposed to simply an instrument in service of his melody. And so now we we contribute we you know now now I co author properly with him because I understand my own I understand how I how my skill set and also the different kind of I mean I'll never have john's kind of his, his particular I'll never I'll never have john's erudition and his sort of his his lexical knowledge but but but what I can often bring to him as a certain is a certain Is a certain way of rendering his argument sort of like he brings the architecture for the you know he brings the architecture for the the the building and then I help him to furnish it that's kind of how it how it how it works if I can use that metaphor. So I think I can I help him to render his arguments in such a way that I can help pronounce things that need pronouncing and and bring a certain maybe a certain poetic sensibility to to what is otherwise a very rigorously analytic I don't mean analytic in the proper philosophical sense of analytic I just mean sort of has a certain analytical rigor and I think I bring a certain I think you would say this I bring a certain poetic sensibility to that and and and we found that the two are are very complimentary so I think that So I think that I think that that in terms of the work itself I have attuned by his influence and by proxy to him I have attuned much more to what facets of the argument and what features of the work. Move me and speak to me which ones I identify with because there's a lot that john does that I don't you know I mean I'm not a cognitive scientist nor have I ever aspired to be the cognitive science work I mean I understand it well enough insofar as I need to. In order for us to co author these works that include those arguments but I'm I don't identify as closely with that dimension of his work right I identify more closely with with the continental philosophical and theological dimensions of the work and so understanding where which parts of those I end well and which parts I don't as much allows me to. To cultivate those more closely and and and understand my contributions to them properly but I think personally I think I've become much. Much much but john's very I mean and you know this because you've you've conversed with john and it's true I mean the john you get in the videos john you very genuine extremely yes very very open and very. Yeah. I was not used to that kind of openness just that kind of forthright honesty. I mean I love I love discussing I love talking as you can probably tell but I also have. Part part parts of being very taciturn as well and john because john is so. Because john is so. Provocative I don't mean that in a scandalous way I just know I understand he's he you know he inquires right. And because he does that you know he he has you can't you can't not be honest with john. Because his his nature just demands not demands in the sense of being prescriptive but he just begs honesty you know. So I think that my friendship with john helped me to be I think a lot more forthcoming. And that to great you know to great. To great results what what do you think was your. Existential experience with the meaning crisis I think I think john's framing of the meaning crisis has been one of the one of the really helpful things I've taken from his work. And your conversation with him about the symptoms of the meaning crisis I think that I think that's probably one of my favorite videos in the whole series because I thought as a pastor. You see a lot of things and you look for patterns and then this meeting crisis sort of saying oh look at this look at this and your and I have to say you're you're sort of it you're sort of secondary exegesis on our video I did watch it and I was very impressed by it I thought that you you were you were very interesting. You were you were very incisive with your the way you annotated it by the way. Thank you. So how did I mean because I would imagine. I mean part of the part of truth about us that that at some point. If we mature we should learn is that we are certainly not transparent to ourselves and that the the aches in our hearts and the hungers that we seek to satisfy are driven by by things around and within that that demand satisfaction and and I think the framing of that within the meaning crisis is a is a very helpful way of connecting us with with thousands of years of civilization and its fruits and its and its poverty's. So so how for how how has that played for you. I mean where did you see that in your own life. Do you think that's part of what drew you to this. I actually think that it has the presence of the meaning crisis. Has grown. I think that I think that the presence of the meaning crisis is actually interiorly grown within me more and more over the last several years since I started to work with John. Which, and I don't mean that it's some kind of, you know, confirmation bias or anything like that. I just mean that. I think it has the work has made me aware of it, where perhaps it was formerly a little bit more dormant or appeared in the guise of other things other anxieties other insecurities. And now it's actually quite a relief, just as it always is when you have a firm or at least an approximate diagnosis of something that has been tormenting you to be able to look at full in the face and I meet you in a way and say, there, you know, there it lies. I see it. I see it. I kind of feel and I think, John, you know, when I was talking before about what what it is that drives John or what John's experience of the meaning crisis is it occurred to me one day that I kind of, I see the meaning crisis as by analogy, because that's all I've got. Imagine that we're living in the afterglow of a dying star. You know, to me that's, that's what, like, that's what the Christian world is to me. That's what that now I mean this I mean this in ways that we don't have time to unpack today but like that's what that's where God lies for me is that it's that by definition it's somehow continuous with the nature of the self and that there's some infinite aspect of the self, the kind of infinite aspect that someone like Kierkegaard described that has been lost to us that we've been. That's now what was formerly continuous is now discontinuous and that, you know, the loss of that infinite aspect, the loss of the partaking in eternity, for instance, the partaking of eternity of the self that Christ symbolizes is lost to us. Now I don't, I mean, irrevocably, I don't know. I don't know, right? I'm just describing a feeling. And the dying star analogy is the closest I've come to depicting both the existential despair of the problem and also the magnitude of the problem, right? Because there's nothing obvious to replace the archetypal image of Christ, right? To the West and I'm obviously I'm speaking within certain boundaries. I want to be clear about that. But there's no obvious substitution for that. It's like every, every substitution that we grasp at. All it is is just a pale, it's a, it's, it's just, it's the same symbol but just in different guises, you know, every, every pseudo sacred or pseudo religious substitution. This is part of what John and I were talking about in our video, right? Everyone that we can find is just, is just, you know, that symbol, that archetypal image of the behind in a different set of vestments. And we see that, right, with the various mythic fads and cultures and I calling them fads. I mean, I don't mean that they don't have value and import and the play and the sense of participation that they induce does have value. And insofar as it refers us to the sacral importance of our fundamental symbols, I think that's valuable because I think it reorients us and points us indexically in the direction that we actually ought to be looking. So insofar as they do that, I think those, those mythoi, they call them that, are valuable. But they're, they're, but they're, they're wizened, like they're, they're feeble. And they can't, they can't solve anything because all they are are approximations of something that is slowly and gradually receding from us. And that's why that dying star example, it, it speaks to me so much because it's such a slow and gradual declension. It's such a slow process, right? And it also taps into that definition of despair as a kind of interminable death or dying, right? The sense of, the sense of hyperventilation is that you breathe in less air every time, but you're still getting enough to survive. Something is falling away. And, and so that experience, that, that, that sort of notional awareness is something that has come upon me with more potency. I think in the last, even just in the last few years, than it did in the 10 years prior, you know, because I also just, when you're an adolescent, I'm speaking generally, when I was an adolescent, I should just speak for myself. You know, I was working on just figuring out who the hell I was and what I could do and what I couldn't and what I loved and what I didn't. So there wasn't as much time for ruminating on things that require you to have a certain integrality in order to even sense them, if that makes any sense. But I think once I had some of that, then the inkling of the magnitude of that problem started to disclose itself a little bit more to me. And obviously the work that I'm doing with John has has facilitated that as well and given it shape and geometry and vocabulary and all that jazz. Sorry, I don't know if that answers your question. I went off on a tangent there, as I want to do. No, it's good. It's that that was, and I think, you know, when you said, you know, John brings the architecture and you help furnish it. I think that's very true about when I watch at least the little glimpses we've had of you two, of you two working together, because, you know, one of the things that I noted, part of the difficulty in following John is that you have to, you have to really keep up with his definitions and understand what he's trying to say. And it's really helpful to have someone who can, in fact, furnish this a bit and give some, you know, provide some some word pictures and some metaphors that a broader audience can understand. And I think, you know, just in in that bit of a discourse, you did that well. I'm glad. No, and quite hauntingly. I think, you know, part of what's been interesting about, about, let's say, and I love how John has been so open and upfront with this because of course myself and Jonathan Peugeot are sort of the Christians on the block. And, and at every time. I mean, John, and I completely understand why he says it this way and given the, how he talks about, you know, Christianity, you know, no longer being a viable solution. I fully appreciate, I mean, given the last, given the last 150 200 years of Western civilization, that that's by no means a, an assertion to make without supporting evidence. And given what I've seen from within the church happening to churches in the last. What is so difficult about all of these conversations is that whenever we use us or we, there's always an implicit framing. And the world is just simply too diverse. Yeah, yeah, way too heterogeneous. Yeah, that's right. That's right, because there there have been within the last, I mean, when I regularly mentioned to people that within the United States, church attendance reached its historic peak. And during the Cold War, that surprises people because people have sort of this, this subtraction, you know, this, that's the subtraction story from Charles Taylor that that there's just kind of the steady decline of, of Christianity and church attendance and that practice over time. That's not true at all. So if church attendance was too simplistic. That's right. So church. So you have the Great Awakenings and the colonial period when, you know, things kind of got superheated and then they cooled down. That you're second Great Awakening, but even in all of these movements, there are always the, it is just simply so complex. The way ideas come in, the way practices come in, the way it intersects with economics and politics and wars and cultures and all the different cultures, especially in the Americas, that all get twisted in together, you know, hazarding, hazarding commentary on any of this at all. You know, it is fraught with just about everything. So it's difficult to talk about trend lines. But, you know, and I obviously, if I thought that Christianity was no longer a viable project, well, then I should probably in all integrity get a new job. But I obviously don't think that, but I very much respect John's position. And I actually find the, I look for, I look for conversation partners that are different from me. I can talk to Christian and foreign pastors all day long. And I do talk to them. Yeah, absolutely. I want to, I'm always heading out there because I'm, and now with looking for interesting conversation partners, now with YouTube, it's like, oh my goodness, there's a whole world full of them. So I'm, I'm sincerely blessed. But the, I really love how you framed it, because I can, and I really love how you framed it because I think that's a very apt poetic description of. So obviously from my channel, one of the things I enjoy is doing exactly what we're doing now. I want to hear your story. I want to hear your experience, because you grew up in a different place than I did. You had different parents, but there are many others like you and I'm interested in them too. And I think it is, I think this is exactly the job of, of what a, a Christian minister should be doing, because if we're not listening and understanding people's experience and people's stories, then we can't be, we can't be good pastors. So I appreciate this. Now, here's a, here's a, here's a question that I'm probably going to ask John at some point, but again, it's kind of fun to ask a student, especially one like you who, who does have a real gift for, I think, I think you really complement, I can see how you two are collaborators because I can very much see how your, your giftedness compliments each other. You take a lot of sort of his wonky, wonky care and add some, add some color and some poetry and some beauty to it. And because that is so important, because otherwise, you know, I could, John's work, a lot of people are going to listen to him and just simply get lost in the magnitude and complexity. It's like, okay, 25 videos and people are like, sometimes myself still. Oh, absolutely. We can only hold so much in these little heads. Here's a question for you. I've been so impressed with John's relevance realization, even just the choice of realization as a word, because realization is one of these words that's on a swivel. Okay, because sometimes realization means concrete realization. This, this track ball was the, is the, is the physical material realization of an engineer's and of an engineer's dream and of an inventor's dream and of a factory engineer's dream and of a marketer's dream. And so, so there is a ton that's just packed into this tiny little thing that we think hardly anything of that is realization. But realization, I think, is also in the Barfieldian sense. It's such a perfect Barfieldian term because it straddles the inside outside of something because realization is also this, this moment of, of insight and this, this, this mental vision. And so relevance realization, ooh, the more I walk around with that term, and you know, when you get a term like this, you kind of walk around with it and you see different things. It's like, ooh, ooh, and you begin seeing it all over the place and saying, ooh, that is a, that is a really powerful thing. And I was, I was really struck by how he used it in the Darwinian biological context. That, I mean, just that thought there, I'm by no means done chewing on that mentally. Just that thought there is really formative. So I've, I've been, you know, part of what I began to notice through the conversations between Jordan Peterson and atheists is I think the historic divorce within, within the God concept that I call God number one and God number two. Yes. That was interesting. That was interesting. And so here's my question for you. Is, is John's relevance realization God? Haha, oh. Um, is John's relevance realization God? No, I don't think, I don't think it is. But in his system. No, no, no, I know what you mean. I know what you mean. I know what you mean. No, I don't think. That's a good question. I don't think the relevance realization. So if we were to take the expression of God. We were to take that moniker and give it a definition that would, that would place it comfortably within John's, within John's typology and his relevance realization framework. I can't believe I'm about to try and give a definition of John's God. My goodness. He's gonna kill me. I would say it would be some, okay. So I'm, I see. I'm gonna do it, but it's, I'm gonna do it by proxy to that, to that typology. And hopefully maybe we can, we can fold it back in. Okay. I think that, and this is again, it's like a poetic approximation, but I think what we might call God in a Verbeckian sense. Is like an expression given to the motioning of Alethea, right? The efflorescing disclosure of being when it yields to a becoming. So imagine like, imagine like God is sort of the oceanic that's fed by a current of knowing that passes through the open self. When that self has become a vessel for knowing it's the disclosure of the realization, the cascading disclosure of the realization. And it's inexhaustibility. John uses that word a lot. There's a reason for it, right? The cast the, and I would call it a symbolic cascading, but that's a different conversation. The symbolic cascading of realization of something like what Heidegger called unconcealment, right? The relevant, the relevant revelation of the ontological revelation of reality that is precipitated by an optimal, by an optimization of relevance realization, right? A sacred optimization of relevance realization, right? It's exaptation and sacredness, right? The opponent processing and the resultant complexification that that cascading disclosure and the flow of that cascading disclosure and the sense of non-duality, the oneness, right? Again, hearkening to the neoplatonic one as a way of as a way of approximating the idea that that disclosure is more like what I might call God in a verbatim sense. I could see that. Did that make any sense? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it only makes sense if you sat through 34 hours, actually way more than 34 hours because I often have to listen to his videos more than once to to to capture. Sorry, Paul. You just you just cut out. You just you just cut out cut out for me for the last 20 odd seconds. Would you mind just going back after I stopped talking? I didn't hear anything from. Okay. Okay. Which I thought was funny. I know. I think that that made a lot of sense. And, you know, part of why I like recording these things is because the beauty of videotape is you could go back and listen and listen, which is exactly what I've done with done with John's series because I can't just capture most of his lectures. I can't just capture the first time upon second and third and fourth hearing. I begin to it begins to sink in. And but no, I think that is a I I would. Yeah, yeah, I'd have to. I couldn't spit it back to you the way you spit it to me. But I think you see part of. It's like it's the it's the process you like the God is not the God is not the framework. God has something more to the expression of God refers more to the to the process you will unveiling the process you will contact the the the intensifying connectivity and connectedness to the world. That is that is enabled by by a by a by a cultivation of the relevance realization. Right. Like it's not the machinery itself. I hate to use such a mechanical term, but of course he uses it. It's not the machinery. Right. It's the connectedness that it affords that is closer to what is expressed by God. I think. Well, and I think that's right. And that's that's fairly God number two ish. And and where I see this. Yeah. What what happened, I think, in the history of the West. And and I think Charles Taylor Charles Taylor Taylor was very helpful for me in this and I really have to read more Taylor, but he's so daggone long. Yeah, Taylor's been very helpful. Yeah, yeah. But the this this split this split in God in the West, where, you know, especially through deism, where, you know, what happens in part of part of what's difficult about Christianity is that it is not It is not it is not pantheism. And so then people try to go to pan and theism to add, you know, let's say another layer. There's in many ways, you know, when when the Apostle Paul in the Book of Acts who quotes, you know, a pagan poet says, you know, and him and Paul sort of encodes it in the Bible for for Christians to not be able to ignore in him. In him we live and move and have our being that there's the God number oneness in that that God is the ground of all being. Yet there is a separation between God and his creation that affords that affords this one of the other things I like about John's approach is that he does very much see it's not it's not all bottom up. And it's not all top down, but there's movement both ways. And I think there's something deeply right. I think there's something deeply biblical about that. In terms of what I would say in a classical theistic sense about God's project in the creation God pours himself mean the world is in a sense God's God's overflow of his glory manifest, but he does so in a way that he actually comes into real relationship with it. And you cannot have relationship without the other. But, you know, and so some of the some of the commenters on my channels keep talking about, oh, non duality, non duality. It's like, all right, what are you going to say after that? Because there's always a there's always a yeah, you have a partnership, there must be some duality where it's this is this is God and this is not God. And, and the difficulty that I think has happened in the West, as I listened carefully to, to many who have sort of unhappily fallen out of the church and are trying to figure the world out, sometimes with a bit of a bias against, against what had been what had been given to them, is, is, is that there is a there is a sense in which there's a sense in which we are not anywhere near as in the, you're not anywhere near as capable of independence from God, as we might imagine. And this, of course, sets up the entire difficult conversation of what hell is, because hell is in a sense, right, the complete alienation from God. And CS Lewis puts it so nicely, where he says, problem of pain, right? That's right. Have you have you read that book? I did read that book years ago, but it does leave an impression on me. And I know you're a fan of CS Lewis. And that I remember that enjoying that book a lot. Yes. So, so I didn't mean to cut across you know, that's fine. So I, you know, I like your, I don't be it'll be interesting to hear what john has to say about your definition of his God. It's a, it's, well, it's not complete. Like, it's not, I mean, just see this. Here's the thing, though. And here's why it's, here's why it's a trick question. And you asked it, I'm not sure if you asked it knowing it was a trick question. Oh, of course. They're the most fun questions. But positing a definition for God is probably not something that not something that john would be inclined to do. I would be I would be much more inclined to do it than john. And so I have to take care to, to, to, to, to parse mine from his because they contiguous but but independent. Absolutely. I actually, you know, you were talking in your, your last chat with john you invoked, I think as God one you invoked, I think it was a quote from Peterson about, you know, God being the person of all persons, right? I thought that was a really cool quote. Because to me, it reminded me of a similar quote that I read by Jack Lindsay, which says the self is a symbol for life. And I love that because I love, I love. I, I, I find it I for a long time now I've found it very helpful. And this is part of the work I'm doing at john and it's also part work I'm doing with another close friend of mine, named Patrick Kelly, we're trying to flesh this argument out a little bit more but for me, I, I find it helpful to perceive of the self, again, by analogy, but to me by a very instrumental analogy, as a symbol consisting of symbols as a symbol for symbolizing right, which is to say a symbol like you talk about the self relationship to the other and knowing God by means of the other. That resonates with me quite a bit because I think of the, the process of symbolizing relations with others, right, which is to say the intercourse and I mean that as a deliberately erotic met not a sexual one, but a deliberately erotic metaphor that the intercourse of knowing with others is a way of calibrating our symbolic relation reflexively with ourselves and of identifying ourselves with something more processual something relational because the self is by some definition relational. And so I like this idea of the self as a symbol that coheres symbols and that and so imagine for a moment that the self is a symbol of symbols in that that being the case, the reference for that symbol is God. If the self is a symbol, its reference is God, and that's kind of how I think about it. I'm not sure that John would say the same thing but but for me that's that's been a helpful way of thinking about it and it kind of dovetails with Tillich's idea of the God, the God beyond God, the ever referring symbol, the ever enacting and transmuting symbol that the self is a symbol that refers to its likeness, its likeness in an exhaustibility right that it's like a self is like a, it casts a, it casts a symbol of the self. The self casts a shadow upon the canopy and that shadow is the thing that we've given the expression of God like the number on the sky or something like that. I don't mean that in an illusory way. I just mean that it's an, that's what I mean when I say I think that somehow the definition of God and the definition of the sake. Uh oh. About God. No, no, no, I think it's, I think it's, I'm really enjoying this. This is, this is, this is, this is very, very good and very, very interesting. This is very good. It's helpful because I think part of what, part of what ails, part of what ails this land of the dying sun is we have abandoned, we have abandoned the cultivation of our language with respect to God. And, and I think, I think part of, you know, it was so interesting so I did a video on the, on the, on the Alastair McGrath, Brett Weinstein conversation. And early in the video, Brett talked about the fact that he grew up in, you know, nominal Jewish household and he wanted to go, you know, he wanted to go to Hebrew school because he wanted to learn more about this religion and he, he learned, he learned that Hebrew school was not a place to ask questions. And when he said that, I just, I just grieve at that. Because I think, and yeah, okay, so it wasn't a church and I can't take responsibility for it, but we have to ask questions. We have to talk. And the, what I think has, where I think the church has, has seriously failed is its ability to, to not only be a space for asking questions but be a space for engaging seriously with those questions and to not fear them. That's right. Yeah, I think that's absolutely right. And so one of the things that we just kind of started, a lot of this I've just kind of backed and bumbled into, is we started a meetup locally, and I had no idea of the hunger and the hunger out there of people, most of which have, do not go to church regularly, don't identify as Christian, some might identify as atheist. But the hunger that they have for just having serious, meaningful, honest conversation that it's, it's within a bit of a walled garden. We don't allow it to be polluted by, you know, by political partisanship because that, that just, that I've, you know, lately in my adult Sunday school class I kind of stumbled upon, you know, in a sense politics is the now, but religion is the always. And because that's why politics, that's why political concerns or concerns that are politically framed are always downstream from religious concerns. That's exactly right. And so I, you know, for a long time was struggling, how to, how to frame these two things, but, you know, we all have to deal with the now and, and we should do so, but we also need some, in a sense, I want the church to be a place where we can talk about the always. And not have the now, not have the now corrupt the always, because the always needs its own tending. So the eternal, yes, that's right. Yeah. And, and another, another ongoing fascination of mine is, is in fact the, the question what is matter for, because it's very easy for us as, as Western comfortable human beings to lose ourself in certain Gnosticisms where everything just sort of floats away and that a lot of that is happening in terms of religious conversations culturally right now. Things are just kind of floating away. But, but the, the eighth. What do you mean, what do you mean by floating away. Oh, I think part of, I think part of, you know, why did Jordan Peterson blow up over of all things, non gender pronouns, you know, what's that about. Well, yeah, there's a political matrix so there's some nowness going on in there. But there's also an, there's also an alwaysness. So part of, I was a foreign missionary for a number of years. Now we have this Discord server and we've got people from all around the world. We're talking about these, these topics, you know, some, you know, one woman there is a missionary from Africa, and it's so much fun having her in the conversation because all Africa's an increasing part of the entire world, population wise, and is going to have its own significance. But many of our conversations. Well, you know, in our current gender conversation. We don't know what we don't know what we don't know what to do about a penis. You know, it's, it's the silliest thing. And, you know, there was an article recently in the Atlantic was a very interesting article with someone telling the story of their, their school and it was an elementary school, you know, one of the best schools in the city of school that everybody's on a waitlist for and, you know, they had a transitioning student and the student, you know, felt a little stigmatized because they had to use the, the one non gender bathroom so they de gendered all the bathrooms in the school. And they took off all the boys and girls signs and I mean the chaos that happened was completely predictable to anyone who knows children. And eventually they had to put the signs back on. Oh my goodness, I can only imagine, but before with with all of the adults seemingly abdicating any understanding of the intersection between, in a sense, our mind and our bodies. The children started basically deciding they would all simply go to the old bathrooms they usually use, because the attendant chaos and disruption was too much for them. And so the kids started acting out the boys and the girls bathrooms all by themselves before the school finally put up the signs again and it's like okay, well, we can talk about the politics and all of that stuff if you want. But but the real question is, what is the age old philosophical question, what is the relationship between mind and matter. I mean, because there we are in that question again, and what is to what degree is, is my mind male is is maleness, an aspect of my mind. It's not an easy or simple question but but as a looking at the way that so much evangelical Christianity has gone extremely Gnostic when I go to many evangelical churches and I hear things like well the purpose of Christianity is that you, you, you die and go to heaven and it's like, wait a minute, you've, you know, okay, you, you got the crucifixion in there but did you forget the resurrection. I mean, what's the point of that story Easter supposed to be the central, you know, the central fact of the creation of Christianity and huge swaths of the church that will say, I believe in the Bible, simply forget the resurrection. Why? Because they don't know what to do with the mind and the body and so it's simply cleaner for us to be disembodied and to go to be with Jesus in some strange way and that's the end of the story. And so now there's a theological problem but it's, it highlights the, the, the philosophical problem which for me was was so interesting in the last year or so with a fuller understanding of Barfield and his, and, and his look at, you know, obviously he has his schema. And then his role in terms of the inkling, I'm just currently going through a podcast on World War I which is very helpful in terms of understanding Barfield and Tolkien and Lewis, all of whom were World War I veterans. And so, you know, these, these questions are difficult and so I will, I will ask people what is matter for what is the relationship between myself which I think, I think john really nailed this in a conversation he had with with Benjamin voice myself which in many ways is sort of this, this narrative, which is, which is non disruptive as long disrupted as long as I'm healthy by my body, but then right. But then once you know things start breaking down my equipment to create narrative. I'll say well what is that narrative, where's that narrative actually located. Why is it that my children in some ways know me better than I know myself. Why is it my wife, why do you know john in some ways better than john knows himself. There's a world of mysterious questions here. And, yes, yes, yeah, and someone would probably say, the church is the last place I would ever go to deal with these things and I think that and I say I hear that and I know it and I say, well then the church has some deep, deep problems because it seems to me, these are probably some of the most important questions we can talk about. Yeah, no I agree Paul I think that's well said and I, and I, I mean the church, the church should be the place that your instincts direct you to when you're contemplating these kinds of problems because the church fills a function that that's, it's an inevitable function, it does there is no equivalent to it. I mean, the academe certainly isn't an equivalent to it and arguably to some degree perhaps the emergence in the last century of the last couple of centuries I suppose by now, psychotherapy is the caring for the soul that formerly the the philosophic and religious enterprises had custody over. Trust tried to bridge a little bit of that difference and I'm enough of a Jungian by disposition I think to appreciate that to some degree but I mean Jung himself would have said well it's insufficient and it is, it's insufficient. So we have nowhere else to turn. It's funny you know one of the reasons why I was so kind of disaffected by my own religious identity when I was younger is that, and this is going to say, I don't mean to start getting polemical with my, my past, past you know the, you know, the, the, the, the, the clergy that, that, that occupied the churches that were in the church. That occupied the churches that I frequented as a kid. One of the reasons I was so disaffected by it is I was so unimpressed by them, which is a little harsh of me to say, but it but unfortunately it's true. I was so unimpressed. You know, I like, and I don't, and I don't mean that they need to be necessarily like virtual virtuosic intellectuals. That's not what I mean either. I just mean like that. I never found. I never, I don't know, I scarcely heard a homily that was deeply insightful, you know, either, either hermeneutically with reference to the actual text to the actual scripture, or just writ large or just in general, you know, it happened on occasion, but it was so sparing that it just never happened. And the closest I ever came to that was a handful of choice, choice professors, obviously of which John is first and foremost. When I, when I got to school, not that, not that they're in much abundance there either. And, and you know, let's, let's harken back to Peterson for a second, because the reason I think like to me, Peter Peterson's a fascinating figure to me because to me, and I don't mean this pejoratively, Peterson is a preacher. Yep. You know, he has a he has a he's a psychologist by training and he's he's a lot of different to me he's a lot of different things he has that he's a he's a I'm looking for. Anyway, he's, you know, but fundamentally he's. Yeah, he's a preacher and I think that I think that he, the reason that he has attracted. One of the reasons that he's attracted so many people who have religious sort of unfulfilled religious inklings, or who are spiritually rapacious, but have no object to say them is that he has taken he's assumed almost archetypically he's assumed the role of a preacher of a religious teacher. And, and that's, and that's not either a criticism or an aggrandizement of him, although I think that he has a, he has a clear unambiguous gift for oratory there's no disputing that, you know, which is quite incredible and he can speak contemporaneously and he can he's very improvisational. Right. In a way that I mean John is too I mean I not that not that I need to start drawing comparisons between people do that too often anyway, but, but I think that's part of what has magnetized so many people to him is because he has the deportment and the temperament. I think, and the style of a very well cultivated preacher. And I think that's the role that he's, that's the role that he's assumed no one wants to say that, because people who really who follow him, follow him or people you know students students of his students in the broad sense right the online, you know the people who go see his talks and that kind of thing, students of his would wouldn't would probably probably be if I don't mean to defensively at all. But I think a lot of people might be might be might eschew the idea of being caught up in that breaststroke of being attracted to someone because he was a preacher. And, but I, yeah, I think it's. That's my take on it anyway. And so it speaks, I think, yeah, so it speaks to what you're saying that we crave, we crave that we crave that role. And, and we don't have it most of the time because the people, many, many of them there and there are exceptions and I think one of them and I'm not just trying to flatter you call one of the exceptions is is who I'm speaking with right now which makes it such a pleasure to speak to you because you clearly are an exception to certainly what has been my experience with the church is that it has not always provided a very seldom provided teachers that have fulfilled what I think their, their true function is or was. I think a lot of well, we've got about 15 minutes yet and I want to be a gracious host because I've dominated the conversation by pestering you with questions so I want to give you a chance to ask what's on your list before we free up. I've got it. I've got a debate after this. You've got a debate. Yeah, with with Adam. Adam's debates aren't like debates with Sam Harris or anything but the question we're debating is is God real so someone on Twitter said, you know, Paul's gonna, Paul's gonna, Paul's gonna bind you in with those quotation marks and it's probably true. Is there an opportunity to reframe the question? Well, that's what the whole conversation is going to be about. I liked what you were saying. I liked what you and John were talking about in your last talk about the fact that most debates about God, in fact, almost all of them are are preordained with a question that's usually not the appropriate question to begin with. And so the you know, it's like the it's like the game is rigged. I kind of I don't it's like I don't engage in most of these conversations about God. I almost I almost I I default immediately. I default to to abstinence when it comes to conversations about God because I find that they're all preordained with with with an improper question. And obviously, the discussion can only be as you know, a conversation can only be as as as productive or as fecund is the question that that preceded it. And I always think like clearly God is like by some definition of real God's real because God has a prevailing presence in our grammar. We refer to God all the time. So clearly, clearly there is such a thing to which we refer thing being the fraught term. Right. And I and I say thing for lack of a better word. But clearly, the expression God refers. Right. So to what does it refer? Let's start there. What is the nature of what God refers to? You know, and I find that to be a personally a much better place to start than like, God does God exist. It's like, well, for goodness sakes. Now, I didn't say does God exist. No, you said it real. No. Anyway, so there's two words we're gonna but it's so ironic that and rather rather rather biblically prophetic that God has become a word that we cannot say. Yeah, because worse because because we devolved into such a we've devolved into such a regressive kind of literalism that like it's like we're incapable of conceiving of such a thing without conceiving of it as like an object like the glass of water on my table. It's like, well, clearly God is not an object. So, you know, let's you know, but the literalism has just infested all of the dialogue having to do with this topic. Yep. And that's why I find increasingly I have I have no patience for it because if the conversation isn't framed properly and and and and fitted with with really kind of trustworthy and mature interlocutors, which I think is the most important thing of all, then I find often it's not worth having. Anyway, that's not a reflection on the debate you're about to have. You know, it'll be fine. You just sort of prompted prompted a diatribe from me because that's that's on my mind a lot. Well, it's with Adam and I trust Adam so he was good. He wants to hook me up with some other guys that I don't necessarily trust but to be a pastor is to go into go into places that perhaps angels fear to tread. That's part of our job. So anyway, I like that. That's a good that's a good turn of phrase. So, so, so, okay, your questions. What do you want to we got another 10 or 15 minutes. So, Okay, well, yeah. So I guess one of them is how I mean you've you've undertaken as I say courageously you've you and very, very industriously to Paul like you're, you know, you're so prolific with your videos like I'd like to see them all but I can't keep up. Nobody can watch them all. That's part of my strategy. I bury myself in hours of video, any enemy that would want to get at me. They got a lot of work to do. They do. They do good strategy, very tactical. But I guess, how if and it's an if and then a how if applicable, you know, do you find that your relationship to your vocation and to your work like your day to day pastoral work and your preaching, and I guess I'm particularly and I haven't seen, I haven't seen your, your work in that respect yet and I'd really like to. So I plan to do that I plan and you have some videos dedicated to that right. I have I have a whole nother channel that is just my Sunday school and and and sermons. So I put that on a channel but the link to it is in the notes of my channel, but it's there. Okay, so I apologize for not having explored that yet but I but I intend to. So how so I guess my question is how like all of those those different branches that all feed into your pastoral vocation. How, or if and how has any of that changed. As a result of these last months of of dialogue that you've been having with all of these different discussions. Oh, it's. So my church a little bit of context my church is an aging, dying congregation like a large percentage of small Protestant churches around the United States and Canada, and the church had its heyday during the Cold War, and is is not stylish or popular I think that's one of the ways that churches can grow large by being stylish and popular, but that affords me a tremendous amount of freedom and the church has always been very generous with my time and with my desire for continuing education. And one of the things I mean I got into this, because again I I stumbled across Jordan Peterson, and I watched his biblical series and I thought, he's addressing in his own way, a lot of what I believe the church needs to address, but has avoided it out of fear and a very foolish strategy of self preservation, which is usually conflict avoidance. And, and so all of this what I've, you know, learned through the Peterson stuff and through john. All of this has been just deeply Deep, it is fertilized my mind in terms, I should mention with gratitude Jonathan, Jonathan Peugeot as well because his stuff has been really helpful in the symbolic world. I've lately been going through the gospel of Mark, and I, my reading of the gospel of Mark, you know I've read the Bible all my life, and so I'm very familiar with a lot of it. And I work in Greek and Hebrew, to a degree and do traditional exegesis from, you know, the history of biblical commentary and exegesis. But, but this, this new stuff has been so helpful in terms of understanding the text, understanding its importance and trying to preachers try to bridge two worlds We have, especially in the Protestant tradition, we have the biblical account which is foundational for us and then okay how can I, it's expositional preaching, how can I expose the text to the people in a way that they can feed from it and be nourished from it deeply. And so all of this material for me has been so helpful in trying to not only expose the text to the 50 people who might be in attendance here at Little Living Stones, but also the thousand or some odd people who might watch my rough draft or my final cut of the sermon. My adult Sunday school class, which is six to 10 mostly elderly African American women who, who sit there and tolerate my working through right now we're in the gospel of John, working through the gospel of John painfully slowly. Lately, I've been doing a verse a week. And, but people who watch the video see that's all this stuff is just flooding into it. And so my local ministry, and all of the stuff that I'm doing online kind of comes together in an estuary, which is not freshwater it's not saltwater, but it's a fertile place where, where some of the freshwater and the saltwater creatures can mingle. And, and, and that's what's happening. And they're both slightly out of their element and slightly within their element. Yes, it's, yeah, and it's part of what keeps the church small because when church strategy is almost always attract others who are solidly within your realm. But I'm much more of a missionary than a pastor. I've always been a missionary. My father was very much a missionary. And so to me, we kind of go out on the waters, and a lot of Christians will be like, he's not telling me all a lot a lot of Christian churches are here are all the words, just keep repeating them. And that will keep us safely within our frame. And I'm not that way. And so that both attracts people and annoys people. And so if you read my comments, there's a lot of people who are attracted by it. But there's some people who come in, they're pretty annoyed by it, because I'm not saying all the things I'm supposed to say. And it's not like I don't know the words. Yeah, I know the words. But yeah, I use those words. My conversation with you won't be terribly productive. And so I've I found this all just life giving, fruitful fertilizing. And I think my people in my church, when I started making videos, they're like, oh, Paul's making videos, I'm not going to watch any YouTube, but his sermons have a little more life. So keep doing it. So I do. There's a there's a there's a cross pollinating effect. There's a there's a mutual influence between your, your your embodied pastoral role in the physical space under the abscess of the church. But there's also it also obviously feeds back into your videos. It also explains like, I'm also curious just to hear more. It also explains like, I'm also curious just to hear more. And I guess apologies to your viewers if you've gone into this already in your videos, but I haven't heard it. Your your your missionary work clearly so clearly your event the adventurousness and your personality isn't relegated to intellectual adventures, but also to physical adventures. So I'd like to hear a little bit more about that. Like, where did you go? What? Where did you you know, I was a what, what lands have you traversed? I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic. Okay. But the Christian reform work in the Dominican Republic was primarily through Haitians who were in the country semi legally illegally, so on and so forth. So I was what was called a church developer and my job was to mostly work with pastors because the pastors and preachers worked with the people. The average educational level of the pastors and preachers I worked with was a second grade educational level in Haiti. I in order to live in the Dominican Republic learned Spanish, but the people primarily lived in Creole. So there was but some knew some Spanish and so there was just a lot of movement there to the my father. My father, my father planted a basically converted a old style bread and soup mission into a church in Patterson, New Jersey in the 60s and 70s and 80s and spent 36 years there. So I grew up in a missionary context, where we lived and worshiped in an African American community with some Dutch Calvinists who were looking for something a little different from their own. Churches and a lot of African Americans who were looking for something different from the black churches. And so the church I grew up in was very much in an estuary, but then the Christian form church has a long tradition of of Christian day school. So I went to school with all these Dutch Calvinists in New Jersey, but I lived and worshiped with the black folks and the white folks were interested in them. So right away, I was always in multiple churches. In multi layered cultural situations. And so the whitest place I ever lived was Calvin College. Yeah, a lot of variety. Yeah. And so and I've always so then I, I wound up after the mission field coming here to Sacramento, California, and I live in a neighborhood that got written up in Time magazine as the most diverse and integrated community in North America. I mean, there's no majority population here. And Sacramento has developed a culture, which while it's multicultural, multicultural isn't ghettoized sort of like the New York metropolitan area was, you know, you had the Jewish section, you had the Italians, you have the Dutch, you have the blacks, you have the Puerto Ricans. So, so Sacramento is much more integrated. So I've always I've always enjoyed multiple cultures together, which then with my more intellectual bent, it's like, okay, so we've got all these, we've got all these people speaking. Where do that? Where does this mix? How do we meet? How do we connect? How do we understand each other? And my tiny little church here is just outrageously diverse. You've got people with, you've got millionaires, just a few, and, and tremendously educated people. And then you've got illiterate people, and black folks and white folks and Asian folks and Hispanic folks. And, and now, you know, so then Jordan Peterson people started coming in. And I noticed the sermons are like, I don't, you know, I don't know, I like the videos you do when you talk about Jordan Peterson, I can understand that. But I don't understand these other things. And it's like this, the gap between the church and the world is, is, is godlessly large. And especially for a religion that as Northrop Prime mentioned in his, his lectures on the Old Testament, Christianity begins in translation, because the New Testament church works from the Greek translation of the Hebrew text. And so there's always been an element of Christianity that is that that you don't have to learn, you don't have to learn Arabic to read the Torah, to read the Quran, or Hebrew to read the Torah. Christianity is always done in translation, and has always been virally transcultural. And a big part of the problem, churches, it's, it's churches have to develop cultures to be cohesive communities. But that process insulates and isolates them from the rest of the culture. And, and so that's always the problem that the church has to work on. And it's also the case that heresy has almost always grown out of those, those interactions. But, but with heresy comes orthodoxy, because the church seldom discovers its orthodoxy, until it struggles with heresy. And so there's a dynamic involved there that churches are, well, we're going to stay here and stay safe. So it's, so for me, this has all been just fruitful and, and tremendously enjoyable. Fantastic. Wow. That's, it's, it's so it's knowing that having that context makes it makes it all the more, I guess, it's easy to see now how you have developed such a, such a ready ease with, with being able to converse with a wide variety of people, because clearly that's the way it is. And I think that's a good thing for people because clearly that if I mean, perhaps the online, the online context is new, but the clearly that's something that you've been doing for a very long time and you're well practiced at it. At being able to, to adjust the levels of resolution of the dialogue itself to fit the interlocutor and to fit the audience. I sense that that's also something that you're able to do quite, quite with a lot of dexterity. And it's clear that you're practiced at that with that kind of that. That's a, that's a, that's a storied history, Paul. That's, that's great to know. That's fascinating. Well, it's just my life. It's, you know, you, you grow up and it's just what you know. But no, that's right. Yeah. Yeah. My father had a gift for this too, though, and because he, he always had an intellectual, you know, he had a library was reading C.S. Lewis and you know, whatever would come across his path. But, you know, we'd spend time moving some ladies fridge or, you know, feeding your dog or and so what's beautiful about pastoral work is that it very much scales. You need to engage the intellectual, but you also need to meet the, the illiterate person who just needs help writing out a check or reading a document. Right. And, and what you begin to discover is that, well, these are all image bearers of God and the intellectual has their own blind sides and the, you know, I before I started doing any of these videos, I started with the Freddie and Paul show on my channel and I worried about how the flood of new people into my channel would interact with the Freddie and Paul show because Freddie, Freddie has his own story. And, but I've, the day, the day I don't, the day I am not in community with the Freddie's of this world is the day that someone should pull my pastor card, because God, God lavishes his gifts in 10,000 places. And every time I go to lunch with Freddie, I learned something new from him. And so I am a student, I should be a student of everyone. That's very well said. That's very well said. Yeah, fantastic. Well, maybe this is a good place to wrap up because I got I think that's a great final. I got think that's a great final note. I'm yeah, I'm happy to take that. Yeah, that's right. You've got this debate. Well, I don't know if it's appropriate to wish you luck. Is this the kind of, hopefully this is this a, is this a, is this a Socratic kind of debate? Or is this more of a dialogue or is there a ring? With Adam, with Adam, it'll be a very friendly dialogue. And that's part of the reason I agree to do it with him. And he and I have spoken before. I think he I think he likes to frame it as a debate, just so that we'll get some views. But it'll be a okay, I think it'll be a productive. Understandable. So I can send this to you if you'd like to preview it. If you're willing to have me share it, I'll probably share it fairly, fairly soon. You can go ahead and share it, Paul. Okay, I trust you. All right, I will. Well, thank you so much, Chris, we will have to talk again. I'd love to, I really enjoyed this. It was it was great fun. And thank you for the invitation. I really, really appreciate it. It's been it's been such fun meeting you and chatting with you. The feeling is mutual. So thank you and say hi to John for me. I shall. Absolutely. Okay. All right. Take care, Paul. Bye bye.