https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3yd3c0NJQ80

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. For this sermon I have to curb the inner elitist in me. I've loved books. My parents loved books. When I was back before the internet I'd always have to buy my books in Christian bookstores. When I was in Grand Rapids for seminary we had some great bookstores from Erdmans and Bakers and Kregels where I could get all these theological books. But I tended to stay away from the Christian bookstores. And then when I moved to Sacramento, sort of before the internet days, Christian bookstores were still big and we'd get church supplies and all those things in Christian bookstores. Mega churches had bookstores. The thing that annoyed me about bookstores, even though I loved books, was that they seemed so full of kitsch. They seemed so full of all sorts of cutesy things with cutesy titles and labels and plaques and all those kinds of things. Well when COVID-19 happened, well, Christian bookstores, partly because of Amazon and Christian book distributors and all these online sources, they really hit hard times. So this is how they survived in 2020. A new item at Christian bookstores in 2020 shot straight to the top of the sales charts. Face masks with faith messages. Christian retailers across the country sold masks with the message, not today Satan, and this too shall pass, as well as faith over fear, blessed beyond belief, and it is well with my soul, as souls found creative ways to continue business in the pandemic. Well, everything's open again, but the kitsch is still there. Kitsch is sort of described as decorative art or objects or designs that are considered to be in poor taste because of excessive garishness or sentimentality, but sometimes appreciated in an ironic or knowing way. The term is often used to describe things that are tacky like car mirror dice, plastic flamingos, and dashboard hula dancers. Kitsch is a German word that was first used in the early 20th century. Christian bookstores are just full of this stuff. Now why am I talking about this? Because the chapter we're looking at this week is Christian Bookstore Gold. I don't know a single chapter in the Bible that verse for verse, word for word, doesn't have more plaque worthy messages on it than Philippians 4. Now the story begins with a local church, and it's a regular local church, so often we idealize the early church, and here towards the end of a really lovely letter, Paul gets personal with two women in the Philippian church. Therefore my brothers and sisters, you who I love and long for, my joy and my crown, stand firm in the Lord in this way, dear friends. I plead with you, I said it in my head just fine, and I plead with Syntyche to be of the same mind in Christ. Now if you remember all the way back in chapter 2, being the same mind as Christ Jesus, not to consider others better than ourselves, and apparently these two women in the church had a dispute going, and it was bothering the church. Now I don't want to say anything on the internet about my church, but churches have fights, churches have disputes, and sometimes it's two women, sometimes it's two strong, forceful women with strong personalities, and they both think they're right and the other one's wrong and off that thing will go. Yes, and I ask you, my true companion, help these women since they have contended at my side in the cause of the gospel. Paul says these are wonderful women, they have worked faithfully with me, they are godly women, everything is great, but they're fighting with each other. Help them to resolve this and move on forward. Along with Clement and the rest of my co-workers whose names are in the book of life, and so here it's very unusual for Paul to just start naming names, but here he does in this negative sense saying, you and you, look at the thing that I wrote, I didn't have chapters of course, look at the thing that I wrote earlier in the letter, have the same mind as Christ, put others' needs ahead of your own, bury the hatchet, continue to work together. This is a normal church and this is what happens in normal church and Paul pleads with them and they probably were a little bit embarrassed and shamed because this letter would have been read in the public realm. And then the plaques start. Rejoice in the Lord always, I will say it again, rejoice. Let your gentleness be evident to all, the Lord is near. Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God and the peace of God which transcends all understanding will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus. This is just the first of the biggest hits of the plaque-worthy verses from this chapter. I hear Christians say this one way or another, a little snippet here, a little snippet there, every now and then someone quotes the entire three verses and because it is just filled with a joyful, peaceful exhortation. I know sometimes that the church gets a bad name for bickering within it or for hypocrisy or for this or that, but in this chapter Paul just sets out gold after gold in terms of what the churches should major in. Rejoice in the Lord always, I will say it again, rejoice. Let your gentleness be evident to all. Our church is known for their gentleness. The Lord is near. Do not be anxious about anything. I often, people will tell me, pastor, how can Jesus tell us not to worry? Now here Paul is saying the same thing. Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation, whenever you're anxious, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God. When you're anxious, pray. Tell God what you need. Tell God what you want. Tell God why you're anxious. Again, there's a reason they put this on plaques. We get anxious and right there on our eyes, do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God and then the payoff. And the peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus. Just take a deep breath and let that sink in. Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if there is any excellence, if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things. Direct your attention, direct your mind. If you're anxious about something, pray. Then focus on whatever is true, honorable, just, pure, lovely, commendable, excellent, anything worthy of praise, put your attention there. Think on these things. Paul is giving his people very plaque-worthy, practical advice about what to do with their anxiety. Put it on your wall, memorize it, remember it. Are you anxious? This is what you should do. Whatever you have learned or received or heard from me or seen in me, put it into practice. So we just talked about the anxiety, we talked about gentleness. Now we talked about where to focus your attention. Now put this into practice and if you do, the God of peace will be with you. This is so immensely practical. This is so immensely applicable. And as a pastor in a church, I can tell you, so much of what occupies people's lives are trouble and anxiety and looking around for trouble even if they don't have it in their lives right now. And what Paul gives you is something immensely practical, what to do with your anxiety. I rejoice greatly in the Lord that at last you renewed your concern for me. Indeed you were concerned, but you had no opportunity to show it. I'm not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content in whatever circumstances. I didn't put this one on a plaque, but it certainly could be. It's another one that gets said again and again and again. I have learned to be content in whatever circumstances. Why? He just talked about the anxiety. I know what it is to be in need and I know what it is to have plenty. I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether living in plenty or want. This whole chapter is about extremely practical things that all of us deal with. I can do all this through him who strengthens me. So all of this contentedness, he proceeds in faith and says, this doesn't come from me. It comes from the one who strengthens me. It comes from God. Yet it was good for you to share in my troubles. Moreover, as you Philippians know, in the early days of your acquaintance with the gospel Macedonia, no one church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving except you only. For even when I was in Thessalonica, you sent me aid more than once when I was in need. Not that I desire your gifts. What I desire is that more be credited to your account. I have received full payment and I have more than enough. I am amply supplied. Now that I have received from Epiphriditus the gift you have sent, there is a fragrant offering and acceptable sacrifice pleasing to God. Paul says, you, the Philippian church, have always been here for my need, but not really my need because the Lord counts this for you as a gift on my account. And so I am fine, but your generosity is all about what you give to the Lord. I understand this and the Lord knows all that you have done. And my God will supply every need of yours according to his riches and glory in Christ Jesus. Another thing you can hear this on people's lips in the church all the time. And my God will supply every need of yours according to his riches and glory in Christ Jesus because you gave, he will give to you. And he finishes the letter. To our God and Father be glory forever and ever. Amen. Greet all God's people in Christ Jesus. The brothers and sisters who are with me send greetings. All God's people were sent here send you greetings, especially those who belong to Caesar's household. The rest of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you, be with your spirit. Amen. Our miseries don't change that much. Human beings get anxious. Human beings get worried. Human beings fight. Human beings are filled with generosity to help one another and help each other. And Paul sees all of this. The politics change, the technology change, health, wealth, relationships. These are the perpetual struggles. Life is hard and it's seldom fair. And we need encouragement, hope and vision that God cares and will make things right for us. And so these plaque worthy sayings are here and they get into our heads and they get into our imaginations and we are called to think about them, to turn our attention towards them when we're anxious, when we're in despair, when we're despondent. Society begins not with a God who is excluded from the common sufferings of our world, but one who enters into them. While they are miraculous, while there are miraculous deliverances, sometimes Paul remains in chains and we stay in stuck places. What do we need when we're stuck? These are the things that we need. They're in Christian bookstores. They may be kitschy. They may be on your coffee mug. They may be on a plaque in your wall. You may have learned a little song that reminds you of them. I don't care how kitschy, how campy, how homey any of this stuff is. These sayings are here for you to remind you when you're in a dark place, to remind you when things are tough, to encourage you to generosity even when you feel you haven't, you don't have enough energy, you don't have enough time, you don't have enough for yourself. The promise of God to us are for the large and small, the extraordinary and the ordinary sufferings. He meets us where we're at. He gives us words to hold onto that are memorable and need to be devoted to memory. He gives us hope that we are not alone, but in the end, he will triumph for us and through us. So I just want to run through these plaques again, memorize them, say them in your mind as I'm saying them. Rejoice in the Lord always. I will say it again, rejoice. Let your gentleness be evident to all. The Lord is near. Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation by prayer and petition with thanksgiving, present your requests to God and the peace of God which transcends all understanding will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus. Finally, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if there is any excellence, if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things. Whatever you have learned or received or heard from me or seen in me, put them into practice and the God of peace will be with you. I can do all this through him who strengthens me and my God will supply every need of yours according to his riches and glory in Christ Jesus. Amen.