https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IYMobP7T6XQ

 Hi, this is Paul. I have a very special guest with me today. This is, are you, your wife is ordained? Are you ordained? I'm not. We, I took the academic route and she took the ordination route so that we had it all covered. So, okay. So I'll, I'll say professor Andrew Root. That's fair. Of Luther Seminary. That's correct. And that's in Minnesota? It is, it's in St. Paul. We actually look over the skyline of Minneapolis, but we're officially in St. Paul, which only matters to people from St. Paul, which I am. So. St. Paul sounds much holier than Minneapolis. We're salt of the earth people, those snooty Minneapolis people, you know, make sure we differentiate ourselves from them. I really appreciate you taking the time to have a conversation with me today. I'm, I'm probably more, more, I'm probably more aware of your work than you are of mine. So I, I first came across your work with your book about divorce and that really caught my attention. I thought it was a, I thought it was, especially when I read it, I'm not the product, I'm not the product of divorce, but when I read it, I thought this was, this was one of the best books on ministering in an age of a lot of divorce than I had read anywhere else. So that's when I first became aware of your work. And then a friend of mine, Eric Dirksen, he's a colleague of mine in a neighboring church, started tweeting about the first of your trilogy on Charles Taylor. And so that's when I picked that up. And then the second book is what I really got into and especially the chapter sort of going through a clergy in this process. And then I was really hooked. So I really appreciate you taking the time today. Well, thanks. I appreciate that. I appreciate you having me. Well, as is my, as is my custom, I want, I want to start with you and tell me about where you grew up, what faith was when you grew up. And I mean, you, both you and your wife are in the business as it were. So tell me a little about a little bit about how that happened. Yeah. I mean, it is interesting. My wife is, as you mentioned, a Presbyterian pastor in, but we grew up in really different ways. And we actually met in Southern California when we were both students at Fuller, but grew up on the opposite sides of the twin cities. So I grew up on the St. Paul, hence my joke about St. Paul. I grew up on the St. Paul side and she grew up on the Minneapolis side in these suburbs and didn't know each other until we went out to Pasadena and Los Angeles. But she grew up in a big like non-denominational mega church and kind of stumbled her way into the PCUSA because, well, I mean, it's actually part of the backdrop of the children of divorce is that we got engaged. And then within, well, within about six weeks of getting engaged, Kara's parents' marriage fell apart. And then about four months later, mine did. So it was like, welcome to being engaged. Good luck. Ring the bell. I don't know. Pack a lunch. So, and hers was a very kind of traumatic experience because her dad helped start this mega church. And then things came out that people can find in the book. So she was really devastated. So she kind of raced within the purviews of what she knew. She kind of raced to a denomination that would make her do a psych evaluation that would, you know, make her do ordination exams. And there were some theological proclivities too, but there was also a lot of, I want structure after growing up in this. Now on the other side of the cities, I grew up in a very conservative Lutheran denomination in a Lutheran church, a Missouri Synod Lutheran church that happened just by sheer demographics. I don't know if you'd call it a mega church, but it was a booming church. I mean, it started in this suburb that was just farmland and now is like the Uber suburb of the east side of the Twin Cities. And yeah, so it was a very odd place to grow up because it was very kind of classically evangelical or culturally evangelical outside of the worship service. And the worship service was very kind of Lutheran liturgy, robed in basically talking about Paul the most, then Luther, then all the other Bible, you know, that anyone else in the Bible, that's the way it went. Luther was before, you know, you would even talk about my gosh, before, I don't think I ever heard a sermon on James, my whole time. You know what I mean? Like they talked about Budweiser before they would talk, the pastor would talk about James, you know, like good German Lutherans are like drink beer, fine, you don't ever read the book of James, man, let's just stay away from that. So that was kind of where I grew up. So it was like people reading or, you know, listening to Dobson in the Sunday school hour and promise keepers went through and things like that, but also this kind of deep Lutheran kind of sensibility. And I remember even my like, the associate pastor or the senior pastor came at conflicts at times because the associate pastor was kind of like Lutheran charismatic reform movement. And then the senior pastor was just like law, gospel, Lutheran, like, you know, echoes of kind of 19th century, scared of pietism that it would corrupt justification by faith alone or something. And so it was kind of in that kind of crucible that I grew up with like these echo haunts of Luther and also of kind of evangelicalism. And yeah, I came of faith that way. And it was, it was, you know, I, it was weird. It was really weird, but it was also really beautiful in some ways, you know, I mean, theologically, I've moved past a lot of it, though there are still kind of deep, deep elements of it that are still within me. But yeah, I moved past it, but also appreciative of, of the kind of piety and of the commitment that was, was passed on to me in ways that both Kar and I look at our own children who are, we're raising a small, you know, mainline church and wonder if we're giving them the same experience that we had as kids where, you know, we had adults who are telling us we had an important role to play and what God was doing in the world. And we had gifts to give and would talk about Jesus and pray for us. And yeah, you wonder, you wonder about that as you become somewhat theological, enlightened, then to practice somehow isn't quite as poignant like it was for us when we were kids. So that's a little bit of the background. I mean, if you want to psychoanalyze me, Paul, I can, I got my, you know, my favorite topics, Bonhoeffer, my second favorite topics myself. So I could talk all day about myself. Well, we will talk, we will talk for this hour or so about yourself. And if you ever want to do more, anybody who watches my channel knows I do content. So I'm looking to put, I'm looking to put cable television out of business. So I put out that much content, not yet the internet, but we'll start with cable. So how did you wind up at Fuller? Now I, a little bit of disclosure here. I, I went to Calvin College from 81 to 86. And in 86, I decided because I had, I grew up in the Christian Reformed Church, you're in a place that you would probably have some awareness of the Christian Reformed Church. I grew up in the Christian Reformed Church. My, I'm a third generation. My father was a CRC minister in a, in a racial reconciliation church in Patterson, New Jersey. My grandfather had been a Christian Reformed minister before that. I won't go into that right now, but so deeply ministerial household I went to because I was Christian Reformed. I went to K through 12, all in Christian Reformed schools. And then I went to Calvin College. So I, I'm, even though I grew up in a Black community, I also had this other side where I was Dutch Calvinist CRC. And then I decided I was going to go to Fuller because Fuller was, Fuller was the place to go. And I didn't really want to be a CRC minister at that point. I didn't know what I was going to do, but then I actually met a woman at Calvin and I didn't want that relationship to be scotched. So that, and also the classical aid guy from Classes Hackensack, who was a, another guy from Patterson, New Jersey, where I grew up, came to me and said, you know, we give a lot of classical aid to a lot of people who don't have a lot of connections to our classes. We'd like to pay for your seminary education. So it's like, okay. So, but, but Fuller was, you know, some of my friends went there for a year. Fuller was the hot place to go. So how did that happen? Well, okay. So, you know, growing up in this conservative Lutheran background, like I said, evangelical culturally outside of the sanctuary, Lutheran in the sanctuary, it became time to pick a college. And I had also been involved in kind of young life in my area. And yeah, I had some really good young life leaders and a lot of them went to Bethel College. It was at the time it's now Bethel University, this Swedish Baptist place. And they, I still think to this day, like Bethel University should send these guys checks because what they would do is they would like, Hey, let's hang out and doing the classic youth ministry thing. Like, let's, you know, come hang out at my dorm. We'll have pizza and we'll hang out my dorm. And, you know, you're like 14, 15, 16, and these guys would take you to their dorm room. And then this was back when there was a, like a literal Facebook, you know, there was like the roster of students. And those of us who are pre-internet, we spent hours paging through this roster and think, why didn't I think of this Mark Zuckerberg? He's a genius. I would like to strangle, you know what I mean? For so many reasons. And, but why didn't I think of that? Like that's all we would just watch reruns of like, you know, I don't know, saved by the bell and the Brady bunch and look through, it was called the roster at Bethel and look through that. But we'd go down there like 15, 16 with these young life leaders and they would, you know, the roster would be there. We'd look through it and there'd be these, you know, pretty girls there and they're like, oh, you think she's pretty? Let me call her up. And they would call up their dorm room and they would come and they were, you know, this is a nice evangelical college. They would come over and be like, hi guys. It was like, this is where I'm going to college. Like this is how this works for me. So, you know, it's very a 15 year old, 17 year old brain, but that became important. And I also had this other strange thing going on in my life, which I was a hockey player here in Minnesota. So the idea of, and the possibility of playing college hockey was an option. And when you kind of love Jesus, have this kind of evangelical part of you and finding a hockey program was not an easy thing to find. And we were terrible. I mean, I ended up playing four years and we were, we were terrible because I think in many ways, at least in the nineties, success in hockey and beer drinking were kind of equal things. And, you know, we were a dry campus. We couldn't even dance for God's sakes. Like we could, so no one was drinking beer or people were doing it, but you weren't supposed to be doing it. So I, so I ended up there for that reason. And that actually had the effect. So now I was kind of in quote unquote classic kind of evangelicalism. I mean, like, you know, praise and worship songs and, you know, it was, it was, it was a step outside of a step similar, but also outside of kind of how I'd been raised and the church I'd been in. And it was a good experience, I think for the most part. And it's, you know, it's one of those things you look back on your life and think, would I do it again? And if you're going back in your life as you are now, you'd be like, no, I wouldn't pay that much money. I don't think I would do that. But at the time it was probably what I needed. It was probably what was best for me. But one of the things that happened that led me to then the Fuller is towards, you know, my senior junior year, I had this kind of, I don't know, it's probably quite similar. I mean, probably a lot of your viewers and listeners have had the experience where you just start to kind of get disgruntled. I mean, you feel in some ways restricted by the kind of theological, but even this, the kind of faith practice world you're within. And I had this little worm that was put in the back of my head from this weird Lutheran community was kind of Luther's theology of the cross. And I was in now a Swedish Baptist pietist environment. And yet I had this deep kind of sense that, and I don't know how it got there. I mean, it's one of those beautiful formative things of community that you kind of resist, you don't care about, and yet somehow it gets embedded in you with this idea that the Christian life is a confession of impossibility and that God moves in that, and that God's found primarily in experiences of loss and suffering with something that I just, you know, I would have never known that I got that from confirmation or all the sermons I didn't pay attention to growing up, but it got in there. And so it just, the kind of Swedish Baptist pietism just kind of, and just the praise songs and things like that just kind of got to me at one point. And I had a couple of experiences, you know, being really young that I think really formed my faith that were really around these kind of darker elements that were central where I felt the real presence of Jesus Christ in really frightening experiences that, you know, I've written a little bit about, I mean, in this book called The Promise of Despair, which is, you know, the feel good title of the year. 2010, it was rated the feel good title of the year. But this kind of sense of, well, my first friend, like four years old that I remember, got cancer and died. For being a four year old and having this friend of mine who lived a house, there's one house between his and mine, just ripped from the world and have vivid memories, whether they're, you know, how they've been psychologically shifted in my mind, but this, the memory of my mom telling me that he had been in the cancer ward, you know, for a long time and that he had died. And I remember kind of throwing myself on the ground and just feeling these overwhelming, well, the overwhelming void that was in the world. And it kind of has a four year old feeling that the teeth of that bite, you know, and then being an upper Midwestern person where it was, I just don't remember anyone ever talking to me about it again. You know, like this happens, it's possible that people did, but I had no recollection of it. And then had like deep experiences of nightmares for a while. And no one ever put it together. And, you know, this is like the early, early eighties. No one also thought that I should probably, you know, see a therapist and talk to somebody about what, no one thought that, you know, but really in the midst of that had a particular experience where I felt the real presence of Jesus Christ with me and the drive for honesty, the drive to confess how dark that was and how implanted on my being it was to have somebody I care about, you know, ripped from the world, that never left me. And so my senior year of college, there was just a kind of discontent or just a discord with the way we were talking about faith and what I was searching for. So, you know, here I was almost, you know, halfway through my senior year of college and deciding to go to seminary. And I thought, I just got to get out of here. I got to get out of the upper Midwest. And I also thought like where I knew that I was in the midst of a kind of theological awakening for me, or I knew I needed to stretch my theological legs. So this just, again, shows you like the narrowness of your purviews. But I was like, I need to go to the most progressive place that I can think of. And that's fuller seminary, right? Like, that was the most progressive seminary you can think of. Right. Like I didn't think union in New York or, you know, something like that. That's the best I could do, man. Like, I don't know, it's in LA. I'm from Minnesota. I would love to feel like what what's a February like with a short serge sleeves on? Like, that made sense to me. And I don't know. So I was like, I just got to get out. And they seem it seems like I could stretch my theological legs there. So there I went, you know, it's just the the ignorance of youth. But but that ended up to be a good place for me as well. And I'm really happy. So obviously, you you talk to me about your your theological evolution, then, because yeah, it fuller. I mean, fuller is not Westminster. And it's not union. It's it's sort of one of these tweener places that, you know, that that are around. And but it but it was, you know, the School of Psychology, the School of World Missions. I mean, they were in the 80s and 90s. They had a lot of play a lot of ways they were the place to go if you were sort of in that wavelength of Christianity. Right. And that's where I was kind of moving at that time, you know, which I thought I was being really radical, which was what I was doing is finding myself squarely in the middle, which in many ways, I've never left, but it felt like such a move from the more conservative communities that I've been in. But yeah, I mean, like I said, my my theological path really was this, this kind of felt experienced reality of, of a darker element within the world that I had to wrestle with this. And I think this has never left my theological imagination that somehow from a four year old on, which is probably in some ways why I'm still kind of enamored with thinking theologically alongside people who are working with younger people and, and just younger people themselves. I mean, I have a kind of connection with Bonhoeffer in that where I think, you know, Bonhoeffer loses his brother in World War One when he's 12 and listens to his mother screaming and screaming in grief. And she's so broken, she has to be taken out of her grief is so heavy, just to be taken out of the family home and it's gone for months, you know, and I think that experience impresses something upon Bonhoeffer, Dietrich as a 12 year old that, that children have these deep experiences that they have to somehow reconcile with God or make sense of where God moves. And, and that was kind of my four year old experience, you know, having having that, that kind of encounter that's never left me. But then, you know, to the credit of this church is, again, like I said, I have so many good memories about it. One of the things that they did that's also been so influential in my own theological imagination is, you know, as a 14 year old, 15 year old, they essentially called me into ministry. I mean, they just, the youth director particularly just started throwing me into ministry. You're going to lead the VBS and, you know, have vivid memories of planning meetings of how we're going to, you know, do a middle school event or how we're going to do, you know, a fifth grade, you know, quarterly gathering and sitting there as a 15 or 16 year old with adults and my youth director being like, Andy, what do you think? And coming up with ideas and having these adults listen to me and have these adults tweaking what I was saying, but then doing it. And so that was really big to just be in ministry. And, and that's also been so significant to me theologically of thinking about God as a minister and how formation itself is somehow, you know, a deep call into ministry. But then I ended up at Bethel, like I said, and I didn't, you know, I, it's so interesting that I, you know, spend most of my waking hours now reading books and, and writing books, because I went to college and was like, I'm going to play hockey and I'm going to try to pass and I'll probably be a youth director or youth pastor somewhere. And that'll be great. And I, and I actually hope I get to be the program guy at camp that everyone, you know, that leads the fun games. Everyone laughs at, you know, I didn't know it at the time, but I think really deep down, there was a calling that I resisted or the Holy Spirit went around to be like in sketch comedy. Like I just never thought of it, but my life would have been totally different if I would have ever thought, Hey, Oh my gosh, I should go to second city in Chicago and see if I can do this. Because in many ways that's like, that was what really drew me into youth ministry. Partly was like, I used to do Chris Farley bits in front of kids. And, you know, when my friend and I used to lead youth ministries, we used to make up, you know, sketch comedy bits where, you know, we would have these crazy characters and things like that. So, but that never, that never kind of dawned on me. But when I was at, at Bethel, there was an interesting dynamic that was going on, which this was, you know, mid nineties and Greg Boyd was there. He was, he was a professor there and he was, he was in the middle of his, one of his many fights with John Piper, who was a pastor across town. So, you know, he had this very charismatic, avant-garde, you know, from Yale and Princeton professor at Bethel. I mean, he seemed really old at the time, but he's probably like, you know, 32 or something. But when you're 18, you're like, wow, this guy seems old. But he was so, he was so dynamic and so filled with energy. And then he would, he would, especially at that time, I mean, he would just, he would find himself in these debates. And even when Piper wasn't on campus, that like the shadow of his opposition to kind of Greg's perspective was there. And, and he had kind of say on the board and things like that. If I remember anyhow, as students, we felt like there was something really at stake between this kind of Calvinist perspective that Piper, the kind of new, the new Calvinist perspective, and then Greg's very kind of like open theist, you know, Apollo, you know, his apologetic perspective. And, you know, like, as I developed theologically, especially as I went to Fuller, it was really clear that neither of those theological camps was for me. And I found them both very odd. But what they did formatively to me is I recognized by like my sophomore year as this was just intensely going on, that theology mattered, that there was, that there was something at stake theologically, and how we talked about God and how we thought about God. And just being kind of a voyeur in those, those experiences, and just kind of watching those ignited some kind of theological imagination in me that there was, there was something at stake. And so when I went to Fuller, I ended up, I mean, Fuller is such an interesting place, like you said, because it is really so diverse across, pretty much across the just, you know, left of center to the right, you can find anyone to kind of help you along, or any professor, you know, in that kind of view, or like you said, you can go to the psychology route or mission route. But I found myself pretty quickly being kind of taken into the orbit of a guy named Ray Anderson, and who was a Tom, a Tom Torrance students, and was, he was a, he had been a pastor for 10 years, and then went to Edinburgh and did a PhD with, with Tom Torrance, and now was like lecturing these like, these rich pastoral lectures, like he would read us sections of Barth's dogmatics, and then kind of step away from the, the lectern, and then just tell us these pastoral stories that illustrated this. And in that, that became, that became really significant for me theologically. So Karl Barth became kind of the way to reconcile this kind of Lutheran imagination, and this intense, this intense, well, the two sides of a kind of a rigid Calvinist perspective, but then a very kind of, I don't know, you know, like Greg's perspective is so creative, and so different than anything you would call reformed in any way, but, but, but so creative and filled with energy, and, and kind of reading Barth became a middle ground, and especially the early Barth just echoes with these kind of Lutheran sensibilities that were embedded in me, of, you know, how we kind of seek this living God. And yeah, that became, that became a real awakening. So in many ways, I went to Fuller, but really, I felt like I went to Ray Anderson, you know, like there was a kind of rabbinical sense to it. Like, I almost feel like my, my CV should say, you know, Ray Anderson. I ended up doing a THM with him where he was my advisor, but so it does say that in some sense, but yeah, that was, that was, it was a huge, huge awakening, and he was a very, very popular Ray was a really popular professor. And that at Fuller, there's in the psychology building, there's kind of like, it's sort of an, it's a small auditorium, but a kind of small auditorium. It's big for seminary. And he used to lecture in there, like eight to 10 in the morning, and it'd be packed and people would, it felt devotional because of the way he would essentially preach these little sermons inside of quotes from Hans Kung and Barth and Torrance and, you know, but no one ever really got it, you know, so especially the first four weeks of class or so, people would come out at a break, you know, sorry about that, come out of class and, you know, the early morning Southern California sun in your eyes and people were like, that was amazing. I have no idea what he would have said, but that was amazing. And that was where I was at too, except one day, I just vividly, it just all clicked. Like I, it felt so visceral and like, I could feel my mind shifting. He was talking about Bart and all of a sudden, like all the pieces, like this, I'm sure this happens with other people when they play a musical instrument, maybe at some point, or I don't know, I figure when someone learns actually how to solve a Rubik's cube, it kind of feels like that, where these things just all kind of cascade and fall into place, but that's kind of how it felt for me. I mean, I don't think I was ready to go write, you know, something that McCormick would believe was related to Bart in any way or something, or Huntsinger would think, well, that's what did Bart's scholarship, but I, it felt like it made some sense to me. And yeah, that, that, that, like, I was bit with a theological bug at that point. So it like started with watching Greg Boyd argue with John Piper and then Roger Olson, I think, Kyrgyzsoyri was there too. And so Roger was kind of like the in-between guy who would try to kind of explain the fight and always have Greg's back, as I perceived it as a student, but also kind of, you know, kind of playing the in-between and kind of pedagogically interpreting it for us, you know, 19 or 20 year olds, but then kind of coming under, under Ray's spell and, and learning to think a little bit, like how learning to think Bart's system in some ways was, it was more than just being learning to think it was a real spiritual formative move for me. How did that impact what you were doing on Sunday mornings? Well, huge, because my first year, towards the end of the first, my first year in Southern California in seminary, I got asked to take over. Well, there was a new position. There's a big church, big PCUSA church in Glendale that a lot of Fuller people were connected to or were interning at. And they had a very large kind of classic late nineties youth ministry, you know, with a youth group and they were connected to these specialties. And, you know, that was still when kind of California was the kind of center, you know, it was like Apple was, you know, brought everything from California to the, to the computing world and youth ministry, it was, you know, youth specialties. So they were like connected to youth specialties and things like that. But they had a, for one night, a bunch of kids from the neighborhood in Glendale showed up on the church steps. And this is the kind of young life connection. They had people in the church who had been partying on life and they decided they wanted to do a church partnership that would minister to these kids from the neighborhood that showed up on the church steps. And I mean, really part of the subtext was we need someone to get them into the youth group because they wanted to hang out outside. They wanted to eat the pizza as it showed up. They wanted to, you know, spray paint the building behind, you know, behind the church and things like that, but coming actually into the youth group, they weren't so sure. And then it was sometimes a disaster when they did come in. So they needed someone to be kind of the in-between person. And so that's, I got, I got the job. That was my job, you know, it was like a halftime job through seminary. And I really thought, I mean, I wasn't sure that I'd be an academic at all. Like I, the only reason I ended up in seminary, like I said, in college, I thought let's just pass, C's make degrees, let's play hockey and, you know, let's go be the funny guy at camp. Like that's what I was kind of thinking, you know? And then I had a friend who was a year older than me. They entered my junior year. He's like, I'm thinking of going to seminary. And I like ideas that started to grab me. And I was starting to be interested in those. And once he said that, I thought to myself, oh my gosh, I think I'm smarter than you. And if you're going to seminary, maybe I should think about going to seminary. Like that was the first time I had thought about it. And then I went to Fuller and I kind of, you know, through my senior year of college, it's these like ideas, ideas were just really interesting to me. And I wanted to think about these, these big things. And so I thought, well, I should get, I should get good grades. But I figured when I took this job at this Presbyterian church that, well, you know, as a good kid who had been kind of involved in the evangelical orbit that wanted to think about more practical things on the ground, that if I ever did an advanced degree, I would do it in sociology or psychology or something. I would never do it in anything near like systematic theology or anything like that. I mean, it's great. I should know the Bible more, but I wouldn't do that. But then at this church, like with these kids who showed up, it just became a train wreck. And at the same time that it would became a train wreck and difficult existentially for all of us kind of doing ministry, because it was, we were failing at it. I mean, I don't know, you know, that's, that's probably part of my journey too. What does it actually mean to fail at ministry? Like what we were failing at was not building the program that we were supposed to build, which has never kind of left my imagination of, well, is that really what we're talking about in ministry? And how did, how did that get transposed into my imagination? And that's what we were doing. So we felt that existentially, but the church was struggling too, because this was a church that had found money to hire someone like me who thought that they needed to do ministry to these kids. And then all of a sudden, well, there were building spray painted and there were people harassed coming into the building. Cause of course they had to do the over 60 Bible study on the same night that this was happening. So, you know, behavior was not what the over 60 people wanted. You know, you catch a kid selling marijuana outside at one point, and then everything flips. And now the church is like, these kids have to earn it. We have to see, they have to earn it before they can be here. And yet in my classes, I'm reading Bonhoeffer and thinking about the church and then looking at a like apartment building that overlooks the church and thinking, well, George, he lives right there. Like he, he lives there and everyone who, who this is their church, supposedly drives, you know, lives in the foothills and drives down to the flats. And yes, they put money in the offering plate, but whose church is this? And what does it mean to be church? And all of a sudden, all these theological ideas became really important and really practical. And then these, you know, these embedded deep kind of Lutheran sensibilities and experiences that I had since I was four started coming up. And now it wasn't about trying to build a program or get these kids to like me, but there was something about sharing in their broken humanity with them. And, um, what qualified me to minister to him, there's my own confession of my need for Jesus Christ to come and move in my life, not some of my, my expertise, you know, like I couldn't fix these kids. Like I had thought kind of what ministry was, was fixing people out of the dynamics of your talent. And these young people really kind of reflected to me that know that there's something about just participation in each other's lives. And there's something about kind of shared life through confession that that is participation in the concrete presence of Jesus Christ. And Bonhoeffer was giving me that vision, you know, so all of a sudden I thought, well, man, first of all, then, you know, Bonhoeffer became just Bart was like the big brother who was like, listen, there's a different way. And in some ways I've never left Bart, but like as my big brother, in some ways I go back to him and I trust him, but I don't really always want to hang out with him, you know, like sometimes, but I don't really, but Bonhoeffer became really the person I kind of journeyed with in my kind of core dialogue partner, really through that concrete experience of ministry and just trying to make sense of what does it mean to really do ministry with people who are in really difficult situations and what matters is not building a program, but embracing the humanity of another person. Now it seems this is interesting because, well, you're in academics, because listening to your story, I might expect that you would stay. And, you know, looking at the landscape of the American church, I mean, the main line, some of those tensions you just described are particularly, they're particularly visceral in the main line in very different ways than they are, let's say, in in evangelical circles. So again, I grew up in this weird way and, you know, an African-American community were very familiar with Black churches. My father's church had a heroin drug rehabilitation center right next door to the church because heroin was going through Patterson in the 70s. So that style of ministry that would be very evangelical, you know, these kids are, you know, the way we're going to stop these kids from spray painting the church is by bringing them to Jesus, you know, that's the way this goes. Mainline sensitivity is a little bit different and, of course, the main line has been moving, in some ways the main line has been moving quite dramatically in the last 50 years in ways, obviously, that the evangelical currents haven't. So how did you get from this youth pastor feeling those tensions resonating with Bonhoeffer? Of course, Bonhoeffer had that stint in New York, which, you know, which is very much, you know, impressed. I'm no Bonhoeffer expert, but I've read a little. So how did you get from there to lecturing at a seminary and writing books about, you know, practical theology? Yeah, so, yeah, I do feel, and this, you know, goes all the way back to being a kid in a Missouri Synod church, which, you know, like the Missouri, sociologically, it's really hard to ever, like, land on what is even like to say the Missouri Synod because it's clearly evangelical in some ways, culturally evangelical, but then liturgically not at all. So it's this kind of in between, and I've felt that my whole kind of life, like I, there's, I don't fit really in evangelicalism, but I also don't really fit in the main line either, you know, which has been a beautiful gift in some ways, because I've had the real privilege of being able to talk to a lot of people in a lot of congregations, a lot of conferences, a lot of schools across that kind of continuum. At other times, you just kind of feel like, well, you know, I'm a man without a country in some ways, too, you know, like, what would it be like to really have somewhere where you, you know, like, felt kind of connected? And I didn't come from, you know, unlike my wife, like we started, who kind of came from pastoral stock, if you will, at least in this kind of entrepreneurial evangelical way. I didn't, like my dad rarely went to church and only went to church when there was snow on the ground, because his summa bonum, his highest good was the golf course. If it was November and 10 degrees, but there was no snow on the ground, the golf course was open, that's where he would be on Sunday morning. So he had an early tee time every Saturday and Sunday morning. So it's not like my dad was a bishop or something, you know, like, you meet all these people across the church, like, yeah, well, my uncle, you know, wrote all these books, my dad was a bishop of this church, and you know, so I found myself here. Like, well, that's not me at all. So, but this kind of stuck, this this kind of not having anywhere to land just opened me up. And then, yeah, I mean, I knew I eventually just felt this call that I had to go do a PhD, like I had to continue at this. And I had some other experiences where I would, I had, you know, taught and had other professors or, you know, pastors, wherever, be like this, you know, there's something to this for you. And, and kind of idea construction was always a big thing for me in creating ideas. And, and so, like I tell students now when they talk about should I do a PhD, I'm always like, if you can't not, you should. I mean, if you can do something else, you shouldn't do it. But if there's like something in you that's like, you know, if this comes to just getting the degree, and I'm essentially back where I would have been with my MDiv, and that'll be okay, because I have this, this idea, or this perspective, or this, this journey I want to go on, and then maybe it's for you. And that's kind of how it was for me that I wanted to figure, figure that out. And then, you know, Ray had been kind of stumbling around practical theology. He was a kind of trained systematician, but because of his pastoral experience, was thinking practical theology, and that really resonated with me. And I think a lot of, a lot of people, like younger people in doctoral programs, or even young professors start to really love practical theology, you know, like, oh, practical theology is it, and love to talk about practical theology, and love to think that practical theology is the answer. And what I've realized is after about five or six years in, in a position, you don't want to talk about practical theology ever again, and you think it's the most boring conversation ever. But at the time, there was just something interesting about thinking about practice, and thinking about deep reflection. And so when it became time to, to think about doctoral programs, Ray Anderson had told me that the, had kind of in this off the cuff statement, it said the smartest person he knew was this guy named James Loader, who was teaching at Princeton. This very, also very strange dude, like Loader was an incredibly strange dude. So this is, oh, when would this would have been like, oh, I guess this would have been like 2001 ish or so, like early 2000s. And so I decided that, you know, I applied to some other programs, but decided that Princeton was kind of seemed interesting, because there were these three, there were these three things, there was this kind of Bardian ethos that was there, that was still kind of anchor point for me. And then there was Kenna Creasy Dean, who was like, the only person out there who was thinking about young people. And I still had that running through me. And the experience that I wanted to reflect on was this experience I had at the church, and then this other young life experience I had when I was on staff for them. And so I wanted to think about that. And then of course, there was Jim Loader, this, you know, eccentric genius, who was who was there. And then tragically, I then ended up applying in, you know, the end of 2001. And right before I came for a visit that that Jim Loader died, right? Yeah, right after now, I think it was right after 911. So maybe a month after 911, he died. So I ended up applying in being admitted. And he was, he was not with us anymore. But he had now haunted the program in a pretty significant way that Jim was a as I didn't know him personally, because of this, but very clear from his former students. I mean, everyone's dealing with the crater of him being gone. You know, he was in the middle of teaching towards the end of his career, but still fully active. And then he was just, I think he had a heart attack, and he was just gone. So that first year I started was kind of the year of Loader review at Princeton. So all his former students would come back and grieve. And the first seminar I ever took was just on Jim Loader by his very talented doctoral student who was a kind of contract position at Princeton at the time, a guy named Dana Wright. And so it was like read all of this stuff and had to read Kierkegaard because Loader loved Kierkegaard. So got Loader but got him, you know, after after his death. But that I mean, that's how I ended up in this kind of this orbit. So it really was like PCUSA because I took took a job in unlike the ELCA. The PCUSA feels like to me somebody may have a different opinion, but it really is like the East Coast compared to the West Coast is like the more you go from East Coast to West Coast, the more you go kind of more evangelical conservative, where the ELCA is not like that. You know, like it's you could find and depending on the city, you can find a really conservative ELCA church, you can find a really liberal one. But the PCUSA, I mean, to overstate myself, it just kind of feels that way. So I got involved in the kind of conservative elements of the PCUSA and then ended up at Princeton, which of course is not the most progressive of the PCUSA schools by any stretch, but then was kind of in that orbit. And then when you know where you land for your doctoral program makes especially when you have such a good experience like I did, like your teachers just kind of set you up for what's next and, you know, open doors for you in certain ways. And mine came full circle ended up back in the Twin Cities at a Lutheran school kind of back to my Lutheran roots that I was kind of running away from since I was 18, but couldn't leave me, you know, it was still there. And yeah, then 2005 was ABD and a faculty person who wore a tie every day because I knew everyone would confuse me as a student. Well, let's let's you wrote these books. Let's get to Charles Taylor. How did you get to Charles Taylor and how did he change you? Because clearly he's left a deep impact on you. I mean, and all my copies over there, but not a small book, not a writer who writes small, easy books, but yet someone who is deeply impacting, oh, lots of conversations right now all across the span that I have conversations. So how did you, how did you got into Charles Taylor land and that's where that's where you're mining. So yeah, that's where I'm mining and who knows when I'll leave it. I mean, I, you know, we'll see. But it is, you know, like you said, it is a thick, thick book that can protect you if some someone's throwing rocks at you after a sermon or something, hold that up and it will protect you or keep your door open on a very windy day. It is a brick of a book. And the first time I came across it, you know, probably, you know, three years into my career, maybe I guess it came out in 2007. So when I started on the faculty here in 2005, so it was maybe 2008 ish and someone, our school has a journal called word world and the book review editor, a new colleague was like, Hey, I have a book I want you to review. And I thought, okay, I could use a book review on my CV. I'm new at this. And he said, that's by this philosopher started, it's starting to pick up a lot of momentum around people. So sure. And so then I went to my box and that was the book, you know, this big book is like, I thought I was, you know, 300 page book, maybe a big book, 100, you know, 250 pages, not 780 pages. And so summer on sometime around 2008 or so I read through the thing to try to write a 700 word review of the thing. And it has to be really quite honest that I didn't have a clue what in the bleep was going on in that book. Like I was lost and just trying to hold on to certain pieces so I could stitch together 700 words that seems somewhat coherent. But I read it, I put it down and thought, thank God, that's over with, you know, I'm so happy that that's that that's done. And I really, to be completely honest, didn't have my arms around enough to know how important it was. But the driving question from back in those youth ministry days at that church in Southern California, I discovered that really what mattered for ministry was not somehow building a program and convincing people to go. But you know, the the haunting a bonhoeffer was how do we testify to the concrete presence of the living Jesus Christ? How do we do that? And, you know, I think Bonhoeffer is really saying that's the modern problem. The modern problem is that we have to testify to the concreteness, which was, you know, so relevant for me in practical theology, you know, like concrete encounter real people, which was what kind of Bonhoeffer's dissertation was about. So that's never left me like the driving question for me is how do we help people encounter the concrete presence of Jesus Christ and make sense of that. And to me, that's the core of ministry. But what Taylor really helped me with after I picked up the book again, and I do tell people as depressing as it sounds, it takes like three times through it. And then you're like, I think I get it. So it's not only 770 pages, we got to get through it three times, which should make your viewers vomit in their mouth just a little bit. But yeah, I mean, so Taylor has become kind of, yeah, similar to Bonhoeffer and Bart in their own ways is these kind of people to travel with, but not as necessarily as much constructively. I mean, there's some constructive parts of Taylor that are really important to me and have become more so, but it's descriptively. I just think Taylor's to me is a descriptive genius on what's so difficult about this late modern age. And particularly if I can convince anyone that our kind of core problematic in the context of ministry is to testify to a living speaking God. I mean, if the God of the Bible, as Robert Jensen says so beautifully, is anything, it's talkative. Like it's always talking. This God of Israel is talking, talking, talking. And yet kind of our default framework that we inherit in this late modern age is to not even be aware that there could be a speaking God anymore, or not to know how it really matters outside of maybe helping you cope religiously or something, which in so many ways, I think, pulls down ministry and ministers, eats away at them in some ways. Again, if all you're doing is kind of institutional maintenance or building programs that compete with the other church, and there's no larger good, there's no larger narrative and story that you're living out of, I think that can be quite debilitating. And Taylor, I think, has helped me see that. The problem with Taylor though is that there are no home runs and there are no straight shots. So everything is a zigzag. This happens and then that happens and this adds to that dynamic. And it's probably back to being a crazy, in my early 20s and loving ideas. And one of the reasons I love Loader is that Loader used to, he was into physics and thinking about Einstein and thinking about physics and thinking about the human spirit and how the human spirit's transformed by the Holy Spirit. So there was like Pannenberg and then there was Niels Bohr and there's all these ideas and he would draw these diagrams that I only obviously saw after he died. But in his books, too, there'd be these weird diagrams that made no coherent sense to anyone. And they are completely unhelpful. And my early books are filled with them too, because I thought they were so cool. But then I realized they don't help anyone. As I looked at someone else's diagrams, like this makes no sense to me. I must be on drugs and now I am a recovering diagramaholic. But it was the sense of creating an edifice of thought that was just so appealing. I think the thing I, you know, probably what I think is the most beautiful thing in the world, other than the love of my wife and the connection with my kids, is a beautiful idea. I mean, it sounds a little bit, yeah, I mean, it sounds a little kind of crazy, but the creation of a thought experiment in many ways. And so that's what's appealing about Taylor is that there's this, it's infuriating, but it does something to me that he kind of makes up these words, like, you know, the imminent frame and the ANOVA effect. And they're all done, I think, in the best way, not, you know, he's so into German philosophers, but I don't think it's just to confuse. He's trying to describe, but the fact that it takes this kind of work of language and it takes putting this on top of this, and this has to happen, so that happens, and it didn't have to happen that way, but it did. That's really, it makes things really complicated, but it also, when you can stand inside of it, much like the first time I stood inside Bart's system and kind of saw the pieces moving together and was kind of shocked by the beauty of it, and I couldn't even describe it, but I could feel it, that's kind of what Taylor does. And unfortunately, I think it's what I try to do, which is not the smartest thing to do for building a readership. Like, I'm often really, like, I'm often really deeply aware that, like, I think, unfortunately, like, especially this trilogy, and maybe I'm overstating this, but it's definitely more like, there's not a microprocessor in it, necessarily, or a chip in it. There's a lot of different gears that have to catch with each other, and, you know, like the pastor book, where we're gonna, I'm gonna walk you through each one of these people, and then that gear of that person's story is going to connect with this gear that Taylor's trying to describe, and then I'm gonna try to catch it with the gear of what this actually looks like in pastoral ministry, and, you know, and that's really hard for readers, I think, you know, it's easier to do straight shots and things like that, but Taylor's corrupted me that way, like, he's become the great, like, yeah, he is, he's destroyed me in that sense, and, you know, comes from other people too, like Bart and others, but that, yeah, so, yeah, that's probably why Taylor's gone. My watch keeps going off, and I don't, I feel like Taylor would say that has something to do with, like, the haunting from beyond the imminent frame. Siri wants in on the conversation. I'm saying I'm having a hard time understanding, and, like, yes, Siri, that's how all my readers feel, like. Well, I didn't, I didn't find, you're exactly right in that this stuff is really hard to get a handle on. This is really challenging, and Taylor, you know, across the spectrum, I mean, you can find, you can find groups of Taylor fans among the Gospel coalition. You can find groups of Taylor fans, you know, James K. Smith is, you know, sort of building a career somewhere between Taylor and Augustine. Taylor, but yet his, you know, there's sort of a drip, drip, drip of the imminent frame, the buffered self, the supernova, and I first tried to started to tackle that book a number of years ago, and then later I've been, you know, in all the things that I've been in through YouTube now over the last few years, but it's interesting also the way you laid out the books. Formation in a secular age, the pastor in a secular age, which, of course, being a pastor, that one, that one spoke to me, and then the congregation in a secular age, which I really haven't had enough time with yet. Why, why those, I know we got to keep an eye on your time here, why those three? It's a great question, Paul. I'm not sure, to be completely honest. Like, the projects just built on themselves. I mean, the faith formation in a secular age really was just thinking, I mean, what it's, it says something about the intricacies of Taylor's work, that it takes three books to kind of get at what he's trying to do in one book. So, faith formation in a secular age is really just trying to describe how the age of authenticity comes to land on us, and what that looks like, and how the age of authenticity, yeah, like, the whole conversations around formation, as we've thought, like Christian Smith's work with around young people and thinking of moral therapeutic deism and things like that, is I saw Taylor as a way to make that a lot deeper and richer to think about. And one of the things that Taylor, I think, is really helpful about for people in ministry, particularly, and this is one of the reads from Gospel Coalition people to Jamie's really excellent book that, you know, that Taylor himself talks so highly of, what, you know, service. I had one opportunity to have coffee with Taylor, and he talked about Jamie's book and said, I wish I could have done that. Like, I wish I could have written a 150-page book on this. So, I think, you know, Taylor knows himself that the book is too long. But, and so everyone has their kind of take on Taylor, but one of the things that's, and you could never get me to not be a Protestant, you know, even if I didn't want to be, but Taylor is a Catholic. And so, what's embedded in all of his description and all of his, like, very ironic, like, I'm just trying to describe, and I'm just, you know, I, you know, there's some good here, there's some bad here, like, even the age of authenticity, Taylor thinks there's a lot of good things that happen there. Yes, there's overreach and there's bad things, but this is, this is good, and Taylor will say often, I'd rather live now than live, you know, in an enchanted age, even though disenchantment does stuff to us, that that's hard. But that Taylor does have this deep sense of the kind of this Catholic, not necessarily mystical, but sacramental reality, and his own story of kind of believing again or coming back to faith is embracing this kind of sacramental sense. And I think for me, what I've been trying to journey at is get at this kind of sense of, from a Protestant perspective, this kind of sacramental ontology of, just a different way of kind of saying, how do we encounter the living presence of Jesus Christ, but how do we even think about, as pastors and ministers, that there is this kind of sacramental sensibility here? So yeah, I mean, I think that's the kind of path that I find really helpful from Taylor is how to think about that. So, and that was really important in that first book, is trying to get at that, that we think about faith formation so much as we allow faith to be defined by sociologists. And, you know, nothing wrong with sociologists. Some of my best friends are sociologists, as the saying goes. But there is a reduction if we, sociologists have to define faith in a certain way so they can measure it. But that's a reduction, and we should be aware of that. And we lose this kind of deeper sense of a sacramental ontology when we allow that to happen. And then there's just, back to Ray Anderson, his real contribution, which goes to the second book, is just this deep sense of how dynamic ministry is. That ministry becomes almost a sacramental place for him, or at least becomes the way we participate in God's own being if we think of God as minister. And so we know God through God's acts, but God's acts are always for ministry. It was really developing kind of that. But I had read too much Taylor in this genealogy stuff, man. Once you start kind of looking for these points across history, it becomes incredibly addictive. And so the kind of biography piece got pulled into that and trying to show that. And so that became important. And then the congregation was just set up. I thought that the third one would be a full-fledged ecclesiology. Like, what's a theology of the church in a secular age? But it just became made more sense to focus just on the congregation, which keeps, I think, the pastor more in focus. And to be quite honest, there's a little bit of a pivot away from Taylor. Taylor's there. And now like Bonhoeffer and Barth, he's embedded in my consciousness. But one of his, I think, really interesting commentators or somebody who's working off him doing his own unique stuff is this German sociologist called Hartmut Rosa, who's really thinking about kind of modernity as acceleration. And that just seemed really interesting to me. And there's been this whole turn within, I think, all forms of Protestantism towards kind of thinking as evangelical and mainline communities start to kind of come up against decline, that one of the things we need is to be innovative and think about innovation. And there's been a lot of borrowing from kind of Silicon Valley practices. And Rosa has some warnings against some of that, that there are some things in that that may not be as, we shouldn't swallow that hook necessarily completely. And I saw just like incredible amount of ramifications in that. And so yeah, so the book goes kind of in that direction. So there's not a clear kind of coherence and there's not a kind of like, you know, working through the, you know, I don't know, like working through, you know, three patterns of something. It's just, it was episodic in the sense of these, I think these are three issues that are really become front and center in this kind of secular age we're in. The identity of the pastor, how we think about forming people, and how we think about what a gathered people in a congregation are for and what they're doing there. Is there a fourth book coming or is this it for this series? This is, well, that's a good question. It is it. This is, this will close it down, but there are two books coming and Baker wants them to be somehow connected to these three, but they won't be like volume four and five. So, you know, like internally, this won't happen either, but internally they're kind of being thought of as like 3.2 and 3.3, which, you know, gets my partner going. But there's no way they'll be like actually pitched like that, but they'll be somehow connected to these. So I kind of think of them as like, you know, the Lord of the Rings and then The Hobbit, you know. Okay. What do you want these books to do in the world? I want these books again to help. Well, I want them to do two things. I want them, I always want all my work to ennoble eyes people in ministry. I want in late modernity where it feels like your vocation in its weight is being kind of stripped away. And I want to remind you that what you do, whoever's reading this is incredibly important and that though it looks very weak, you know, particularly compared to being a CEO or maybe, you know, being a physicist or being a politician that I do want to make an argument that ministry may be the most powerful form of human action in the world. And it's kind of Corinthians looks foolish, but it's something quite more because only ministry, and I don't mean this by like clerical people doing it, but all people in ministry, doing it, but all people in ministry, in the events of ministry participates in what's dead and brings forth new life out of it or participates in what brings forth new life. And there's no other form of human action that does that, not celebrity, not any, you know, not any of this. And so I want to ennoble eyes people that way. And I also want to, I want to invite people to really wrestle with the core problem of how do we testify and help people on the ground encounter a living God again and hear God speak and discern that and make sense of that and seek for that. And to me, that's really quite beautiful and quite profound kind of reality that to hold on again to this commitment that God acts and God speaks, and that we need to listen for God moving. And that becomes the job of whoever's in leadership is to help people up against their narratives of loss and their narratives of hope to listen for God to speak. And that actually may be quite dangerous too, you know, like that it's not an easy thing. It's, it's, it's not a straightforward thing in, but it's quite beautiful and transformational. Well, I know you've got to go and I, I don't have any regrets going into your story, because again, with almost all these conversations, knowing you a bit more and reading the book helps me understand the book and really have a sense of you speaking through the book to me. So I know my, my interviews are a little odd in that, that I do so much biographical, but I loved it. It was great. It was fun. It was, so do I send a check for therapy to your church office or home or I do, I do therapy on YouTube for free. So it's tough to get a spot, but right. Well, I appreciate, I, I, yes, I feel, I feel ready to face the world again. So thank you. Well, thank you, Andrew. And if you want to talk again, or you want to go any deeper into these books, let me know. I'd be happy to, cause I, I think Taylor's important. I think your books are important. It's, I've, some of the, some of the people who watch my videos, I've been getting into your book, some of my colleagues. And so, and, and yeah, so it's, it's, it's, I, I'm finding it interesting to engage with it. So thank you. Thanks for having me. Thanks for everyone who was reading along and thanks Paul. Appreciate it. All right. Take care. Bye bye.