https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Czb8dRXjq6Q

 Hi, this is Paul. Certain segments of Christianity are in a tizzy over Christian nationalism and Christian imperialism basically gets a free ride. What do I mean by that? Well, in many ways Trump was America first, sort of an interesting turn on Christian nationalism in the United States, but Biden, what is he? And I think Biden is really a turn back to a certain kind of Christian imperialism, but you sort of mask over the Christian part. And I think if you want to see some of this, you have to see it from the outside. Now, the rest is history is currently my favorite podcast. I usually listen to it on Saturdays and so I have a few built up by Saturday and can get through a number of them. But in a couple of episodes, one on Americanization and one on the 90s I think Holland and Dominic Sandbrook, I guess his last name, really do an excellent job looking at some of these issues. So I want to dive into some of them today. I've been talking about various Christian nationalisms and imperialisms as we've been part of the American, I've always been part of the American religious culture and I did a video on that not too long ago, but let's take a listen to first the towards the end of the Americanization, they use an S instead of a Z, that podcast and see what they see what's here where they go with it. Yeah, okay. Oh, here's a question from James. It's an excellent one. Hi, guys. Love the pod. So we like that. To what extent is Americanization and American exceptionalism influenced by the widespread belief within the US that it's a nation blessed by God? It's a gift to you this question. Dominic, what's your view on that? I think I can answer this with no need for any input from you. No, I think it's absolutely. So American exceptionalism is clearly a very religiously infused idea, the idea of the shining city on the hill. And that's an idea that they've got from 17th century English Puritanism, obviously, but I think Americans, irrespective of their religious identity, share that sense, don't they? They share the sense that America is a nation chosen by God, even if they don't believe in God, they think they're a chosen people. And that their nation is special. It represents an ideal, rather than just a sort of a story of shared belonging. And that it represents I mean, even people who are the most sort of radical critics of the American government within America will often then go on to say, because our country should mean something more than that, because we fail to live up to our ideals. This isn't the real America. This isn't America. This is what everybody said after that. Tom Holland tries his American accent. Trump riots, wasn't it? This is not America. This is not who we are. And everybody else outside America saying, No, no, this is who you are. We've seen the films. We've done the video games. We know this. But absolutely. And I think it is completely religious. That's an inspiration, this idea, don't you? Yeah. And I but I think that from our point of view, I think that it's part of a common stock of kind of Anglo American Protestantism. And again, I think that that means that it's not just one of the reasons that we're so kind of susceptible to it, open to it, ready to accept the justice of it, is because we share a common kind of seedbed of theological assumptions. So the the idea that people should be awakened, that people are steeped in sin, that the spirit should descend and that people should be awakened. And you have this thing, the great awakening that begins in Britain and spreads to America in the 18th century. And in the previous video, I, I, of course, began with Jonathan Edwards, and Jonathan Edwards didn't consider himself an American as such, even though he was born on this continent. He considered himself part of, at that point, what was this British culture war, which was vehemently Protestant versus Catholic. But for them, this was all about the destiny of the world. And again, you can go back and I didn't, I didn't read a whole lot of that in the John and the George Marsden, Jonathan Edwards biography, but that's, that's exactly what the existential crisis was about. And that vision that here we are, the Puritans, we're here to save the world. This takes on different labels. They won't call themselves Puritans anymore. They won't necessarily believe in God anymore. But this overall world saving ethos continues to, to move through and work through. And then you have a succession of them, because of course, you have an awakening, people are born again, they have their eyes opened, the spirit descends on them, and then they return back into sin. And, you know, it's And if you read, if you read again, Marsden's biography of Edwards, that was Jonathan Edwards in his early teen years, he had an awakening, but Marsden is quite careful to note that, well, Jonathan Edwards father, who is the minister, understands that, well, people have these awakenings, and then they slink back and they need another awakening, and then they slink back. And it's, it's this process back and forth, back and forth, that that really creates the transformation that they're looking for. In case you need another book, I'm I'm obviously on a George Marsden tear right now. I'm reading Religion and American Culture, Brief History by George Marsden, and this isn't one of his newer books. And it's, it's an attempt to sort of take this gigantic, take this gigantic issue and, and, and break it down into a smaller, much more digestible piece. And in the book, you get you very much very interesting, get this sense of, and this will become, this is still a big issue that we deal with in America itself, the degree to which, okay, you've got the institution of the church, and then you've got this revival spirit. Marsden notes, a good many people, especially those touched by revivals, were intensely religious. What does he mean by that? Well, full of, we would say, full of religious enthusiasm. Many more, most of the population, in fact, were religious only occasionally, or ignored religious services entirely. Some also trusted in minor folk magic that had little to do with traditional Christian, Christian connections. And, and so what we've sort of seen, and I think, and we'll get to that in this video, is this decoupling of religion from the institutions. And, and they, the religious, the religious impulse feeds into a lot of other manifestations. The great dynamo generating this remarkable American religious vigor was continuing revival. The period from 1795 to 1865 was marked by recurrent outbursts of revival throughout the states. In 1801, spectacular new camp meeting revivals occurred among both whites and blacks, especially in the Kentucky frontier. At the other end of the social spectrum in the same year, Timothy Dwight, president, president of the Congregationalist Yale College, spurred a campus revival that helped inspire a whole generation of Connecticut Yankees in spreading the gospel into new, into new settlements of the West, now Midwest, and throughout the world. Meanwhile, Methodist movements, which had become an independent denomination, was growing at a spectacular rate among the common people, surpassing even the Baptists in number by 1820. At the same time, countless local revivals sprang up, sprang up, often with highly popularized and democratic versions of the gospel. Innovators formed several new denominations, each marked by a grand expectation of ushering in a new age of the spirit. By the 1840s and 1850s, impressive percentages of enslaved people had turned to Christianity, which became the overwhelming dominant religion of their culture. While women usually had the majority in these revivals, in 1857 and 1858, urban revivals among businessmen in the North drew them into noontime prayer meetings in numbers unlike anything anyone had seen. During the Civil War, notable revivals had been reported in both Union and Confederate camps. Just the overview of these remarkable developments leads plausibility to estimate of renowned historian Perry Miller that the dominant theme in America from the 1800 to 1860 is the invincible persistent of the revival technique. Mark, who's been on my channel, is often over at The Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord and also on our Discord, heard me talking about Billy Graham and he had no idea who Billy Graham was and he noted that when he lives in this area of the country and he kept seeing the signs for the Billy Graham Library, so he went to the Billy Graham Library and for him, he was walking into a strange new world. He had never seen any of it. Now, even just looking at this picture here of, I can make the picture a little bit bigger, of the Billy Graham Library, the spirit is manifest in the architecture. You have the barn, you have undoubtedly what is a cosmetic silo, you have a metal pole barn hidden behind this obviously iconic rather than pragmatic barn structure and you can go in with the virtual tour. And so I was talking to him on Discord and if you look at the virtual tour, you have all of the iconography of this revival ethos and you can, he said, there is this animatronic cow. Well, there he is, this animatronic cow. Now, I think if I were talking to Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook, they would be laughing their heads off at this, but other people in, let's say, New York or California, they would be mocking this. But this is religious iconography for a deep part of American history. And again, if you look at a book like Jesus and John Wayne, you have this rejection of this kind of thing. Well, the real story isn't that this kind of thing is dominant in American culture. That's a given, that's American religious history. And so if you go on, you have, at each point, you have the camp meeting, you have in some ways, I was trying to find language that my friend could get into and I said, this is sort of Cracker Barrel meets church. Now, you could take it a lot of different ways, but at every different stage. Now, it's easy for coastal elites to mock this, but isn't this just sort of the comparable thing to the National Cathedral in Washington, D.C.? Now, as this post-Christian, kind of embarrassed about Christianity, Christian imperialism progresses, they're going to have to deal with this. And that's a lot of what's going on in our culture in terms of dealing with this history. Now, this whole, I mean, you can do a virtual tour. You've got a buggy up there at the ceiling. Mark pointed out that when you go into some of these places, let's see if I can get into some of them fairly quickly. Come on, come on. And then there's a movie and then, okay, now we're going to go into the LA camp, you know, the revival. And again, you know, the sawdust, all of this, this harkens back to this revival history. I want to get to, okay, we're going to go through here. Now we're in the home. And for some of us, this is just sort of zooming us back to the 1970s. You know, this was how you decorate your home in the 1970s. I went in how many homes in the 1970s that looked like this. Okay. And it's, you know, now he's going to talk about China, Richard Nixon going to China. All right. Now we've got, you know, radio, media, Larry King. Oh, come on, navigating. I want to get to, I want to get, okay, now we're going to get into here. You know, Mark mentioned here, he says, oh, look at, look at where all of the Bible verses are placed up high. And he talks about verveky, how you look, you look up high and well, there are all the Bible verses and, and the various ministries and, you know, we're going to, we're going to deal with, okay, his relationships with the presidents, which was not a non-controversial thing. The team, the Billy Graham association, you know, we're going to get international. Okay. We're going to have the fall of the, the, the Berlin wall at some point. I mean, you can, you can just sort of view 20th century history from, you go place to place in this museum. So this is American history. This is American history for a lot of people. It's a kind of truism to talk about the great awakening, but I think that it's, it's manifestly in that tradition. And I think that that's why it's, it's had the impact that it's had here is because we also are as to that kind of essentially Protestant sense that we're lost in sin and we need to be awakened to our moral responsibilities and the kind of, and also the biblical narrative of Exodus of people in slavery who are chosen by God to be redeemed from the evil oppressor, the imperialist oppressor is, is, you know, this is in its overtly biblical form is something that Martin Luther King absolutely enshrined as the kind of the heartbeat of the civil rights movement. Now with Black Lives Matter, that's not overtly Christian. Indeed, often it's, it's in overt terms anti-Christian, but it's still manifestly drawing on those traditions. And I think that again, it's kind of, you know, transplanted so easily here. It's very interesting that the relationship between, I mean, America was an English colony and what America did was sort of like, well, they sent the prisoners over to Australia. We got all the religious, we got all the religious dissenters and, and this then became the promised land. So the interesting thing is that we've lost, what we have lost in Britain is the sense that did exist in the 18th century, that Britain was that country, that Britain was chosen by God, and that Britain was the city on the hill. We don't know what leaves that now. No, but I think that what you see in Britain, what you also see in America, which is a sense that we are kind of unique in our evil. We're dignified by the fact that we're Oh yeah, we definitely see that. We're dignified by our wickedness, by, you know, we are the enslaver, we are Babylon, we are, you know, the evil empire, and therefore we need to repent of that. And only by repenting can we be brought into the light. And I think that, you know, the sense that both America and Britain, that both Americans have and the British have, that somehow there's a kind of deep stain of evil there that needs to be purged and repented for. It's a kind of arrogance almost. It's a kind of solipsism. It's a kind of, you know, it's a narcissism. It's placing us at the centre of history, at the fulcrum of history. Even if, you know, a hundred years ago it was because the British Empire was great, now it's because the British Empire was uniquely evil. It's a kind of narcissism. I agree with you. I mean, that's something that Britain and America definitely share. There's no conflict in the world that there won't be somebody who says it was either the British Empire's fault for misdrawing maps or it's the CIA's fault plotting in the name of international Americanised capitalism. And it's always putting themselves at the centre of the story and their own moral failings. Yeah. I don't think you get the same thing in France, for instance, which would be the obvious parallel to us. Yeah, no, the French don't think that. And of course, as we discussed in a previous episode, people like the Dutch are delighted by their own empire. And, um... Well, to be fair to the Dutch, not all of them, because the Dutch also were part of this Anglo-American Atlantic world of Protestantism. So I think that the Dutch also are, to that extent, perhaps... Am I not right in thinking that the big YouGov survey shows the Dutch are prouder of their own imperial past than anyone else? I think they said that 40% of the Dutch were, but also that means that 60% aren't. And there are huge, you know, there's huge debates in the Netherlands about, was it Black Pete who is a festive figure who turns out wearing black face. And I think that's a kind of, you know, very much the kind of debate that is informed by American cultural concerns. So anyway, yeah, interesting stuff. Do we have... Now, I want to plot some of this history. And so I went to YouTube, of course, and searched, basically searched, you know, background on the New England Transcendentalists, because in many ways, you can see the process from New England Calvinism to New England Unitarianism, to the New England Transcendentalists, and this sort of becomes a core religious factor. And what I found, which was, I thought, enormously charming here in the middle of COVID, was a professor, Asher Harris, from Fordham University, who basically in the summer, probably planning his syllabus, sits with his daughter and made a couple of YouTube files, probably YouTube videos, probably for his students. And I was the second subscriber to his channel. And I thought, now I am really on the ground floor. His daughter was probably the first subscriber, and I was the second. And I wish they'd made more videos, because actually on YouTube, and even Marsden, in his, I gotta grab that book, even Marsden in the books of his that I've read so far, hasn't really touched on it. It's touched on somewhat. Here's another Christian Reformed historian, Mark Knoll, taught at Notre Dame. And Mark Knoll does treat it to some degree in his history of Christianity in the United States and Canada. So there's another book that I have to put on the shelf. But I wish there were more things on YouTube about the Transcendentalists to contemporary American spirituality. And so I'm trying to, Asher Harris has an account on Twitter, and I'm going to try and send him a message, and we'll see what I can get on. But let's listen to some of how he describes this passage. Now the volume is a little low, but I boosted it up, and hopefully it'll be okay. That had really shaped New England thought from its formation during the 16 and 1700s. The clergy started to reject that. A lot of the Calvinist doctrines that had really shaped New England thought from its formation during the 16 and 1700s. The clergy started to reject that. Really the only school of theology, the place where every minister in New England went to be trained was Harvard. And by the year 1800 or shortly thereafter, almost all of the faculty of Harvard that talked divinity had become Unitarian. They rejected a lot of the doctrines of Calvinism. And what they were really trying to do was go back and develop a system of beliefs that they felt actually were more reflective of the New Testament. So there was a whole bunch of different people. It was shaped a lot by William Emory Channing, but they kind of coalesced around four basic principles. One, they believed in the fatherhood of God. They believed in the reject. It's great. You can hear someone doing dishes in the background. You think my YouTube channel is rough. They did the idea of Jesus being divine. So the idea of the hypostatic union of Jesus as a being who was both fully human and fully divine, that was rejected by the Unitarians. In terms of human nature, they had a much more positive view of human nature than did Calvinism. They believed in that people had a potential for virtue, that people could become good based on the strength of their own spirit. Could they redeem themselves? They could. And it didn't require... I just find this so charming. That's gotta make a video. Daughter probably set up her cell phone and she's gonna be the... It's just lovely. Atonement. Unlike the medieval doctrine of atonement that had dominated Christian theology for many centuries, where original sin was so grave a sin that no human could atone for it, that it required the sacrifice, the self-sacrifice of a person who was both fully human and fully divine. They rejected that and they believed in the mission of Jesus as altering the human heart. So they believed that each person had within himself the ability to model himself and pattern himself after the example of Jesus and become virtuous. So those were the central premises of Unitarianism. So as we'll see, Transcendentalism consisted of a group of people, most of whom came from a Unitarian background, but that was kind of the trajectory of the fought of New England, where it was originally Calvinist. Calvinism was rejected by the Unitarians and then Transcendentalists came along and rejected the Unitarian tradition. Okay, so which philosophical issues did Transcendentalism really address? So I think really at the beginning of the Transcendentalist movement is an issue about epistemology, the question of how does man know? And much of the philosophical premises of the latter part of the 1700s were based on John Locke, who believed in a tabula rasa. Every person was sort of a blank slate and that person would know through experience. And we'll be covering epistemology more as we go through the semester, but just at this stage, I think it's important to know that this was really a key jumping off point for Transcendentalism, that they rejected the Lockean epistemology in favor of belief that a person could come to know through his own intuition. They were heavily influenced by people who were influenced by Kant and I think that they thought they were influenced by Kant even though now most people who really now know Kant and examine the way they thought, they don't really think the Transcendentalists were accurately based on Kantian epistemology, but from their perspective they viewed Kant and in general the course of German epistemology as breaking from the English Lockean tradition based on experience and moving to one that was based on intuition. There is a very important philosopher by the name of Victor Cousin, a French philosopher, who by now is not particularly widely known, but for the Transcendentalists, Cousin's emphasis on intuitive understanding as a source of knowledge, that was really key to their understanding of epistemology. So if you're interested in that you can obviously watch more. The key thing is that, so the timeline basically goes, you go from the Puritans to the Unitarians over to the Transcendentalists and these Transcendentalists you all know Emerson, Thoreau, these are very formative figures and these in many ways will sort of shape this, well it'll stay within the Christian fold until of course it sort of doesn't. And what you have in American history is this mingling of all of these traditions and you would think, oh it's the intuition versus empiricism or rationalism, no those are going to get mixed together and all of these things come mixed together and of course it's very interesting reading, you know, get a good biography of Dr. King. The autobiography of Malcolm X is, I wouldn't trust it as a biography as such, it's an important document in terms of the history but I would, there are some better biographies of Malcolm X. The Civil Rights Movement and the counterculture, this is where you sort of see this breaking out of church walls. Now this is a common theme in American Christianity, Mark Knoll will bring out these themes in an important essay that he wrote which unfortunately is no longer on the BioLogo side but part of what happens in American Christian history is that American religion keeps sort of breaking out of church confines and you see this in the frontier, the circuit riders and the sawdust revivals, these keep sort of getting outside the walls of the church, outside of the hierarchy and the structures and the elites and everyone who is sort of managing this. Now in the south of course, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., a minister, that's a deeply Christian church movement and Dr. King mobilizes and uses the churches as sort of a base from which to launch the Civil Rights Movement. Now Dr. King's emphasis again is on calling America to its enlightenment roots. Dr. King will keep pointing back to the Declaration of Independence and they say, you know, this is in his most famous speech, this is a promissory note and it's time now to pay, it's time for America to treat all of its children as equals. Okay, that was Dr. King's theme. Now of course, lurking in the wings are the much more radical movements of the Civil Rights Movement. You've got the Black Power Movement and Stokely Carmichael, you've got especially early Malcolm X and the Nation of Islam and if you haven't read some of that, it's fascinating reading the whole, I mean the Nation of Islam in fact has a complete metaphysic behind it that, you know, it's almost a Gnostic situation where the white man is created by a lesser god that has somehow triumphed and the world needs to be set right. I mean the Nation of Islam, it's not really Islamic, but it's, be careful what I say. Again, read a good biography of Malcolm X and get a sense of the historical context and then of course even just saying Nation of Islam would lead Malcolm X to look at historical Islam more than just necessarily the work of Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam, but you've got this tension in the Civil Rights Movement and so what sort of happens is that the, well eventually the Northern institutional elite, well looking at their options, well they back the Civil Rights Movement and what was really cool about this article in Pathios, how the Civil Rights Movement converted white liberal Christianity, I thought the author was dead on right in seeing the American Civil Rights Movement as yet another iteration of this long history of revivalism. Now it doesn't have like with Billy Graham, the sawdust on the floor and the rough-hewn benches and the tent and you know it's astounding in North America today. You can find revivals where in fact they've got a perfectly adequate building there, but next door to the building they actually put up a tent. Why? They put up a tent because that's the iconic religious thing to do. That is the icon of this American revivalist spirit. Now of course once we get into the 1970s things are really going to change and this, the revivalism sort of let's say blue church revivalism now is in some ways anti-Christian and against Christianity and we're going to find this flopping back in terms of Republican and Democrats back and forth because remember Abraham Lincoln was a Republican. You get to the Civil Rights, you know the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement, the South is consistently Democratic. I mean a lot of people are too young today to understand that history and Americans don't pay much attention to history anyway. So you know you have this going back and forth and so key elements and this is of course Vietnam where suddenly, not suddenly, but America continues to lose sort of its innocence about its basically the imperial struggle that it is having with communism. Marsden in that book on American religious history notes that if you want to get a sense of let's say what Jonathan, how Jonathan Edwards felt about Catholicism, it was probably something akin to what Americans felt about communism. This is an existential world struggle and so for Jonathan Edwards again that Jonathan Edwards was working as a missionary to American Indians and the real horror was that these Indians would be lured into Catholicism by the French Canadians because of course the Pope was the anti-Christ. I mean it's hard for Americans today to appreciate just how long enduring and vehement the Protestant Catholic struggle was for centuries and then see again I read, I'm gonna have to do a full a fuller review of Jesus and John Wayne because the real story is not that this long-standing tradition endures, it's how quickly it's been overturned and masked and the labels have been exchanged. So here we find Chuck Colson born again, prison ministry, you know Chuck Colson disillusioned by you know Richard Nixon. It's a, it's a, I didn't, it wasn't too many years ago that I read Chuck Colson's Born Again and I found it just a fascinating book in terms of this narrative history. You know evangelicalism was always a more conservative movement, Marston calls it a primitivism. You're always sort of looking back, someone in the question, the Friday Question and Answer comment says you know what about these orthodox and you know are we always just going to say oh the world fell apart in 1054. You know Protestants say the world fell apart at the end of the first century that somehow Jesus and his disciples looked like Baptist ministers. That's sort of the nature of a religious movement. We always tend to project ourselves back on to our heroes and that's why hence the term you know be careful meeting your heroes. You know I have books from the middle 20th century Christian Reformed, Christian Reformed Church where if you read these books you know the reason we have elders and deacons is you can find them right in the Bible. It's just lifted right from the Bible right on to the Christian Reformed Church in 1960 and it's that's sort of the the movement that takes place and and so now religious and political conservatism sort of track together in some ways with this and this is where these progressive and and conservative labels really do sort of betray us because what are happening are these these long-standing we can call them principalities and powers these long-standing motivations just travel through history and get expressed in the different political parties. But but now America becomes this this mass exporter of culture and again I in listening to Dominic Sandbrook and Tom Holland talk about this I just had my eyes open in Tom Holland's about four years younger than I am I don't know how old Dominic Sandbrook is but just had my eyes open in terms of okay well what's life like in the UK. I you know we're all sort of prisoners of of how we grew up but I found I just found the podcast incredibly enlightening. ...the first world war and I think from the 20s onwards you have this persistent anxiety in Britain specifically in Britain I mean there are different kinds of anxiety elsewhere but I think we have a very particular anxiety that we have been infiltrated I guess by American-ness and you have that now when the demands their arguments about the culture wars and so on that we're actually we've just imported unthinkingly these American ideas and we're arguing about them and they don't apply to us. I think that's true but I think and you know where I'm going with this is well these American ideas these are in some ways these are so foundational that they are religious ideas and so first England colonizes America and then America returns and colonizes England back. I think that that it's interesting that you know in terms of the culture wars which I think is actually the way that America is being most influential on us at the moment. Yeah I'd agree with that. What's interesting is that that again is a kind of flip from when we were growing up when really it was the right that was very pro-American yeah all the debate around you know again going back to US air bases in Britain Greenham Common campaigners, CND, America was seen as the enemy, Thatcher was disliked not just for her own sake but because she was seen as Reagan's mole. Yes yeah the kind of the explosion of finance in with the big bang and everything in London was seen as a process of Americanization. Yeah as a canary wolf you know it had the look of America skyscrapers and things like that so the sense that Americanization was a kind of right wing project I think that's now flipped because I think that the debates the passions in in Britain at the moment are massively coming from America. I think that's so now I think it's the left that's been Americanized so we're talking about anglo-saxons the the sense that that is a problematic phrase so you're no longer now absolutely but you're no longer supposed to use the word anglo-saxon to describe the period between the end of the Roman Empire in Britain and the you know the Norman conquest because anglo-saxon is seen as being an inherently racist white supremacist phrase but that's only the case in America. Yeah yeah I've seen that you've been involved in that argument haven't you? Well it's infuriating it's infuriating because you know they want they say we should use you know early medieval England or early English but it's the English defense league it's not the anglo-saxon defense league anglo-saxon doesn't have that connotations here in Britain it's a purely American connotation but because it's American academics leading it British academics or you know some of them kind of obediently say oh well we must we must abolish this phrase and ignoring the fact that of course as we've already discussed anglo-saxon has a quite different we appreciate your subservience British academics different connotation for the French or the Germans where yeah so I think that that is that that's been the kind of the intriguing change is that now it's the left that's been Americanized I can actually get a kind of strain of suspicion in the on the on the right about America yeah I completely agree with you and I think that's because it's partly been driven by the internet hasn't it so that um if you're a sort of engaged liberal sort of academicy intellectually kind of person then you're part of it so you see yourself as part of a conversation that's dominated by Americans simply because there are far more of them speaking your language than there are of you and I think you see this in terms of so far more of them speaking your language than there are of you whose language is it do we really talk English or do we really talk American I mean I remember sort of 25 years ago teaching um undergraduate courses about white supremacy in America and white supremacy being a very specific thing um to do with slavery and the sort of incomplete legacy of reconstruction at the end of the civil war and the creation of these kind of white supremacist regimes in the American south and it was a very distinct specific American thing and now of course white supremacy is a is a sort of concept that is banded around in a very vague undefined way and people talk about white supremacy in Britain and and in European countries and so on it's not the same thing at all what they've basically done is just taken an American term and that's true of almost all these cultural battles the statue toppling started in America well I mean some of it starts in South Africa but a lot of the the most notable examples are Confederate statues in America and people copy effectively been copying what they see in the states and translating it to the sort of British cultural landscape now this is this is really interesting because why are they copying what are they copying it's it's basically the revival spreads across the shores and this is what you had in the first great awakening you have George George Whitefield comes over to America he's an English Calvinist and you have this the first great awakening you have this revival and so essentially what we've got going on is this sort of revival which is now you know spreading from the UK but it's you know oh this isn't religious really what's your definition of religion that is a big change because that's not something that left liberal people would have done when we were growing up in the 70s and 80s is it I mean they would have recoiled from the idea of America so so the question is um is this it does it happen simply because um we speak the same language and so we are prone to think that that phrases that are banded about in America have a relevance here a lot of people in the world speak English or does it go further than that is there a desire to kind of be American um so in a sense the desire to feel that you're fighting white supremacy or whatever here in the way that radicals are in in in America I think it has to do because there is a there is a moral telos there is an image there is a sacred image there is a a sacred way to be that you wish to maybe it's the beings of light they're going to talk about this whole episode is great I listen to every one of their podcasts I think they're all terrific that presumably is kind of drawing it's part of a continuum that reaches back through people in the 60s being inspired by hippies or whatever um the example of music there into the 50s through through rock and roll um I guess ultimately you know again going back to the 30s and the 20s through Hollywood that America just kind of provides a template for for kind of you know what it is to be cool to be cutting edge to be on the zeitgeist there is a bit of that actually a great example you mentioned 60s is the um British protests against the Vietnam War I mean we weren't in the Vietnam War but people have protest about it anyway um yes so that's that's pure Americanization I mean that's just that that really is just copycats kind of we've seen it so let's do it in Grosvenor Square in 1968 yeah I think there's also a deeply buried sense I think that America is the kind of fulfillment of Britain and that obviously goes back to the 18th century when in the US war of independence that America was the kind of summation of the British kind of you know the liberal experience I suppose the good old cause of the English Civil War that America was the realization of that and that we were moving you know we're sort of moving towards becoming America but that's also and of course I mean understand the Puritans come over and this was why they came they were going to now in this new land well the virus wipes out other people and they're gonna finish the job but this fresh land they're gonna terraform it again read 1793 this this blank space they are going to now construct the kingdom of God now that's deeply Protestant because you know you look at okay the Catholics and the Orthodox they all got it wrong we're gonna do it right it's church planters do this do this all the time so they're in France isn't it so you have I'm kind of thinking you know one of the very first is the good old cause of the English Civil War that America was the realization of that and that we were moving you know we're sort of moving towards becoming America but that's also there in France isn't it so you have I've kind of thinking you know one of the very first not exactly Americanization but looking to America as an example there's a famous meeting in I think 1778 something like that where Benjamin Franklin is the ambassador to Paris of the of you know the newly founded American Republic and meets Voltaire and introduces his grandson to Voltaire and Voltaire kind of blesses him in English and basically says yeah America you're great yee-haw equivalent oh Harland yeah I'm fascinated um and Voltaire with an American accent this is spiraling off in directions that I anticipated but there's a sense I mean kind of just to the right at the beginning that Voltaire is kind of handing over the torch of the Enlightenment to Franklin who is you know the embodiment of of a Republic before France has become a Republic or anything like that and and the sense that you know it's a new world and new worlds are good yes it's America being the future and I think that's actually what's really interesting about the last few years is that that's the it's the first point that I can really think of when America has not felt like the future when now we're going to get into this decadence doubt that uh theme and and actually I'm going to go back to their their episode on the 90s where they get more into this um so so all through the 20th century when people were arguing about America or when people said Reagan is a you know Nixon is a Nazi Reagan is a fascist all this sort of stuff they still never doubted that America was ahead of Europe to some extent I mean America was literally ahead they got their films earlier they you know pioneered coke and McDonald's and Levi's and rock and roll and all this sort of stuff but I detect in the last sort of 10 years or so especially with the Trump sort of imbroglio a sense that America is no longer seen as humanity's future or the West's future that America you know there's this real sense of having taken a wrong turn or taken it and you can and it's interesting because you know some of you upset if you're a Trump fan that he mentioned Trump but that's actually exactly what Trump said we've and when I get to the other you know our airports look shabby compared to the rest of the world we need to make America great again and what was what were the kinds of examples that Donald Trump gave about that he gave about well you know the airport should look better public works and you know for all of Trump's four years I mean the the story on Donald Trump is going to be well he talked a certain game but push comes to shove he didn't do anything he couldn't get it done now again it's very interesting because when I listen to people on the left talk about Obama well Obama would have been a great president if the darn Republicans hadn't stood in the way and the the other side are going to say well Trump would have been a great president if the you know if the deep state if if QAnon if the Democrats hadn't sandbagged him the the the definition of greatness is that you somehow figure out a way to overcome your adversary these guys also have a terrific episode on greatness but you know these themes come through and what's interesting is that okay so Trump Trump wants to make America great again well America first Christian nationalism okay but but what is the other what is the other theme the other theme is the American empire American internationalism American imperialism America leading the way and America has lost its way that's what Trump comes in says America has lost its way and Biden comes in and says well with Trump America lost its way and so we're going to have the third Obama administration but but you see these themes come through again and again and again at the same time and again again there's just all these layers American evangelicalism and Pentecostalism have conquered the world in terms of the the spread of Christianity around the world but but what happens with Christianity always is it goes into a land and then the people make it its own and then the people make it its own and so I expect with the rise of Christianity in China and we'll see in another number of decades if in fact China you know Christians in China eventually overthrow what the the communists in China and where on earth that would lead but you know Christians in China are patriotic even though they have you know they've they've been deeply from American evangelicalism but also I mean how many Chinese movies crazy rich that movie that was out a little while I mean it starts with a Bible study you see this in Korean dramas now of course South Korea is a deeply Christian country and in some ways the most Americanized of the of the Asian of the Asian powers but so you've got American evangelicalism and Pentecostalism it's spread like wildfire around the world you can't go into slums anywhere in the world and not find Pentecostalism just just just growing by leaps and bounds but we pay little attention to it why because well the blue church is looking at their own cathedrals and their own narratives and so well we'll just dismiss those those Pentecostals but you know but again look at the United Methodist and the and the big battle over same-sex marriage why did the blue church lose the battle in the United Methodist Church it's because of the African bishops and so suddenly right there you have two you have two value systems that are now at odds oh we want to be an international church that's sort of the imperial church but all these African bishops are saying no we're not down with same-sex marriage Roman Catholic Church I mean growing throughout the world no we're not down with same-sex marriage well what do Americans do well if you want third world aid because you either what it's your poor or your gays or your gays or your women or I mean all of these this is why hierarchies develop because you've got all of these you've got all of these value systems to somehow figure out where they land in your structure you know the other major religious export is what I call progressive liberationism that's the blue church that's the that's what America that's you know and when people vote people vote religion I mean again and again I'll hear you know Democrats complaining about poor whites they're voting against their economic fortune yeah because they're voting their religion and it's a far deeper more pervasive narrative and and okay now I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna jump into their 90s podcast because because they really get at some things there you know you see it's on the Twitter thread or something why can't people just be kind when people say that they they mean it in the most they mean it in the most vitriolic way usually yes but but but I think they're kind of the ideal of you know of kindness of love of everyone just hugging each other and not kind of kicking each other in or whatever is as a myth it does kind of have a kind of enduring resonance maybe not I don't know my son does something at school that he refers to as kindness studies and it's surely only a matter of time before that becomes a degree anyway that's all the influence of rave culture okay this is a great question from Nicholas again I hope I pronounce this right Juan Juan Juan um were the 1990s the last decade of uncritical Americanism on screen and indeed perhaps beyond screen films like Independence Day the Patriot Armageddon or even Saving Private Ryan seem unthinkable in the way they picture the U.S. nowadays um I totally agree with that that's just a really good observation do I I think that is true I think there was a America you know it had its issues but it clearly there was a sense that Hollywood projected that they had in inverted commas won the Cold War it was always presented that way it wasn't presented as a matter of kind of Gorbachev's performance going wrong and the Soviet Union falling apart and there was this quite uncritical sense I saw Saving Private Ryan in the cinema an American I can remember the scene they've got a colossal American flag flying at one point the shot is of this American flag and I mean there were people sobbing in the auditorium around me and I just sat there I've never felt so British in my life just this I just wanted to leave I just wanted to leave the cinema to be honest I'm just so churlish and nasty as a person um well and Saving Private Ryan famously featured the British war effort didn't it yeah well of course I I think yes and I think that's actually a really interesting story the last few years is the collapse of America as this sort of idealistic model in their own minds actually as well as as well as in ours and again I mean what did Trump run on this is exactly what Trump ran on uh doubt its ideas about decadence uh Eric Weinstein in the 1970s America lost its way you know you see American politicians breastfeeding about the fact that they're being mocked elsewhere in the world or they're being seen as a as a sort of a model of what to avoid and I think that would have been unthinkable back in the 90s yeah well I mean it's interesting that both of us talking about you know remembering how we got connected to the internet both of us have a link to Stanford both of us had American friends who yeah have to set it up I mean essentially we felt like kind of primitives absolutely America was America was was the future whereas now I think you go to America often it's it it's certainly in terms of its infrastructure and even in terms of its kind of you know the the phones and things it seems yeah I completely agree Tom I totally agree I think that's a bit I first went to America in the 90s and was struck by the modernity of it I mean they had things that we didn't have and I also even just tiny piffling little things that were somehow symbolic so I can remember going and they're having films that I had that had not come out in Europe but I'd never even heard of you know they're because their film schedule was always ahead of ours yeah um yeah and then going back home and saying to people oh there's a new Arnold Schwarzenegger film or whatever you won't have heard of it but I've seen it in America and that sense of them literally being ahead technologically culturally that has gone hasn't it the internet has destroyed that but also there's a sense that America has failed to kick on after 1989 1990 my I think my favorite series of the 90s was the x-files I which I I loved because it was it was kind of engagingly paranoid it you know you could watch it and enjoy it and it was clearly nonsense um but the kind of the vague hint that perhaps there were aliens in Roswell or whatever whereas now all of that has become completely terrifying I mean essentially the x-files has become q and on and it's not it's not fun it's not fun at all um on the topic of weird stuff that people believe uh question from Steve HP wonderful man um the history of the 1990s was affected important ways by pope saint john paul the second the islamic republic of raram azam bin laden the destruction of the ajah mosque and the soft power of the delhi lama are western historians you dominic equipped with conceptual framework to explain this I've got a great conceptual framework actually you don't need to worry about my conceptual framework tom um so this is a I guess I'm guessing a question about religion really it's a question about yes yeah I think it's and not and specifically institutional religion so not the kind of um alien x-files kind of yes spiritual and again religious institutions but not religious stuff that you get in the 90s but organized so it's an interesting thing isn't it because the 1990s felt like a kind of get that's like death of god period um the sort of fiki ama book and the idea that sort of humanistic liberal democracy was the future and that I definitely remember um sort of putting my purely sort of personal memory hat back on um the way that people talked about iran and the ayatollah and the rashti fatwa and whatnot that these were relics these were soon to be forgotten kind of relics people would often say it's medieval sort of behavior and they talk about iran as a medieval regime and people did that a lot actually after 9 11 as well and it's clear now that people particularly in the sort of secular west underestimated the resilience of religion and the way in which religious identity and religious loyalty would play a part particularly in the post cold war world and I actually hate this question because it's such a gift to you it is um because I I had I had no interest in this question at all in the 90s I mean I it was nothing to me I barely registered on my radar whereas now of course I have realized that that was completely wrong and um I've written a book about it called dominion which is available from all good bookshops and on the last book shops yeah I don't think we have those in America I only agree to this topic because I yeah I could see that question I think we should draw a line I mean I see how we can top that okay well I think you should give me one is the one moment from the 1990s that you think we don't talk about that we should talk about more that you think historians will look at is there anything unexpected you can't ask me that question I feel too tired after great great after your plug after your plug you do so tell me what is the moment what you clearly have an answer to this question um I think actually probably Britain not joining the euro from a British perspective yes very good um I think not joining the euro was so we did Brexit before and and and you you almost get the sense that the gravitation of America keeps Britain tries to keep keep Britain there the the the aircraft carrier you can't sink and I think we've both read the book by Robert Toomes about um he was a big brexiteer professor Robert Toomes about brexit he makes the argument that brexit would not have been possible had we joined the euro I think he's right because the economic damage of crushing after the euro would just be so great and that was actually Gordon I mean that will probably go down as Gordon Brown's apart from as he would himself put it saving the world in 2008 after the crash Gordon Brown's great contribution to British history I mean great as in as in important rather than as a term of approval uh by not joining the euro that made brexit possible in a way that what would you say inevitable well Toomes would say inevitable um uh but that's a well that's a massive question it was brexit it's inevitable um surely there's a podcast in that uh yes we must get Helen Thompson yeah anyway we're just having she's brilliant on this topic we're now sharing our we're now sharing our backstage conversations with all right it's interesting how the end of the cold war changes things and earlier in the 90s episode they talk about the fact that the 90s in many ways begins with the fall of the Berlin Wall and ends with 9 11 and so the the decades never quite um quite match up and also earlier and they talked about you know recent history versus past history and especially in terms of the very interesting question about what history is but the cold war especially before the 1960s was sort of the peak of overt American imperial confidence again one of the um one of the very interesting takeaways from me from Jordan Peterson um um Ali Ali conversation you know when she went to the Netherlands she was just tremendously impressed by the dutch and the way the trains ran on time and the way the police could be called and the rights that she had and and her her frustration with the west that it is it has sort of lost its confidence but it's interesting that the the confidence isn't really lost but sort of shifts between these focuses and and crosses over the political aisles and so it's just fascinating the way the way these things the way these things twist and turn but in many ways it you sort of come full circle is sort of a back to a Calvinism of sorts but now new and improved where you have at least the uh democratic um members of congress who take a knee with um a degree of of multicultural garb to to confess their um are they confessing their imperialism but but you first need to sort of confess your imperialism before you can sort of keep it moving in denial i mean it's not different from Caesar Augustus is the foremost defender of the republic except the emperor of course is the complete opposite of what the republic is supposed to be or is it you have these twisting these these intricate feathered layered narratives that go on and on and on and and this is how we establish our authority and our supremacy because we realize and have confessed our imperialist sins and therefore pay no attention to the imperialist behind the mirror just this morning on twitter the new captain america apparently is an lgbtq plus activist truth justice and the american way well that's superman but same business who in fact what are these gods and they they always sort of manifest what's in the the principality and the power and of course in the evangelical church we watch this um we we watch this sort of twist and turn around um the i should find it this is so the publishers have sent me this book and when i get into these reviews here some of you are not going to like i make enemies on lots of different sides in terms of some of my ideas about a variety of things so the making of biblical womanhood but what what some of these books you know what what some of these books have in common is is a is sort of a mythology about about well when when american religion was pure or was the church ever pure so is this a purely progressive narrative or or how does this work you know when i when i saw that beth moore had okay left the southern baptist and the and and lifeway books because suddenly in 2021 she discovered discovered sexism and racism and i quickly looked up her age and she's 63 so she's six years older than i am and i grew up in the 70s and 80s and was fully aware of sexism and racism in the christian reform church and i i and and so i actually wrote the the author of this piece and he said well it was it was sort of the trump experience that shook her and yeah this stuff is going to get confusing and then the the author of this book you know do you realize that the same folks fighting against critical race theory are also fighting against male headship or fighting for male headship racism and patriarchy are part of the same oppressive system pull on the thread of one and both will start to unravel but the big fight in the christian reform church is same-sex marriage and the and the new synodical report on on sexuality which is a conservative report which is that and the the election of a same-sex married deacon in neil and avenue i mean these two things will sort of may become the hammer and anvil that will sort of may become the hammer and anvil that shred my own denomination and christian patriarchy and then the question okay well should be women you know the big fight of the 90s war in the christian reform church of this 80s and 90s was should women be ordained to different offices of the church well who has more influence all your local pastor or priest or beth more is how is the church as a platform as compared to youtube there are deep deep questions that that we are struggling with a deeper work yeah a lot of deep work and and these things go back they go back centuries and they and they go to the core of okay how what does christianity mean how does it work we're caught in a lot of double binds you can't simply go back and and you have to work on the intellectual the institutional and and the popular just to keep my eye on the time but just this morning the little the little bit from brett weinstein on his his talk with jordan peterson says how well we need our experts to to sort of be displaced from the market forces i couldn't believe he said that fascinating how to work this stuff through the church needs to figure out in my opinion of course and if you listen to my sunday sermons you know you know how jesus navigated his culture war all of these strains we we have to see i can't say come to terms with because i've got john mcwarter in my mind what does it mean to come to terms with what does it mean to actually deal with all of these things how can we find better ways forward better answers how can we be both faithful to our master and live at this time and place with all of the different forces that have been around us so leave a comment