https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oXO5SYHrfuE

 we're gonna miss stuff. I started this channel, I started this channel and I basically either do conversations with people or just think out loud on it and I was pretty surprised to see that people were interested and so that's what I've been doing for a couple of years. Okay fantastic and I really again I apologize for not, I'm trying to think like why like because your request was so, as they say in my wheelhouse, like why I missed it. I only think it was I was just coming back from Indonesia and I was getting lots of different DMs and I just missed it. It's totally, I think the timing is perfect. I think I could, I don't think we could find a better day to talk. Today is the perfect day with the whole country sort of hanging between these two individuals and for me it is I, you know from what I read in your book which I loved, there's a blogger Esther O'Reilly who just pestered and pestered and pestered me because of my channel. She said you've got to read this book. Like everybody's always telling me I got to read books and I picked up the book and it was like oh yeah now I see why she was bothering me. She's been very sweet to me. Yeah it's very sweet of her. Because I love your story and well why don't we, you know for those who haven't read the book, why don't we begin with, why don't we begin with your story and who you are, how you grew up and how you started this strange odyssey and where it's led you. Thank you. First I'll introduce myself with my pronunciation, my name, everybody gets it wrong. My last name is Chris Arnotti. I'm Chris Arnotti. I would give you a copy of the book but I would hold up a copy of book but I gave them all away. I left mine at home. I was saying I got to take it to work today but yeah there it is. This is a draft copy but anyways I tend to give my books away when I have them. But it's called Dignity, Seeking, and Respect in Backer America and I guess the cartoonish character description of who I am, I was a PhD in physics who was a Wall Street trader so if you've seen the movie Big Short or if you've read Liar Poker that was me. In fact I went to the exact same company where Liar Poker was set, Salmon Brothers, after getting a PhD in particle physics and then I did that for 20 years and then I ended up spending time with prostitutes, addicts, and homeless people and eight years, basically seven years, I quit my job to spend time documenting the lives of people who I call are in the back row who are kind of overlooked by society. People who are, if they are, thought about are generally in negative terms as just what I said. You know all those terms I say are unfortunately stigmatized homeless sex workers. They call themselves prostitutes. They don't use the term sex workers. The front row people use the word sex workers. People were scolding me for using sex workers when I started asking what would you want to be called and they're like what I am a dirty hoe. That's what one person said to give you some, you know, language is much more, much less important and how, but and drug dealers and homeless people and so. Did you grow up in a community with this or did you grow up? No, I mean I grew up in a very working class. I grew up in a small town in Florida. A lot of people don't think of Florida as being the south but the area I was in was very south, very much the deep south. Had 500 people. Most of the jobs in the community were based around orange groves and if you worked in a factory it was one of the orange juice factories. If you drink orange juice in the 70s and 80s it usually came from my town. 60s, 70s, 50s, 60s all the way up until the 80s before the factories left. What kind of jobs did you have? Jobs in high school or college? Of course, I mean I was picking oranges. I mean I started picking oranges. Well I would just say one wrinkle especially relevant for your audiences. It was a Catholic community which is very strange in the south. There's not a lot of Catholics in the south other than New Orleans. There's a monastery. So it was it was it was originally it was a pre-planned community from the 1860s by a very religious person. A Judge Dunn who was Catholic and he was given a land grant of five whatever and he formed these these five Catholic communities built around a monastery, Saint Leo, Benedictine monastery. So the area is southern but Catholic and that's strange. And my father was came to the area in 1958. He was a he was a German refugee who was ethnically Polish Jewish and not religious from and so he came there because a lot of the people who lived in the town were German Catholics who had gotten there. So but we were a bit of an outsider in this town that is also a bit of the outsiders in the south. But it's a very working class. And so my first job one of my first jobs was working in the monastery actually. But picking oranges I picked oranges. There are two there are two picking seasons and and you can make extra money picking oranges. And so I was out in the field starting sixth grade fifth grade because one of the picking seasons is basically Christmas break. So you spend Christmas break for two weeks picking oranges in the groves and you make 20 bucks. That was a lot of money then for someone who was 10 years old 12 years old. And then I worked. Are there adults picking with you? I mean what was the community around the orange picking like? It was mostly Mexican Americans immigrants. I did it because me and some of the neighborhood kids would you have to usually to pick it you perform a picking team. And me and some of the neighborhoods kids would form a picking team because they you know and for two weeks we'd pick oranges and we each make about I think that's like 40 bucks. I ended up making you know for which was a lot. I washing dishes starting at the again starting in sixth grade. It was illegal for some of my young to work but I worked you know I worked in this little family restaurant washing dishes. I worked as a monastery the convent actually as the kid after school who did all the you know took out the garbage. I drove a little golf cart around and then I eventually worked on the I then eventually worked on the paint crew for the college. So I would work all summers on the paint crew and I would it was notable for I it was unique in the sense that I was an outsider. I was the only white person on the paint crew. It was roughly 20 black guys and the only reason I had that job is my dad kind of was friends with a foreman who was at my father was active in civil rights. So we spent a lot of time in the black community there. So I always worked those sort of jobs and that was kind of the bulk of my childhood was was kind of doing quote manual labor which I don't think kids these days do much at least at least my kids don't do that much which is a problem. But I mean I you know one of the lessons I learned from that was you know because I would come back and then I went to college and I'd come back summers and do those jobs again. I remember you know feeling kind of guilty about you know being the college kid working a job that was you know with a bunch of very people who were you know basically going moving on. Clearly this was just something I was doing temporarily to get the hell out of my town and I remember once telling some friend I think he's in the book of Stefan. He makes a small appearance in the book black guy something along the lines we were both stoned I think because we used to smoke dope back then and I remember saying something along the lines of like you know something along the lines of I feel kind of like guilty and not guilty but you know trying to make trying to pretend like I didn't really want to go to college because I wanted to fit in with these guys. Why did you go to college? Well let me just and he just simply said um what the hell man I don't want to I don't want to be doing if you can get to get out of here get out of here. You're lucky man don't don't feel you know if I could I would. Why did I go to college? Because it was my dad was a professor I was expected to go to college it was just kind of in the milieu you know it was everything that was um well it's just how I was raised you know my father was a professor and my mother was a librarian after we I'm one of seven kids so once I'm the youngest of seven so once I got to the age where she could start working she started working again as a librarian. So you know highly educated parents in my world I call them front row and we traveled a lot when we weren't and you know so. Why did your parents settle there? My dad was um my dad was a bit of a stranger he had left forced to leave Germany in 39. He went to Bolivia with his father and then they came to the states in 1946. And my father was a just recently had his PhD in basically anthropology political science and they offered a job for him in Tampa USF at New College. And he was literally driving from down to Tampa and he would stop to get gas off the interstate about 40 miles away and they stopped in my hometown what became my hometown and he heard people speaking German. Because um like I said there was some German we had actually in a in a fluke the town had hosted hosted had held some German prisoner of wars in the war um who who settled there because they found other Germans and it became this kind of German Catholic community. And my father then you know had lunch one of the people speaking English Germany heard was a was a monk at the local monastery who invited him to the monastery and he loved the area so much that he you know didn't have much money he didn't like big towns it was a small community. He ended up buying they ended up buying a house that was about to be torn down for $3,000 and you know turned it into a place to raise kind of professors salary seven kids or junior professors salary. So I mean he they they liked it um it was a rough beginning early I mean we were the outsiders like I said the civil rights um period was rough. Um there were certain people in the neighborhood who wouldn't let us play on their yards because we had black friends. The the NCAA chapter um for the community was started in our house um and uh and uh my father's car was uh uh shot at twice and one time they they shot out the window when when him and some of my brothers were in it um for supporting civil rights. So you know I I came along a little bit after all that um but you know um they liked it they liked the community they ended up liking the community um in a way that um wasn't clear from the early stories that they would have they would but um it was a very welcoming community um and so we I was raised Catholic just because we were literally a block away from the church and everybody around you my dad was very much when in Rome do as a Romans and everybody is Catholic you know um and he he took a very different message from you know he he took a very different message from um from his experiences during the 30s and 40s which was to kind of be be open-minded about accepting others um and so you know and um did you did you go to public school um yeah I did um I mean I went to Catholic school for the first three years four years and then and then sixth grade they they moved me to public school that was um you know I don't think people understand how how shitty the public school system in Florida was rural Florida was in the 70s I mean we had something called 45-15 um because there was an influx of northerners coming to the south and they didn't want to raise taxes or spend and so there was too many students and so um they had something called 45-15 where you went nine weeks and you took three weeks off so that at any given time only three quarters of the university was was in or high school so it was a junior elementary school it was a culture shock I mean the school was I mean it was it was you know I'm glad I went there because the school was roughly 20 percent Mexican Americans depending on picking season um you know 10 10 to 20 percent 30 to 40 percent black and 40 percent white 50 percent white it was a real and there was some problems and there was a lot of fights and there was a lot of tension um but we were all learning to fit in and we all had to learn to get along um in some ways and I was in this really awkward position because um of my father's work in civil rights um the the principal of the school was very close to my father he was a black man because the school we went to had been the old black high school and so um the colored high school and so it when segregation integration happened it was turned into um it was turned into a elementary school but having been the old colored high school um it had no resources ever been spent on it you know it was it was in a cow pasture it literally was in a cow pasture you know there would be times when we'd have to stay inside because the cow would get loose or steer would get loose in the hall um and you know it was but we had to learn how to get along and um and we generally did get learned I mean you know it was tough but I wasn't tough I was in an awkward position because the principal wanted to make kind of a you know because the school was so divided by race like you know I remember the the cafeteria was literally like you know there was a black section there was a mexican section there was a white section self-segregated self-segregated and the principal would come Mr. Denaard was his name he would come in and see me and sit me down in the black table to try to start the process of integration um which was you know sweet of them and nice but you know it was probably desperate you know and yeah and you know and and you know physical ed was literally the whites versus the blacks I mean the the PE teachers didn't care they just let people choose their own team and you know so I apologize about my language I'm using language of the 70s whatever you know the white trash kids and the blacks black trash kids would pick their own team and then you know every once in a while again Mr. Denaard would walk by and pluck me up and put me on the black kids team or he or I ended up becoming friends with some of the black kids you know because of that because I also you know grew up going to church with them or going to national social and color people NAACP meetings um and so you know yeah it was one of the things I just you know looking back us kids were being put in a real bad position because you know we were just kids you know you think and we were trying our best um you know some people weren't some and some had really racist parents and you know and they they were being taught how to be assholes and you know and so that you know there are fights and there were quote race riots but they were clear like you know the black kids are going to team up and the white kids and the white kids are going to team with them it was just and the poor Mexican kids were always stuck in the middle they just wanted to like fit in man yeah so it was um it was an interesting time and uh I ended up uh you know kind of having kind of standing in the back and trying my best to just try to like I just like I said I used to want to play baseball man I just want to play soccer um you know I didn't want to get involved in all this politics where'd you go to college I went to a small um small liberal arts school um in Florida called new college um another place in Sarasota Florida that only has like 500 students at the time and and I kind of took off there I mean it was the first place where I really found the community that you know I really got into um I really got into math which I didn't know I was good at really necessarily because nobody around me in my community my parents weren't really mathematically inclined although I my mom was but she didn't really you know she was um so much busy as a home taker caretaker that but we there was no math books in my house there was no there was no kind of role model to kind of see that I was good at math I was just always really good at math and so I didn't realize realize how good at math I was until I got to college and it was like wow this is kind of easy and fun so then how'd you get why'd you go to grad school how did that I always say as a path of least resistance you know I mean it was just it was expected of me and um I was good at math and where did you go to grad school Johns Hopkins and I remember they um when I found out they paid you nine thousand dollars to go to grad school and study the universe drink beer and play softball I was like this is the best thing ever man like like I couldn't believe my luck you're paying me to learn about the universe and play softball and drink beer like eight thousand I mean that's a lot of money man and so and retrospect is still one some of the best times of my life was that was that five years what did you learn socially making these transitions from high school then to the liberal arts college and then to Johns Hopkins but in terms of the people that were around you because I would imagine with each level you're immersed then in a very different community yeah I mean it was very academic and so I kind of my academic side so I got further and further away from kind of my childhood experience of growing up in this working-class town and you know one of the things I write about my book was that difference you know that kind of escape from the small town and kind of the the the the um um the close-mindedness and the arrogance that you can find in academic communities um almost uh you know looking down at these smaller communities and their quote backward ways now I was never that person I never I never mocked you know the people I grew up around I never called them dumb rednecks I never called them stupid stupid you know religious nuts um but you know I was surrounded by people who did that and I certainly you know I think if you pressed me at the time I would have said you know I would have rolled my eyes at the silliness of religion I never really got you know gung-ho about the strong atheism things you know I one of the things I mentioned in the book is the preacher man from the from the from the job I worked at on the paint crew when the black largely black paint crew who used to try to get me to read the bible and I was just like you know no no no no you know um and then eventually telling him look man I finally broke like you know he used to try they would take 15 minutes every day to you know to read the bible he was always trying to convert people and um and eventually I just broke and I said dude I'm a fucking atheist like you know like get that shit out of here you know I don't believe like you know Cain and Abel may read their sisters or whatever you know like a literal interpretation of the bible look how smart I am sir you know I can find the flaws in your book um and then I just remember him turning to me go you an atheist you an atheist you're gonna you're gonna rot in hell and you know what I write about in the book is how you know if you had asked me that day later that day when I thought about the whole thing I would have just said Jesus dude man that guy bothers me like I just gotta get the fuck out of here yeah but what I write about in the book I try to write about in the book is how I came to basically have a lot more um stability for him or a lot more understanding a lot more understanding of where he's coming from yeah a lot more understanding of the context of the situation a lot more understanding of me being the jerk you know and that has seen I was the jerk um more than I would like to admit so how did you wind up in the financial sector um that was um you know one of the things I learned about being good at physics is um because I ended up going from math to particle physics theoretical physics um that you know 99 of the good stuff is done by one percent of people and I wasn't one of the I wasn't going to be one of those people I just wasn't you know but it was also a part of reckoning I mean I wasn't a great physicist I mean it just wasn't you know I was I was naturally inclined at math but there are a lot of people much more naturally inclined at math than I was and also to be to do that to spend your life studying the universe and the mathematical questions you got to really really really love it like you know you got to live breathe that you got to want to do it on the weekends and I found myself you know I was just talking to somebody who was a grad student of with me back and then it's like I spent most of my time you know on the weekends becoming friends with the janitors and custodians and going to their houses and barbecues and you know and going to you know east west Baltimore and just getting involved in their lives I mean that's kind of foreshadowing what I ended up doing um with my project I mean that's where my I was much more interested in the people I met than I was in the in the math and in some senses uh finance was a kind of a way station to getting into a industry that was a little bit more people oriented a little more grounded in reality believe it or not you know and a little bit more and obviously could pay I mean you know I was I was recently married and you know I did want to have a family and all that and uh and it was intellectually challenging it was kind of an intellectual challenge for me yeah I I so then you're the book the book begins with uh you living in Brooklyn and you're working this job and you start taking walks I mean was is that just something to get out of the pressure and just I mean yeah and it was also you know my way of learning has always been to walk and just explore and you know I remember when I told when I first got to New York City telling my wife or because I didn't want to go to New York City I mean I was kind of intimidated by it but you know they paid me a lot and my wife had grown up in part of New York so she kind of like said we she gave me some sense of what it would be like and I just remember getting there and absolutely falling in love with it because I just I remember sitting on the boardwalk the promenade there in Brooklyn Heights and just looking out and saying I think I see 12 forms of transportation like and you know there's helicopters there's ferries there's tugboats there's cars there's you know like it was just so dynamic and it was so exciting and but also I could take a subway token go to the end of the line and be in a different country and so I would do that I would take a subway token go to the end of the line walk home and I started realizing that New York City was just this you know patchwork of different neighborhoods strung together you know Little Albany a little little Albania you know you go up to Bronx to go to the Albanian community go go to Bay Ridge and go to the you know Korea go to Sunset Park and there's the Pacific community and then there's the Mexican Americans and then there's the Chinese it was just this really wonderful you know and it was just this great way of exploring and learning and traveling without leaving your home in some senses and always sleeping your own bed at night so to the degree I could I would get away and go these walks and they're given that given the way my brain works the walks were generally built around some goal like I had I literally walked this entire length of New York City subway system above ground you know I called them my terminus walks I'd go to the terminus the end of the line and then walk home I would walk to you know I'd walk to the one of my usual walks was to walk to Coney Island from my house and sit on the boardwalk and have a beer at the Russian bar you know that became kind of a you know and go through the Jewish neighborhoods and the Pakistani neighborhoods and so that was always kind of who I was and that kind of liked but they were just more for intellectual curiosity and then as my life on banking became more frustrating in some ways my intellectual life I started to see them as a new way of learning and a new way of thinking and it became more about the meaning of people along the walks and what I learned from them became kind of the goal is to meet more people who would basically make me question how I thought about the world and that really took off when I kind of brought my camera along and I started realizing and I didn't take I didn't sit bring my camera along take pictures of people I took my camera along to kind of document the weird stuff I'd seen the funny stores you know the this and that odd you know the when I get home I'd say you can't I tell my family I can't believe what I saw like I saw you know blank and then I didn't have a picture of it and so I then I would have a picture and I could kind of show people this cool stuff I saw on these walks but then when I was you know being a white guy in a largely non-white neighborhood with a camera people started coming up to me and asking me to take their picture and then they would you know we talk while taking the picture and then they tell me their stories and then that became the almost collecting stories became the kind of the the focus of the walks as opposed to you know collecting pictures of buildings do you know where Patterson New Jersey is yeah yeah that's where I grew up okay my father my father took a little church there in 1960 and he was from the Midwest and he he loved taking pictures and so when he died he died a few years ago he lived just thousands of pictures of people and kids from Patterson because just like you if he'd have the camera you know in in a lot of front row communities if you have a camera people you know back up and but I'll tell you on the streets of Patterson kids would they just show up yeah but that's that's I mean first of all I'm sorry about your father but yeah I mean yeah that's you know that's what always surprises me when people who don't know these communities like is it hard to take pictures it's hard not to take people's pictures like you find yourself saying like look I mean I just look I gotta go like I really want to take the 99th picture but I've I got you know I'm really sorry to deny taking your deny you the chance of me taking your picture like you know people want you to take their pictures and in some senses it became you know that sort of friendliness um which I always knew about but it didn't really know until like you know I got to be 45 and 50 when I was doing this um I mean really is kind of what I was kind of drove some of the projects of wanting to show people that these kind of misconceptions about these communities which I mean I don't need to tell you because you know you can tell me about about the misconceptions of these communities having grown up in that in that environment when how did the idea of the book arise I mean I literally I was doing this there was never a project in mind so I started really kind of doing this with a camera and collecting people's stories and kind of writing about them like 2010 I'd say um like a decade ago and it never really you know it never became the idea of a project or a book up until like 2016 so six years later I was just this guy with a camera kind of enjoying enjoying learning learning you know but enjoying enjoying too yeah and so um and it um it very much uh um it very much became um you know uh this process by which um kind of just took over my life um literally um because I quit my I quit my banking job and I quit my I quit my banking job and I became you know your family was okay with that yeah they I mean like they said they knew I was a bit of a weirdo I mean like I said people who know me really well going into banking was a bigger move like the bigger kind of head shake like what you know um but so when I exited banking that wasn't that surprising maybe to you know spend time taking pictures of um heroin addicts which is what's the problem all because so eventually the walks became this kind of I ended up going into this one community hunts point the most you know and and spinning and taking pictures of pigeon keepers and bike by and then eventually it became taking you know working and becoming close to people who are um you know homeless on nama streets and um so you know I think um one of the one of the fortunate things about working in banking is it does give you a little bit of uh freedom once you pin enough money so um you know and and the thing was I never I kind of had that freedom also because nobody in my family me my family my kids or my wife really ever act um really ever got into really luxury things or you know we we didn't spend a lot um we still live like grad students largely you know so what when when did you take I mean you took this to another level with that you know minivan and I mean you you you went beyond New York City how what how did that happen I mean that's a whole other level yeah after basically three years of daily immersion in this one neighborhood with this one group of street addicts you know after quitting my job and spending basically three years every day um writing the stories following becoming friends trying to take him to detox visiting him in jail taking him to the hospital all that whole stuff you know helping them shoot up I mean I didn't shoot up myself but I helped them um um basically like some weird mixture of friend social worker documentarian um I just got burned out I mean I just it got to be too much and I also you know still have my old math math mind my old mind as a as a as a kind of theorist I saw I had learned all these things in the Bronx um these kind of things that I try to put in the book in my book um about the importance of um dignity and the dignity I found in these communities um the inequality we have in this country um also as you know you're the subject your most comfortable your most um familiar with is faith and the role of faith and how the role of faith was so essential and how I had such a misconception of faith I wanted to see if these things I saw in Hunts Point were unique to Hunts whether was it just Hunts Point or was it something more about the inequality in our country was it you know was it true and what I was seeing in Hunts Point was it true in other kind of quote left behind communities so I took the show on the road as it were and I you know pulled got my van and ended up spending basically three years driving around the country um but 400 I mean I think overall but when I retired my van I had 450,000 miles on it I think I started the project with probably 180,200 so like 250,000 miles or so give or take on the van um just driving all over the country how did you pick your places to stop I ended up similar to how I ended up going to Hunts Point which was basically people tell you not to go there you know like you know I mean it was kind of mean of me on Twitter because I'm on Twitter to use social media so I'd say hey um I'm in Michigan where should I go and everybody would say all these places and I'd go the opposite way I would cross them out not to go there like if you know about them and they're like oh you have to go to the following restaurant in blank well nope cross that means that that means it's this place I don't want to go because you know it's being talked about as a good place and you're left with a place no one says anything other than whatever you do don't go to blank I go kind of go to blank you know um and you know so and then I also looked at poverty maps and crime maps and yeah and to try to give a balance of the project I didn't want to over represent one thing that wasn't true of the kind of statistical nature of poverty in the United States so I try to spend as much time in black communities as I did in Latino communities as I did in white communities as I did in rural communities as in urban I try to do a balance of all both both both everybody's place I went was poor but within that geographical urban rural red blue by race so I try to get as many a full picture if possible of um of the true nature of poverty in America yeah I loved I loved when you talked about McDonald's and churches because I thought that's exactly right that's exactly right um oh gosh how did you I mean well actually what I really want to ask you is I mean because I'm I'm actually quite now interested in in your burnout on hunt in hunts point because you know my father spent 36 years in Patterson and um you know I at some point while we're talking there's going to be some knocking on my door and um my my father helped um start uh so in the 70s of course heroin went through Patterson and and so right next door to our church they started and what was called um so we were in the north side of Patterson so it was north side addicts rehabilitation center and it was sort of this you know get get clean of heroin you know live in this house you get counseling sort of 12 step type stuff plus god and um the the thing is you know one of the things that that I've there's a weird attachment and now over the last number of years I mean homelessness is in California cities is continuing to ramp up and and so you build relationships with people and you know I look at a lot of these people and it's like well it's either going to be an overdose or uh they're going to get hit by a car because of course they're wandering in and out of streets all the time and you know it's it's hard it's hard because you love these people and they love you and whereas because I'm a pastor nobody's really asking me to help them you know buy or you know buy or shoot up or anything like that you know they're more comfortable asking me for for food or a ride to the hospital or um maybe you know show up in court to speak a good word on their behalf something sort of ministerial but I mean I I can I can just I can really imagine being three years and becoming part of that community I I would have sometimes when you know so Sacramento doesn't get real cold here but in the winter it'll get into 30s and 40s at night and it'll get wet and and there will be times when you know I'll drive past you know and I I know the people yep and I know where they're sleeping and I see their shopping cart or just kind of the the little lump in the darkness and I I would I would go to bed in my house with heat with my family and my wife and I would feel it was really strange because and some sometimes it was it wasn't really guilt it was almost sometimes an envy and and I I I would feel that and it'd be like what on earth is this doing to my mind um and and at the same time you know as a pastor you know I joke because I talked to you know I know I know a bunch of therapists and therapists live in this little box and clients come and clients go and clients pay but in a church at a corner with a door people knock yep and and they you know they can be high out of their mind yeah they you know one day I'm sitting in my office and I hear some noise and so I open the door and they're just having sex right outside my office door it's right open to the street it's like broad daylight it's like come on guys and you know one guy you know he he he literally slept against my door for six years and we both knew why because you know he knew that and he's kind of a loner he doesn't get along with anybody which is part of the reason he's homeless because he can't live with anybody but he would he slept against my door because he knew that you know he and I would have to interact if I was going to go into my office and get some work done and you know and and so and and for years you know even though everybody in the neighborhood knows him you know he trusts me and he knows you know I'll hold money for him I'll bring his mail in I mean just do all of these things you know I'll you know he can use my phone to call his parents in another state who are in their 90s and you know and so you most of these individuals are living on the street and they've gone someplace else because they've burned through their familial connections often and but you know but then you and I listen to your story and I think gosh in some ways you know I mean you're you're you're not necessarily religious you're not a pastor but it sure sounds a lot like my job yeah I mean your your job is I mean all those things you said you know is to some level what I did for three years or ultimately on there and you know I remember there was two moments when I realized I just had to take a step back one was I was drinking too much myself I was kind of you know I mentioned slightly in the book but you know I'd be dealing with these these these awful things and then I would just go sit in a bar and you know drink until closing and try to you know write write about them but also process them and kind of get away from them and you know not really talk to anybody in the bar I just sit there in corner and I think there was one night I remember when I came home and I wrote about it somewhere where I remember seeing things in a very different framework you know because I was living in this really nice apartment in this nice neighborhood where I always went home too that was always the goal like I kept the separation between that and I didn't I didn't do the thing where you did which is live in the community which was where you have no separation but I always made a point of having a separation and um and I remember um and they always respected that no one ever wanted to you know they understood that that's my family that's my yeah yeah and once that was clear like you know that's that's his that's his family that's his money that's that's not our yeah you know yeah yeah um he's got to do right by his family sort of thing um but I remember parking in my garage or my parking space and seeing right you know in the trash from our building this beautiful rolled up rug being thrown away and thinking wow man that's like you know that could get 200 or 100 on my friends or they or they could turn it into it you know because they live in abandoned buildings so they could unroll it and make a nice space out of it and then you know realizing it came from my apartment you know that that that that we had thrown it away wow you know and because some stain had gotten on it or whatever and you know and had been old and but still you know it's like wow um and then there was the kind of times when I would be spending you know with my kids and my wife where I would kind of want to be that guy who I says yeah but in Africa it's so much you know when they had a moment of joy and I was like that's just not right yeah like that's not fair to them yeah you know I to to to bring my the problems I'm seeing and trying to lessen their pleasure out of life you know it's just not right that's you know that's not that's not right they didn't do anything wrong yeah they don't understand why I'm on this weird journey I mean you know I don't need to take down their happiness a notch and you know and so and you know I was there as a moment and also there was a and this is going to sound bad there's felt like there's a futility the whole process you know I would take someone to detox you know I'd wake up to text messages you know we agree you're gonna go to detox you know yeah drive up to the Bronx yeah couldn't find them end up finding them two hours later go through the hole and find the find the place that has intake without we'll take the picture ID oh I need a yahoo soda before just the whole the whole ring around give them in detox you know admit them yay you know two-week program yeah yeah come back the next day and they have run away yeah yeah yeah eric why'd you run away um I got in some fight with this bitch you know and or going to visit people in reichers you know and just the the dehumanizing process of visiting someone to reichers shows you how dehumanizing the whole prison itself I mean if it's dehumanizing to visit people what it must you know it just should you know as an outsider visit how bad it is to be there you know it just got to be too just got to be too much where I'm like I gotta you know self-care to some level you know I just can't I can't I can't just wallow in the misery here yeah um and at the same time feeling like I wasn't accomplishing anything yeah you know there was this one case where I had this kind of standing order you know if you know if if the ducks are lined up in a row I'll get I'll take you wherever you want in the country you know and this one you know kind of 28 year old woman having said it sometime that she wanted to go visit her mother in Oklahoma her name is beauty her street name is beauty and um you know and she showed me on Facebook that her mom beauty was literally born in prison her mom was in was incarcerated when beauty was born and her mom had been a crack addict and meth addict and her mom had a three-year chip and so she showed me on face she used my computer sitting mcdonald's you know surfing and showed me the family and wanting being really and so I said to her you know because I wanted to make sure all the ducks were like this I was taking her into her goods so I called her mom and I talked to her mom for you know 10 times and I was like okay this is a safe situation she's coming back to her mom is is really clean like not street clean but really yeah yeah has her own apartment is it doesn't have a dangerous man in the house it's all set up yeah um and beauty wants to go and so I said to her I just remember saying off the cuff it was like you know November I said okay beauty because you know people can be you know I said if you really want to go to Oklahoma City and go visit your mom and go back to live with your mom show up here on the day after Christmas in this mcdonald's at this booth and I just you know okay she's not going to show up you know so you know I showed up there I drove down from my new home in upstate and I drove and got there at the mcdonald's with the intention of going to Florida to take a vacation in Florida you know I just thought I'd honor my obligation and stop by because beauty didn't have a cell phone right she just um and there she was sitting packed ready to go wow and I'm like okay well I'm not going to Florida I'm gonna honor my obligation and um so I did I said listen beauty let's do another four hours of thinking about this yeah let's um let's call your mom you know let me call your mom let me make sure the ducks are lined up if we're going to go on this two day you know and uh four hours later she still wanted to go for all the right reasons you know she wasn't fleeing something she was it was just um her mom was all set up and excited had her picked out the meal she was gonna have for her had her room set up and so we went we went it was a pretty intense two days um because she was in withdrawal during that but uh we got her there um and then she did the then beauty tried to do the and her mom was wonderful wonderful solid person so I was very comfortable this is a safe situation you know and uh then I left and um then beauty tried to do the right thing her mom tried to get her to do the beauty has some old outstanding warrants from when she had left Oklahoma like eight years before so she had beauty beauty go into the police station and turn herself in for the old Oklahoma and then they ran it and she had outstanding warrants in New York and they took her back to New York City so there was this kind of sense of like oh my god what am I fighting against here yeah like the system is just so unfair yeah you know this like it's just like you know and was I even taking to the right like you know yeah why am I injecting myself in this process if all I'm seeing to do is make things worse yeah you know and so because I'm out of my element here man I don't have your training you know so um I kind of took a step back then um and tried to like you know and then and then you know I ended up basically emerging to kind of what every and after all this work I did that ultimately resulted in me look I kind of came back to feeling like you know people asking well can you do what can you do um you know it's kind of what the uh Catholic workers houses have and like presumably what your father's house was like was just a space to talk to people can come in and talk you know be there to offer people you know a non-judgmental conversation or a little judgment a little bit sometimes you need a little uh a little a little judgment here and there driving driving a guy to the hospital one day says why is it always you driving me to the hospital and me not driving you it's like well let's sleep on the sidewalk you don't have a license because you've got 15 DUIs in your history um that's not really a hard question to answer here yeah you know you got you you got it you got to respect people enough to give them agency right that's right treat treat them like somebody who's entirely without agency is insulting I think you know when I listen when I listen to your story so I grew up watching my father do this my my grandfather was a pastor as well but he was a pastor in um in rural farming communities in the U.S. and Canada during the depression and then into the 50s and so you know I remember when JD Vance's book came out and I told my mother I said mom you gotta you gotta you gotta read this book and my mom read it mom's like that's Patterson with white people yeah and but I think you know when I listen to your story you didn't have you didn't have a community around you or a church because you know when my father and grandfather everything they did it was it wasn't and this is where I see churches go wrong often you might have a like a white church that's sort of left in a black community because the community has changed and the church people love their building so they don't want to give it up and then they're merciful and they try and do things for people in the neighborhood but that there's nobody in the church that is living like the people in the neighborhood and nobody knows and and so you just watch these dynamics go back and forth and it's like people don't know what they're doing but when you see a church that's that's from the neighborhood in the neighborhood it's a totally different dynamic yep exactly I mean I I I it's interesting is because one of the things I I write about in my book that I think surprises a lot of people is faith I have a whole chapter on faith and you know coming from a former atheist or that's pretty surprising I think and I think a lot of people in the religious community was were very excited to see somebody of my of my leanings right not only a book that wasn't negative about the church but a positive so I got a lot of outreach from from people in the religious community so I learned a lot through that outreach that I didn't know because I have I'm basically self-taught I don't have your background I don't have a lot of and what I realized is one of the things I realized is there's a real hierarchy in the in the religious community and I was being I was being in I was in the back row of the religious community and you know and meaning I was I was in these community I was spending time in churches that as you said the congregants were drawn from the community but more importantly the the pastors and the and the people leading the church to the degree they had leaders were also part of the community and that's what was so you know that was so one of the things I tried to write about my book was that was what was so appealing or so obvious to me about these storefront churches I mean there was you know like what I mean what I mean storefronts I literally mean storefront churches I mean like there was a church I intended that had been it used to be a Kentucky Fried Chicken that had been turned into a church there was another one that was in a strip mall that had clearly been a furniture store but was now a church you know you know someone's home that was now a church so repurposed materials that were turned into churches was how welcoming they were in the sense that and it wasn't just yes the door is open and you can come in but everybody around you looked like the community I mean so these people I was spending time with who are used to being poked and prodded by the secular you know the secular help in these kind of dreary institutions with fluorescent lights and rules by outsiders who are like me who go home and sleep at night but they walk into a church and that person preaching to them not only looks like them not only gets them but might have been an addict before too so they know the lingo I mean it's just it's a cultural familiarity that breeds an empathy but also it breeds that thing that you just if you spent like they give them agency they don't treat them like somebody who doesn't fuck up now and then you know oh I'm here to save you like no no motherfucker sorry about my language but I've just for some of your listeners my channel pro whenever but most won't but you know no you can't do that like you know no gotta get right man like you know I'm not gonna sit here you I've heard that look don't like or don't play don't play me for the fool I've been where you're sitting man like you know I know you don't have you didn't miss this because you know you're you went to a job interview and they didn't let you in you went because you overslept it man don't don't fuck with me so there's a sense of like I appreciate your game but don't play it on me yeah so um you know and I think a lot of outsiders fall for the game yeah you know um and get played yeah I mean like I you know some people used to say like you know like why do you give people why do you end up buying people meals and McDonald's like you know so usually like when I walk into the McDonald's and you know the reason I spent time in McDonald's the same reason I spent time in the churches because they work and they're and the people who work there are just like the community and they're welcoming and people get along there and they can be there without feel like a lab rat you know like you know the church churches and McDonald's are more welcoming to the the poor than the universe if a lot of people I spend time with walking on a university campus that claims to advocate for the poor they would call the police that's right that's right I mean you know you from your ivy tower while they're yelling to defund the police they'll call the police it's just like what like so anyways so you know it's like you know when I go into McDonald's and I immediately you know I sit down and someone comes up to me you know and the game starts and they're like you know so eventually they you know we talk and then they say hey man can you like sign me like a little little change I'm a little rough I'm like okay well just I'm not buying a meal I don't know man you know um you know I um I really don't like the menu here I was like look man and then you know then you just like look I'm going to tell you but dude beggars not choosers we know that line like I can buy your meal or not buy your meal like what do you what do you need that money for well I got it I need to get across town for the bus I'll buy a bus ticket no not the you don't know the right but it's like okay so you're not gonna play me this game you know I can help you by buying a meal you know and then you get the you know you get the guy or you buy the meal right and then go outside and sell it for half the money and at the point you're just like dude why don't you just tell me you were gonna sell it I would just give you the five dollars you know yeah I mean you got to learn to play the game and also I think a lot of outsiders get get played and they they end up basically disrespecting you more if you get played like you got it and it comes with the time familiarity manually you just you know and you know so they they it's like giving give them the agency to be clever to play you yeah yeah so yeah I mean I think the the whole process is you know going back to the churches it's like like I said you know I think a lot of the people who spend time as you said the churches where it really does serve the community like in a in a in a lived reality way yeah have a lot more you know get it a lot more yeah yeah what what did you learn from writing the book because I mean the book sort of and I loved I loved the front row back row metaphor because in many ways it's sort of it's sort of it's sort of yeah I thought it really worked well but you know obviously I mean the book has some I mean a number of um I don't know how well the book has sold I hope it's sold really well I hope a lot of people read it but what did you learn from the process of writing a book and the experience of of having written the book on sort of from both rows um one of the things that um one of the things that was one of the frustrations as a writer and again I always writing is hard for me I um math comes easy to me and writing is hard because um is not feeling like you do justice to the people who shared your stories with you so you talk about you know those people being giving you your time you know wanting you to take a picture is a sense of like did I did I do them right because you know you they were generous with their time they were generous with their story did I do them right and so there was that frustration of I can I really I mean there's this real immense frustration I had of like can I explain to people what I saw in a way that you know and I got kind of overloaded like I like you know how do I get this across how do I get this point across in the way that really gets to people but also isn't cheap you know you don't want to you don't want to sure I can write a book that you know that sells well because it gives people what they want to hear but I don't want to do that so that's what walking that tightrope of you know doing something I felt intellectually proud of but also wasn't so dense that it that it escaped people but you know so when people you know going back to that what you said that very first thing about you take a camera and the neighborhood people want you to take their picture you know when people say when the criticisms came from some parts of exploitation poverty point I was like you know my phone is blowing up by people who are mad they're not in the book I can just imagine people are like I mean they carry that book around and they tell you know that I'm not you know and then some of the people in the book are mad because you know I didn't get exactly right you know so it was like I was getting it from both sides you know the people in the book were like and of course they think I got I made a million dollars off of like you know where's my share you know I lost money on this project man like you cannot I went 78 years without salary to get paid very anything for this book right most authors make less than minimum wage from the book they write so you know I you know I did not make a million dollars which was the rumor like you know yeah I think the rumor was I made five million dollars going around the neighborhood so they're like you know and I help people out in the book I would wire them money yeah but I set aside a certain percentage of the money to help people but then the thing that again you're not surprised but I don't think I think a lot of people who don't spend time in these communities or have lived in them are surprises more people are mad at me they're not in the book like like you know where's my picture where's my story yeah and in some cases I didn't put them in the book because I thought I was protecting them right right which in retrospect was very insulting of me again you know going back to the agency thing like you know I was I was so scared of of getting them in trouble yeah that I erred on the side of leaving a lot of stuff out yeah um which I'm still comfortable having done but then for them to come back and say they're mad I'm not in the book is one of those things is like you know but um so there was that um um I mean they're actually the book for me the the most you know you do this project and then you get criticized for it which I did yeah but mostly from the left which is surprising because I'm on the left you know but but but then um but then what was your criticism it was a trump voter book when in fact if you've read you've read the book it's it's mostly African-American and Latinos it's not a trump voter book but I remember um you know you every once in a while you get like a I think I have it here still one of them is just like someone found me um you know someone's whose mother had been an addict and died found me and wrote me a personal letter yeah yeah you know I get that stuff every once in a while on social media someone finds me and says like look man thank you like I didn't understand my you know one of them was moving was um a gentleman whose brother was a heroin addict who just died six months ago but he had man but this this this guy read my book two months before his brother died and and because of that he reached out for his brother and got to spend you know he didn't know the guy was gonna die but he he when his brother he his brother was incarcerated at the time and he had basically excommunicated his brother from his life but he read my book and he decided to reconnect with his brother and then you know two months later the brother died but he he thanked me for being able to spend those two months again before his brother so things like that you know were really are really just kind of made it you know all worthwhile despite the criticism or despite the you know the people who text me saying like oh yo man why aren't you in the book because if I put you in the book you'd be texting me like why did you why did you put me in the book that's right that's right when my father when my father retired he wrote a he wrote a kind of a memoir and he I you know you know my mother and my sisters and I kind of thought well some of the best stories he couldn't put in the book but um that but I'm so glad you know maybe when I'm maybe when I retire I'll take my father's book and I'll re-edit it and I'll integrate some of the pictures because he didn't really do that and um I thought you know did he not put the best pictures stories in there because of the same reason yeah yeah well partly because some of the people are still alive yes exactly and so and I always threaten my congregation that when I retire I'm gonna write a book about them and uh because I got my own share of stories and some of them are a little nervous I said don't worry I won't write them till you're gone they're still nervous I mean I changed some names um I changed some details um and one of the things I did as a photographer was I kept a lot of pictures out of the book that probably um I should have I should have put in if I cared only about you know if I didn't care about protecting people um and I probably like I said I think I went overboard in protecting people which yeah um I think that's wise yes exactly because you don't you don't know what I mean because all these people have their own networks and just like bringing this woman across the country oh she's got warrants and I mean you don't know what you don't know and yes and you just don't know so so what's what's coming what's coming next for you I mean you wrote the book and I part of I read the book and I thought part of this book it's got to be therapy for you just to just to be able to share some of this um yeah I mean as you you mentioned you asked about writing the book yeah there was a very much uh a reflection that gave me a chance to sit sit back and reflect yeah um but what's next was I wanted to um I mean I wanted to basically when you spend you know three years crisscross I think I drew from across the country 20 times 25 times um when you do that there are places that stick in your mind that you're not sure why they stick in your mind that at the time didn't seem like they'd stick in your mind but there are places that just keep coming back to me and I keep thinking about and I wrote a list of like 10 of them now and I wanted to go back and explore these 10 like why are they sticking my mind what is it about them what's a unifying theme here what is it that I saw that just won't leave me and I kind of know each one but I want to go back and do and spend time there and um so I was planning on that and then COVID hit and I can't you know I the way I operate I can't yeah I'm on hands I'm very much involved with people and so I so I'm sitting here doing nothing um I'm I'm I'm actually trying to write a novel um partially um because it solves the problem of people who I wanted to protect yeah you can kind of you can kind of combine characters you can change stories you can you can give the essence of what you saw without the unnecessary details that harms people yeah yeah so novels in that sense are very helpful to allow you to communicate what you learned in a way that's easier to read and also protective of people yeah yeah well I'm I'm just amazed that you can do this alone because I mean so obviously in a place like Sacramento we live in a very pluralistic religious context you know one day I you know my car's in the parking lot and I get up and I end work and I go into the parking lot and the nation of Islam is in my parking lot they see me and I see them and it's like oh this is going to be interesting and because they probably assumed that the the at least the pastor of this Christian church was black and then because of the neighborhood it's in but then I'm white and they're in the parking lot and they didn't ask permission and it's kind of like how's this going to go but you know one of the things that one of the things that I see whether or not people believe the content of the religion part of what religious narratives do is at least afford sort of a bonding agent around which a community can cohere and and and that that narrative layer sort of affords and of course every narrative layer will afford different things but that narrative layer affords at least maintaining some level of community by which so many of the oh just the just the the grinding insanity and frustration um can can be at least ameliorated at one level or another you know because again I my father my grandfather had a community around him in which to care for people my father had a community I've got a community here with my online stuff I mean it's it's been really weird since my youtube channel started we created a discord server and I in many ways I see that disc the community and that even in that internet space you know is is a buffer because I might not be able to connect with everyone's story but there might be someone in the community who is close enough to their story that they'll have wisdom and connection and all of those things and so I you know I I don't I think it's really really difficult to to really bind the wounds of a community of people without a community it's I just I mean I mean one of the the biggest change intellectually and personally for me has been respect for faith um you know and I can I as just as a the the more the more kind of simple-minded respect initial was just the respect for this works yeah very utilitarian like yeah you know yeah um let's say I believe it's garbly gook and it's it's it's it's mumbo jumbo but it's mumbo jumbo and garbly gook that provides people a network in a community so it serves a real purpose but you know I'm at a different level now of I think that's that's even a slightly offensive view because of the oh yeah yeah it is it's it's a it's a view from the secularish front row down yeah yeah yeah but but exactly but it's at least it's the first step yeah you know the next step is saying well wait um this is as valid if not more valid yeah than than where you're looking from your secular front row um and you're the one who's removed from reality yeah you're you're the one who can't see the evidence for faith you're the one who you know who who has a utilitarian framework for living a very shallow life you know as opposed to me who is is has a rich community and a warm life that that is natural not a utilitarian yeah so you know and actually so you talk about wearing the book I was very that was the hardest chapter for me to inter like that was the hardest point for me to intellectually get because I was so far away from it and I don't think I would have got there my work alone but I was actually very gifted with an editor who was very spiritual and very religious and was able to talk over these these views I had about religion and at some point say to me quite honestly what you just simply said well that's a pretty offensive view of you know you don't think it is and that's that's nice of you but yeah but think a little bit more about that yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah you know so I don't I don't want to probe or push or get in your business or anything but so what has that done in terms of if you want to talk if you don't want if you want to pass on I mean I was I was you know I started going to church again um and uh prior to prior to covid I was attending I went back to Catholic church um I I'm very I was very very fortunate that um that um you couldn't you couldn't give me the more perfect Catholic group than is my church that happens to be by sheer coincidence is two miles away from me it's it's um it's friars um cappuccino capuchin friars okay yeah um who are kind of basically exactly the in community you know the the there's a friary two miles away from me but again by sheer coincidence and uh yeah and I don't know about coincidence but that's uh I'm a Calvinist so I don't I don't put a lot of stock in coincidence yeah and so like you know at eight nine o'clock every day there was mass you know uh and this and and one of the one of the brothers there one of the friars I guess is the term I guess like it in Benedictines as far as brothers but I think in capuchin um is it capuchin that's right it's capuchin I'm not Roman Catholic I don't know I I'm um um is um I mean they're very much you know Franciscans who go into the community okay was so by sheer coincidence one of the brothers there um was um someone who ran a house in Hunts Point the neighborhood in Bronx wow wow you know for for people not dissimilar from who I was spending time with but again and so I was going there and you know it was a I was again I was have a front row person trying to become religious again and and it was a bit clunky um and then COVID happened and you know I I got in pretty heavy and then I kind of pulled back and I was starting to go back in and then COVID happened and I just can't yeah I just can't go I I can't take that risk yeah um but it was you know you know so it was um you know and then again another coincidence is um Saul the the the priest who ran the the the um the church he's he's an interesting guy because he had been in the publishing industry and then and and joined the friary at the age of like 45 after kind of ending so he you know here I was writing a book and starting a church with the priest who was a former publisher and actually knew my publishing house I was like this is like oh this is too wow so um yeah you know and um like I said I I kind of went in heavy back into Catholicism and then I pulled back a little bit and I I hope to go back again um you know when when um I'm not sure I found the um religious affiliation that's no I went to Catholicism because um it's what I knew as a kid yep yep yeah and uh you know and uh but I I still think the at least the places that I found where I got um the most was storefront churches really the ones that really struck a chord with me yeah I saw a little bit within the Catholic faith I saw a little bit in the in the commie the Catholic um workers houses that I sometimes run across yeah yeah yeah wow wonderful wonderful well I've I've pestered you um and thank you so much for your time I don't know if there's any any place we didn't go that you'd like to touch on or um you know we can always do if ever you want to follow up we can do a follow-up okay and I feel bad I didn't ask you enough questions but I'm sure your listeners know you right my listeners know me quite well so okay I talk I talk out loud in front of them all the time and so they uh it's before I go go ahead your ethnic ancestry I mean can I guess sure are you Polish nope what is it well you you look very you look you look the reason I ask is you look like a dead ringer for a friend of mine who's his last name is Galimelski um who I mean it's like it's I'm having like kind of flashbacks of talking to you because I've um you know so my father's we uh so my mother um I don't know if you recognize Friesian the Friesians were a an ethnic group in the north part of the Netherlands so my my mother's side came over with the dairy cows to New England and we just a couple of years before my father died we learned that on my father's side they were Jews from the northern part of the Netherlands who who went to western Michigan sort of assimilated with the rest of the Dutch Calvinist and so that's um yeah so it was a northern European European Jewish Friesian Dutch that kind of mixture so German Polish Jewish here mixed with um English and Irish yeah that's all that northern a big maelstrom of northern Europe and of course the Jews get thrown there and and on and on and on and on it goes so well again thank you so much and uh I appreciate and I and you asked me to do this about a year ago and I ignored it and I really apologize oh hey you know I since I started my channel I get more requests than I can handle and I miss emails and tweets so I I I completely understand so well God bless you I hope I hope COVID lifts enough so that you can you know re-engage with your um you know your religious community and I really especially hope you can pick up your project again because I'd love to I'd love to read your next book yes and my my my publisher would want me to just you know yeah absolutely hey and I I completely I fully recommend this book uh I've been doing it on Twitter and um it is it is well well worth reading and and thank you again and uh and I hope we didn't miss anything no well if we did you know we can come back around to it so thank you so much Chris bye-bye bless you