https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rgWneTtWgsE

 All right. Christian Baxter, you're up next. Boy, I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it through this speed rando. My heart is just getting pulled all over the place. But you're you're you you have you have made your way into the corner. And I think what part of what you have done is exemplified. There are a lot of people who, you know, I want to get into the corner by getting a randos conversation and that that makes me a bottleneck because I can only have so many. And you basically made your way in here and you've shared your story on your channel you started a channel. So let's, let's do a little rando stuff, because your story is on your channel a little bit. Yeah, tell me about the home you were raised in. I was raised in a mostly in the in the very rural country, Arkansas, and a town of 350 people went to a public school of 300. The whole town is a school. But I was. You're you're breaking up in and out. The bane of speed randos is going to be technical issues. Can you hear me now. Oh, even better, much better. Can you hear me. I hear you. I can't hear you. No, I hear you. I can't hear you. Oh, that's a problem. Oh, the technical glitch. Can you hear me now. I hear you fine. Can you hear me. All right, I'm gonna come back in this. Oh, off he goes. Now I have to fill airtime. Where's my branding. I got I need. Oh man, I was so I've, I've really got a, I've really got to steal some branding from I get some favorite branding. I was thinking this morning that you know grim grizz always gives these savings throws against mind control and the most mind control thing he does is the branding. So, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so on the farm that we moved to. So we were surrounded by 400 acres. We didn't have much, but we had a ton of land. And so that was my, you know, world and, uh, you know, grew up birthday parties were four wheelers and, uh, you know, hunt a lot. Everybody hunted, but I was this weird kid who liked sci-fi and fantasy, um, and read. And, but I didn't feel like I could like express that in my context because nobody else really understood it that well. And that really ties into coming into this space. Ultimately, uh, is, is that part of me? Um, why things like Peugeot has had such deep meaning, um, your synthesis of ideas and theology. So, okay. Um, so you, you eventually became a worship pastor. Yeah. Yeah. That was, I was about 16 and I had a, um, I call it a mystical experience now, like a call. It was, I share about it in my, um, one of my videos and, and, you know, it wasn't something I wanted to do. My dad was also kind of had done some lay bivocational and some full-time ministry. Grandparents had been in ministry. I wasn't really wanting that with my life. Then it, it wasn't a fun ministry as it existed. Wasn't fun to me, you know, in a way, in a way, you know, it wasn't, it was in the culture that I was in, but this whole modern Christian music thing was bubbling up around that time. And I had a lot of attraction to that. And that, that's where I kind of was like, oh, well, this is what I want to do with. That's how I feel connected to this world. And so even at like 17, this, in this, I live in it, I grew up in a town that was like 10 minutes from a town of about 10, 15,000. And so there was like a new church, very young, a very small church that was trying to bring that in. And they were like, I was one of two people in the whole town that did that stuff at 17. Yep. They had me come in and a big part of my story is that you got, I'm so young, but here I am like trying to like lead people, but. I didn't know how to deal. There was this always this theme of hiding things in my life, like hiding how I really felt about. Sciencey, you know, imaginary fantastical things. And then even secrets about, you know, just lusty things that, you know, and guilt and all that. And so I'm like going to lead adults on a Sunday morning, you know, some group of 10 or 12 people, but I didn't know how to like reconcile the hiding part of me, but also wanting to do this for God part of me. Yeah. And that just like that remained that remained part of my life. I went to college. I got a degree in biblical studies. I wanted to take like I wasn't interested in like historical music. I wanted to understand. How to take like understanding of the Bible and mix that with what was going on in the culture. And so that's so I still I got a ministry degree, but I was still just doing like a lot of the music. And then, you know, got married to my high school sweetheart, which is another big part of the story because she was raised Lutheran, Missouri Synod. Her her mom, her mom was raised Catholic. She was Catholic till she was five. And this is her. My wife's uncle is an archbishop in the Catholic Church. Her her aunts are nuns. One of her aunts left her broker vows and became Greek Orthodox. And so Thanksgiving, when I started going to Thanksgiving at my girlfriend's house, it was I'm a Baptist kid. And this was like, what is this place? And so I get married and I started having conversations with my in-laws about liturgy and about Pato baptism and about why these things hold meaning to them. And here I am, you know, still just like strumming along. And and then in 2012, our church, I got on staff at a church in 08 and then went full time. It was actually the church that I served at when I was in high school. And then I went to college and kind of stopped and then came back and I was doing itinerant stuff, camps and what I actually and I need to apologize to everyone for interrupting the last the last one, the last episode. But I actually spent a summer in Sonora doing a camp up in the mountains from where there where she was. Yeah, yeah. So I did I did ministry that didn't camps in Florida and then all over. But I was always in my hometown coming back to this same church, this kind of eclectic, had a little bit of care for like the historical. And in 2012, we hired a Presbyterian pastor and he was like, hey, you want to bring in some like actual liturgy into these contemporary services? And I was like, yeah, I'm right there. I'm like, I was primed for it in so many ways because of this relationship that I had with my in-laws. And trusting their faith and in their life and their example and how these things held a certain kind of meaning that I was trying to understand. So incorporated that in, go back to the part where I was a hider and I was hiding this part of my life and ended up destroying me. So I had this love for ministry, for the church, for worship. But what I loved about the last conversation was Audrey, Audrey, Audrey. It was on the last. Alexandra. Alexandra, sorry. When she said it's the. She said, chasing healing like I did not know how to heal. I didn't know how to. And a big part of my convictions is like. Confession, you know, this office of confession, the sacrament of confession versus. Admitting to God that you're a sinner. There's this huge gap in in the in in Christian Protestantism, it's like, well, I've admitted that I'm a sinner. But there's not really that's that's all that you're responsible for. But, you know, that doesn't kill you, that that doesn't kill you as a human. It might kill you in some form of soteriology, but it doesn't kill you as a person. And so. You know, I broke the trust of my marriage and. And the trust of the church that I was serving, the trust of my community, and I lost my reputation, my job, my, you know, my career, everything I've been doing since I was about 15, 16 years old, I was 30, about 31. And so that's. That's where I met Jordan Peterson, and that's where I met you. And and that's why it's like. My heart was racing to get on here and I, you know, we've talked on Twitter a little bit and different things like you're not Jesus and you know that there's a there's like. There's a reality to the woman who was sick, who wanted to reach out and touch. Yeah, and so to meet you all like is. Is it's in this digital way is is reaching out and touching a world that existed in my head for about six or seven years, you know. That's what this and that's what this is and. Yeah, and I'm watching the other videos and stuff, you know, my my marriage was reconciled families were reconciled we were reconciled back to the church. And then over time, my career was a career was rebuilt. Music was healed in my heart because it had broken. And then I'm kind of in this stage now where there's ministry starting to kind of be re healed after seven. Getting professional ministry. Is. It's a particularly. It. You know it gets you into spaces that can mess up your own faith and your own discipleship. And you know your story of I've obviously known others with similar stories and. There's a there's a there's a whole there's a there's a there's sort of a completeness that professional ministry and so then when you don't it. It really incentivizes the hiding. And because you I mean everyone has to play everyone has to put on a mask to do something if you're working with someone else. Everyone has to play everyone has to put on a mask to do something if you're working at an airport and you're working for the airline and the airline has just you know messed up. You know few thousand people's travel itineraries and the customer service person puts on a mask Oh, can I help you and they've had people screaming at them all day they got to keep wearing that mask and ministry you keep wearing a mask. You know it isn't it isn't incidental that you know you look at say Native American religion you know a lot of them has to do with mass. And and in especially I think in some evangelical. Places over the last in this last chapter of culture where authenticity is has this value so then you start putting on a weird mask of authenticity which just accelerates the dualism and. And it's a it's a really it's a really difficult thing and so yeah I but I'm really glad that I mean it sounds like you know you had a tough bump but the story wasn't terminal. Yeah it was a it was a major car wreck and it took a it's I'm still healing worst I love what she said on the last video like the journey of healing. This is another step of healing I'm not. Old I mean I won't none of us are ultimately healed you know but. No not not in this world yeah not in this world well we we have limited time so. Tell me tell me how your interaction with this little corner because you've certainly made an effort to get in how that has been a part of your healing because. You know when all of these debates over sort of what's happening that we kind of put this little corner as a label on top of it because we don't really know quite what to call it. But I do get the sense that for many people, this is a space of healing and this is a part of their healing so talk to me about how this was a part of healing for you. So for one you're a pastor and, by the way, your podcast with based camp you were so lucid. I saw Tim Keller in instead of with Charles Taylor Tim Keller with Jordan Peterson Tim with then with instead of like normal embodied church the digital church man you're going to have. When you when you finally hang up the the caller you know so to speak. I wanted I just want to encourage you, I just think you obviously have had lots of opportunities, but like you're going to take like that conversation the loose. you'll be able to take that and keep going, but this corner she's still for one you're a pastor first and I even heard you talk about on that podcast like your motives for staying where you're at your commitments to that. And you talk about going slow, even at the end of the last rando you just did and you and and i'm in a situation with that now, but this. Going slow I so. You as a pastor you're you I hear pastor things I spent time as a pastor and. I hear pastor things I spent time as a pastor and. I hear pastor things that's that's how it was like there's Jordan Peterson psychologist and I can take there, but then, for you, it was the pastor thing that. That made so much sense to me, I was watching debates and listening to apologetics and i've read Lewis and all these things as a younger man when you were doing that your whole life as well, so. That engagement it's like eight years of in or seven years of input, this is the way I can explain it is like yet like all these people spread out over the United States and spread all over the world. have been they've been in university inside of their heads for eight set 567 years and it's like okay you can't. You can't just stay there, it has it's gonna come out, this is the you know I patron St Jordan Peterson, this is the seeds planted, and this is the heart, the harvest is starting to. Come is starting to come out yeah that's my experience with this. Well, and it takes time and you know mentioning Keller because before I did what I did with Jordan Peterson I did what I did with Keller and you know I see CW is in there, and he says you know he's right that I still have to I still should make a video on my. On my experience with Keller part of it is one of the things, as we talked about before you get used to as a pastor is wearing a mask yeah and when you're on YouTube you also have to wear a mask. Because, and I can I can you know I can tell you know, even with you presenting your story, you know you have to be really careful because your wife didn't you know sign up for YouTube and children, and I mean so you still have to wear a mask and so. You know you still have to wear a mask and so you know in I actually visited Tim Keller in 2006 but when I visited him I hadn't yet done the deep dive and it was about three months after that I did a huge dive into Keller and I spent about. I spent about six years listening to two three hours of Tim Keller a day. I mean so I did the Jordan Peterson thing with Tim Keller before there was Peterson yeah and so Peterson wasn't my first dive and Ryan. And so Peterson Peterson's been interesting too but then, of course, YouTube is a whole different thing and that changed everything oh we got one more minute so do you have anything I don't have that nice I should take that you know and everything else that you want to say. I want to say thanks. Thank you. For you know just making yourself available you still are looking at how making your not not trying to send the status hierarchy too quickly, so thank you. Well, thank you Christian and the name of your YouTube channel is Christian Baxter underscore UT so if you want to find Christian he's making videos he's making a lot of videos when you make it a good number of videos they're very transparent they're very authentic the very him. It's been oh that's right up cycling and now for something from the Freddie you up cycle great idea that's right i'm gonna do my brand and Freddie would love it, so thank you Christian so much for coming on and next is.