https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=KwAyIlCHQkE

 Hi, this is Paul. After the what I thought was quite interesting conversation between Jonathan Pigeot and rationality rules, rationality rules came out with his Christ Whisperer video. And you know, maybe he's just paying the rent, maybe someone who hears me, and in fact, I know this is true because I read it in the comment section. Sometimes you watch one of my videos and think, oh, maybe Paul is getting beyond his shallow Christianity, and then you zip over to the church website and there I am shilling Jesus one Sunday after the next. I get that paying the rent. I understand. But part of what I thought about this morning when I woke up was I want to do a video on a guide to most celebrity atheist videos out there because the format is is pretty well known, just like the format for my Sunday sermons is pretty well known and just wanted to do a little critique of it. Almost all of these videos can be boiled down into something like this. Christians are politically bad. And now Jordan Peterson coming into the mix. Jordan Peterson, this is specifically to the Christ Whisperer video. Jordan Peterson is sympathetic to Christians. He gives aid and comfort to Christians. This is part of the reason Sam Harris wanted to have those conversations with him. Don't be a Christian. Don't be like Jordan Peterson. Now, both of these are basically arguments from pride appealing to our prideful instincts that you want to be basically status in the group. You want to be like all the other cool kids. So don't be a Christian and don't be like Jordan Peterson. Now, at the heart of many of these arguments is Christians shouldn't be politically influential, especially in the United States, which maybe I'm pulling some of my own tribal privilege cards here, but it is sort of interesting to watch other members of the world or the English speaking world talk about this and complain about it as if Americans don't complain about their own politics. This is the heart of almost all new atheist grinding. And again, one of the best examples of this was Richard Dawkins on Unbelieveable a number of years ago when he very readily ceded ground to the Christian and the and the Jew in the conversation and basically said, well, you're not like all those other Christians and, you know, rationality rules crying game moment in his video too, when he discovered to his horror that well, Jonathan Peugeot is a Christian and one of those Christians that believes in God. And and if he watched more of Jonathan Peugeot's videos, well, Jonathan Peugeot isn't an American. He's a Canadian and Jonathan Peugeot has his own political views and a lot of them basically wouldn't sort of match up with what rationality rules thinks are good political views according to his own estimations. But you know, this is this is something that is so that I find that I find annoying in our present position. I think everybody gets to have religious beliefs and everybody gets to have political beliefs. They might not be right. You might not like them, but everybody is entitled to something. And again, I'm putting my cards on the table as a as broadly speaking, a Western liberal Christian, if we must use labels, because freedom of speech, freedom of thought, freedom of religion, freedom of expression. Now, part of the way the democratic game works, democracy game works is that you get to go into public and express your political beliefs. And we have things like elections and courts and laws and legislatures. And hopefully we can do a lot more talking, a lot less jailing and a lot less killing. That's sort of the goal of democracy. And I think along with many of you that's worked quite well. And so what that means is we all have to not only put up with political views that we don't like, but we have to put up with a fair amount of political bitching that we don't like to hear. And well, bitching usually leads to bitching back. And so maybe this video is that I hope it's I hope it's more than that. This is also a consequence of of a worldview. And again, almost everybody playing in in this space is deeply impacted by by modern liberalism and our assumptions about what good political processes are. If you like a democracy to one degree or another, you're going to have to tolerate the the the political views of the rival political factions. That's just the nature of the game. Now, now secularity really does sort of focus everything to the political layer, because it's the seculum. It's the it's the hundred years. It's the age of one person's life. It's the it's the it's the water we're swimming in right now. And so politics is prioritized. And actually, this habit amongst the celebrity atheist is very much a function of their worldview. Now, I bring David, I like bringing David Brooks into this conversation at this point, because David Brooks, although he is a political pundit, although he's a political and opinion journalist and kind of a moralist as well, and he's had his own religious journey that has, you know, that's, you know, so brought him into Christianity, but also brought him out of his first marriage and into his second marriage of a Wheaton grad and almost any moralist book that he writes, go to the Amazon comment sections and people are are, you know, very quick to, to bring that data to the point. He keeps making the point that, well, worldviews are downstream from politics are downstream from worldview. And everybody has a worldview. And he says, well, politics in many ways is getting too important in our world. Not everything should be political. Brett and Heather made a similar point. Rod Rear has made similar points. This is sort of a standard point in the IDW. There are other more important things to life which make life more meaningful than politics. And politics should stay out of them. Politics should be a limited part of our consciousness, a limited part of our conversation. And government should be a limited part of our life. And of course, that is a political argument too. And part of what we're dealing with right now is, in fact, to what degree the state should be involved in different aspects of our life. I grew up mostly voting democratic for the Democrats. And, you know, you'd hear the Republicans argue about limited government. Well, maybe I'm getting older. I'm getting more conservative. I don't know. But David Brooks point about there should be limitations to the state, I think is important. And perhaps part of what we've seen in these enlightenment values that we live out is, yeah, limited state and frankly, in some ways, limited church. I, simple church has been a, has been a kind of a meme before COVID. Church should do a few things, do them well. And that's also part of my Kiperian background with Dutch Calvinism where you have severe sovereignty. Let the state manage state things. Let the church manage church things. Let the family manage family things. Let there be multiple institutions. Now, again, all of this is seeded in a long narrative and is in itself not fundamentally essential. But I think for life in the here and now, it's a pretty good system and one that's proven itself better than many other systems. And there's a lot of nuance to it and something that should be preserved. And so in that way, maybe I'm just reflecting my, my age cohort because it seems that most of the IDW peeps are about my age. Were born somewhere in the mid sixties and you know, sort of at the end of the baby boom and right before the Gen Xers right there on that cusp, Jordan Peterson, the Weinstein brothers, almost all of us born right between Jordan Peterson and the Weinstein brothers in 1962. And I think the Weinstein's getting towards maybe 67 or 68. That seems this demographic cohort is now expressing itself now that we're into our fifties. And again, there's a long, fifties are sort of a sweet spot in which you sort of reach the height of your career, of you know, you're not quite knocking on the door of senility, but you've had enough experience to see a few things. So again, it's no surprise that a bunch of us now in our mid fifties are sort of exerting ourself on larger stages. And again, what we're talking about are broadly enlightenment values. And I actually don't think there's necessarily a lot of disagreement between most of the celebrity atheists and the kinds of stuff I'm, I'm trotting out here. Now religion S which is sort of this post secular view of what a religion is. Of course, Tom Holland's been barking at that door more and more. All these little Vander clay isms. You know, there is a list of them on the bridges of meaning discord. And I guess the consequence of doing these videos is I keep coming up with more and more little Vander clay isms. So barking at the door instead of knocking out the door, slug, you know, fudgy sloshy. Well, a big part of this whole rationalist game is all falsifiability and the imagination that the world can be somehow distilled down into these little disc discrete truth nuggets that can be, that can be verified via correspondence and yada, yada, yada. And, you know, Esther pushed back, I mean, not in my video, but in the, in the constant conversation between her and I and Twitter DMS, he says, well, you know, verifiability and, and, and not verifiability, but verifiability and correspondence is a part of your system too. And she's right. That's, that's fair. But I think it's more that the world can somehow sort of be broken down into these truth particulates. And then, well, there's a truth particulate and we can, we can use reason to sort of correspond it to their well, truth particulates meets combinatorial explosion. Because if you want to break down the world that way, there's just too many of them. And even our ability to fully exhaust one or another is highly limited. And the tiny little discreet truth chunks that we break the world down into don't wind up being terribly useful as the combinatorial explosive nature of the world and values and everything presents itself to us. And so on one hand, the problem with religious people is they get into politics. On the other hand, the problem with religious people is they're pursuing non-secular goals. They're pursuing heaven or trying to avoid hell or trying to please, please God or some of these things. And so on one hand, Christians don't be involved in politics. Don't bring your religious ideas into politics, your non-secular goals, keep them out of politics. And to a degree, they make a point in many ways, the United States, which was a pioneer in trying to lay some of these things aside as best they could was an attempt to get away from a lot of the internecine religious political wrangling that was disabling Europe in the wake of the Protestant Reformation. But I think as Tom Holland has been showing, secular is a Christian product. And this is a very difficult thing for a lot of people to see that in many ways, you won't have a secular world apart from this. Again, this is a product of Christianity. And in this little paper I wrote with the Vervecki book that will be coming out at some point, you know, when I was writing that chapter, you know, my experience of writing is sort of like my experience of talking at these videos. It's sort of the second secret sister to the church. You lose Christianity and you sort of lose secularity. And I know that would cause fits among the atheists, but it's a hard argument to resist when you just look at the timeline and the sources. You're just like, it seems that our Western liberal conception of science is downstream from Christianity. Our Western liberal conception of secularity is downstream from Christianity. Someone at the door, hang on. Part of what comes into a lot of these things is the idea of don't encourage people to sacrifice secular goods for the sake of the non-secular. That's sort of at the heart of this too. And again, you're expressing sort of the privacy liberty ideas. And should, you know, should will always be with you. And so while these, the part of the problem of what these Christians are doing is they're sacrificing, well, money, ambition, sexual gratification, all of these things for, you know, heaven. And while they shouldn't do that, oh, okay. Well, but okay, maybe if you do it in private, maybe, you know, be an adult, be on your own. You have liberty to do what you want, but, but don't encourage other people to do it. That's, you know, in that way, evangelization, as Christians would call it, or proselytization. These are bad things and people should really stop. People should be left to their own ideas. But evangelization and proselytizing is common to everyone because you can't make this argument and not do your own proselytizing. Because again, this argument is built on a whole system, a whole worldview. So implicit in this is good people help other people be happy. All right. That's an idea. That's a worldview. That's a value. Bad people leave, lead others astray with offers of non-secular happiness that are unverifiable. They're unfalsifiable. Oh, okay. So, so you should stop. Where are you getting your should from? These things. I mean, you just go round and round and round on a lot of these things. Now, again, implicit in this is often that, well, eternal conscious bliss is a goal. This is sort of what we're heading for. And this is why utilitarianism just kind of keeps seeping up from the bottom in these conversations. It's seldom named because once it actually gets named, its, its weaknesses will become apparent. And that leaves people open to certain kinds of arguments that aren't all that hard to make. You know, the good in this worldview is as much happiness for as many people as possible, sort of. And the other day someone on Twitter was going off on something. And so I usually just kind of pause and ask them, well, is this the good? Is the good as much happiness for as many people as much as possible for as long as possible? Well, yeah. And so if you keep following that out, it's eternal conscious bliss. It's sort of the opposite of eternal conscious torment. So it's, but then when you start pressing people on, well, if it makes someone happy, or if it feels tremendously meaningful to spend maybe their short life because they're not eating well or getting any exercise, but their short life playing world of warcraft all the time. I mean, think about my, chat with, my chat with Topher. So there's Topher one and Topher two. No, there's, there's one Topher, but Topher the salty, there was episode one and episode two, almost three hours of Topher conversation. And just a little aside as if I needed to ask for that since my videos are almost all asides. Part of the reason I do these conversations is because what I am trying to do is establish a bit of a community. And so if you Topher is one of these people in your neighborhood, as the Sesame Street song said, and so if you go to bridges of meaning discord, you'll find a little, you'll find Topher there. And so give them a little bit of celebrity and invest a little bit of celebrity in him. And because I have a high degree of confidence that if you meet Topher and find him, that you'll find him a good conversation partner and you can learn things from him. So that's part of why I do this. So again, the girl, the good in this worldview is as much happiness for as many people as possible, sort of eternal conscious bliss. But what about brave new world Soma? And again, that's what brave new world and novel form is dealing with. Well, what if we could sort of lay down and have a drug and well, that's why part of the reason Jordan Peterson would always bring up cocaine, because cocaine, you maximize bliss. And let's say instead of implicitly defining eternity as in a timeframe, you take eternity because there's really two sides to eternity. One is all time and one is no time. Well, cocaine is in a way no time. And so maybe cocaine with a with a bullet tracer suicide is going up and it's in but most people will shrink back from that and say, no, well, doesn't it make sense? Isn't it rational cocaine with a bullet chaser? Because you maximize your happiness and then you end your life into the null value void at the end of the world. And shouldn't that be ultimate good? Isn't that eternal conscious bliss? They would say no. Well, why not? Well, because there's something about the the video game addict that is that is that is well, it isn't noble for a human being. But where are those ideas coming from? And and how can we account or address those ideas in our system? Now, it isn't entirely blind to the meaning argument because meaning won't necessarily keep you from playing video games because part of the attraction of video games is you create a tiny little world on a tiny little computer screen. And it is in fact meaningful to play Candy Crush or World of Warcraft or civilization. You know, I construct these little worlds and these little armies and these little kingdoms. And and part of why I like civilization is it's sort of complex. And so you build this whole thing. And with each edition of civilization, that's my computer game drug of choice. With each successive degree of civilization, they're always trying to both make the world more complex, but yet keep it being fun. And so all of that is sort of meaning tinkering. It isn't necessarily a current eternal conscious bliss. It's also a degree of escape, but it's also a degree of meaning chasing. And part of the weakness of the meaning argument is meaning can be found in, you know, helping the homeless person or or having a child or torturing people in your internment camp. Meaning is sort of an equal opportunity opportunity provider. But meaning again is forced to live in this constellation of other goods and things that that are really sort of hard for us to get a handle on. This morning I watched the case against Santa denialism on Sisyphus 55. Sisyphus lately has been putting out some fun videos sort of in this corner of the conversation and he's sharp and he succinct all these kinds of things that I am not. And so in this little eight minute 50 second video, he sort of lays out a I think one of the best case secular sort of agnostic cases for okay how are we thinking? And he just rapidly runs through using Santa denialism so many of the arguments back and forth and back and forth and back and forth and it's you know it's very well done and it's and it's a lot of fun. But what you get at is that our quarry here and sometimes the quarry is we can't seem to a Christian would say God and so on. And so a Christian would say God in some ways. But our quarry here we might say the good, the good, the true, and the beautiful which is sort of a classic approach to it and not a bad one. Our quarry is complex. I mean we have difficulty even articulating what we're shooting after. And so often we just catch ourselves in cheap reductions of it. And so yeah utilitarianism doesn't really get there. Yeah certainly we want our children to be more happy than miserable. Certainly it's a benevolent thing to want our neighbors to be more happy than miserable and happiness gets trotted out again and again as you know I'm in previous years it was me and my wife and sons living in the house because I have five children and just sort of the way they lie it was you know sons and right now it's me and my wife and two daughters living in the house and almost all the tv watching I do with them and if I want to watch tv with them it forces me to watch the tv that they're interested in which often isn't what I'm interested in but I almost always learn something. So we've been watching the bachelorette which maybe I should do a video on my thoughts on the bachelorette. But again and again these parents so it was meet the parents week this week and so the parents come on and they say things and this is sort of the the national ritual I just want my son to be happy. Can you make my son happy? And again it's not a bad thing. Parents want this for their children. Parents don't want to see their children suffer. They don't want to see their children miserable but there's a certain degree of irony for parents saying this because in the training of their children if they actually did a decent job raising their children to the degree that their children have at least a certain have hit a certain bar of humanity that they can and functionality that they can somehow qualify to get through casting to be on the bachelorette. Well these parents brought a great deal of misery into those little children's lives because that's what parenting is. It's saying no and it's clean your plate and it's clean your room and it's do your homework and it's bringing all sorts of suffering into children's lives so that when they grow up they can have less suffering. It's parenting 101 and so utilitarianism sort of breaks down in that score and this is well known by this point which is why you won't have people really come out full-throated utilitarians because they know that well it's pointing to some aspects but it fails to really frame the entire picture. You know and you know these are fine people who have made it to celebrity atheist status on YouTube and on bigger stages and in the bookstore and they're not above but they're not above recommending the marginalization or punishment of people who don't share their worldview agenda. In other words their utilitarianism sort of only applies to those who deserve it and well people who vote wrong and Christians who trot their their religious views into political as if the utilitarian atheists weren't doing exactly the same thing somehow deserve punishment or marginalization or censorship or yada yada yada and so now we've basically got in-group and out-group dynamics. Eternal conscious bliss and you know so one of the ongoing back and forth things on the discord server as a function of the high degree of people getting interested in big o orthodoxy and David Bentley Hart and the kinds of books and ideas he likes to write gets into the question of well eternal conscious torment and Preston Sprinkles written on this and so this is something that gets kicked around the server and and every time I hear you know it's only been quite recently that I heard hell described as eternal conscious torment and usually when you first hear something like this which is which is quite clever you sort of have to pause and and something in your intuitive side says well that doesn't sound quite right but your rationalist side hasn't had time to chew on it yet so you know the consciousness congress and their subcommittees have to sort of go to work on some of these things well I don't really think hell is eternal conscious torment and I don't really think heaven is eternal conscious bliss I think sort of like utilitarianism they're sort of pointing to something that's we should pay attention to but not really and the relationship between eternal conscious bliss and material existence is is well I don't think it's what hardly any of those celebrity atheists would want it to be because again I mean the most rational thing might be you know a huge dose of cocaine followed by a bullet chaser you know boom maximize bliss boom and life out of the world mission accomplished maybe we should do that to babies right after they're born maybe that's a defense against anti-natalism where okay maybe we got to get it in the womb too because maybe they're suffering in the womb you know pushing against mommy's womb and they finally get out and they cry and they come out into this world oh they're about to suffer let's inject them with cocaine and then end their life quite quickly and so when you when you see these anti-natalism and you see all these arguments you begin to say okay well what's the telos what is this what is the world you're really pointing about what's the great evil the great evil is suffering and the great goal is bliss and well these are these are reliably producible with chemicals it seems absolutely a materialist argument this is reliably producible with chemicals use cocaine as Jordan Peterson says okay give them cocaine and kill them before they have a chance to before they have a chance to to suffer again it's sort of like you know the Roman Catholic last rites you know or holding baptism off until the end because well baptism covers all the sins and don't don't let them sin after they get baptized I mean these there've been analogies for these things in theology for a very long time and people that just sort of dismiss theology well you're actually dismissing a source of argumentation and clarification that's been around for a long time and all of this stuff is sort of built into religious traditions and people act out religious traditions which is sort of why the paying attention to the religious frame is sort of like paying attention to the biggest questions living computational system of all of human history that's that's one way of thinking about what religious life on earth is like we're all working through these religious ideas in real time and it's and it's not just abstract thought and theory and rationality but it's it's far deeper because it's both sides of our brains and we're living it out and we're acting it out and all of the consequences are being manifest and some of the consequences are being ducked and on and on and on and on and that's what we're doing in this world at least from one point of view so not only is it unclear that this is a good goal again mike in our local mike in our local meetup would you know this argument has nothing on him so now we're injecting babies with cocaine and snuffing out their life right after it and and we all shrink back in horror from that and rightfully so but but that's sort of a telos or an implication of this worldview it doesn't hold it doesn't make sense they keep promising that someday well someday when someday we'll be able to deliver this to the masses oh okay but you're not going to do it with cocaine and bullets all right um but first of all we as john gray points out well that's a that's a wholesale grab from christianity the idea that homo sapiens and human beings are a category that is functional and real in our midst well thank you jesus for giving us that one so you have the problem of we in there and none of us will ever get there well what do you mean by that what do you mean none of us will ever get there because me i won't get there i'm already in my mid to late 50s and at some point i'm going to die and truth be told if you look at what we've managed to do in terms of life expectancy is that well people live longer but in some ways they suffer more and you might say well that's a consequence of christianity not letting us kill off old people because maybe the merciful thing would do to be kill off old people so let's well we killing off other people you know other old people that's kind of grim so let's just at least give people the option to off themselves if life doesn't seem to be living up to its dreams but again once you start pushing the suicide thing they shrink back because as c.s lewis noted as gk chesterton noted they're smarter than their system affords well what does that mean it means that they've inherited systems that they're not completely cognizant of not completely consciousness of that have more wisdom built into them than they themselves have acquired and and for all of their attempts to install a new operating system into their minds those attempts have been limited because they naturally shrink back from the cocaine bullet baby scheme or from well let's just let's just kill all the old people because well utilitarianism it isn't blissism and and so suddenly the usefulness well usefulness to what end usefulness to happiness but again look at happiness studies it's a very interesting area but you learn some things looking at happiness studies and so jordan peterson's rejoiner is well meaning sort of trump's happiness but my rejoiner is meaning is good too but not meaning alone because jordan peterson finds it meaningful to complain about other people who find it meaningful to do what they're doing that jordan peterson is complaining about so meaning itself isn't really a perfect gyroscope now you can let's say adapt jordan's system and say well if you keep doing what's meaningful you'll outgrow your wokeness or your neo-marxist tendencies or or or and well maybe that's so then i think a number of people have discovered that but seems to be sort of a painful process there are other things involved and and just like you can't reduce the world to happiness you can't really reduce the world to meaning too and this gets to the point that the world is really hard to reduce and and in almost all cases including in religious ways when we reduce the world we find ourselves kind of in a bind because the reduction doesn't really finally fully work a lot of this and i put up the i put up the link to mabel which i read not too long ago where you have this woman who is in a nursing home and she's been there for 25 years and she's blind and she can't smell and she can't see but she seems to be encountering a great deal more bliss than maybe even Hugh Hefner was during his life or or Jeff Bezos or Jeff Bezos ex-wife giving away a billion dollars a month or or or this woman seemed ridiculously blissful and it seemed the path to it was decidedly religious and so utilitarianism has that weakness but then again most of us when we look at the story of mabel what gives the story power is that in one hand we sort of look at her and say she shouldn't be happy but she is okay so religion can do that but another side of us gets to the point that says you know what she shouldn't be blind her face shouldn't be eaten by cancer she shouldn't be abandoned in a crappy nursing home she deserves better and she deserves better she deserves to well to what she deserves to shine like the sun she deserves to be brimming with health she deserves well does she deserve or see again we struggle with these things and some religious people don't do themselves justice when they don't struggle with these things to the degree that we we we wrestle with trying to not trying to reduce without the costs of reduction we're looking for lossless compression or at least less lossy compression because all of our compression schemes are tremendously lossy and and we want to understand and boil down the world and see the world better and writer and and so in some ways again this this idea of eternal conscious bliss is sort of a vague copy of christian hope and you know part of the reason tom holland is so devastating is that he just sort of exposes as he walks through history how you know the christian footnotes behind the anti-christian screeds from the celebrity atheists but again i don't think heaven is eternal conscious bliss just like i don't think hell is you can reduce hell to eternal conscious torment it's a very modernist move now back to rationality rules christ whisperer video and by the way if you would call me a christ whisperer i would be more than happy to accept that label it's the no true scotsman argument which as google scrapes wikipedia no true scotsman or an appeal to purity is an informal fallacy in which one attempts to protect a universal generalization from counter examples by changing the definition in an ad hoc fashion to exclude the counter example and we all do this because it's really hard not to because we're trying to wrangle with broad essentialist categoricals and categorizations and this seems absolutely necessary to have a productive conversation but it's almost always subject to very valid critique and you could play this game all day long and like many simple games like tic-tac-toe play it for a while and it gets boring quickly and so we stop playing the game charles manson was an american charles manson was a murderer americans are murderers and you can play this game in a woke fashion the story of america is white supremacy all americans are white supremacist or at least all american institutions are white supremacists therefore barack obama is a white supremacist leader and president it just doesn't it it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's such a sloppy approach to things that it just loses validity now again we might ask well how does it lose validity and why does it lose validity and and this is where we get into the the moreness and suchness of thinking and when you're using something like christianity it seems like a specific and narrow category but you know over two billion people roughly considered christians in the world that's a lot of people far more than americans and you've got a massive agent arena relationship because the diversity within these groups is is just simply enormous now so let's let's pluck a recent example i didn't know alex jones was one of us being a christian shucks there was jericho march and um go ahead and rationality rules could that's a kid in a candy store a jericho march you've got all kinds of folks there a lot of prominent christians a lot of evangelicals and if you read like rod rears take on that and the comments to it yeah there's some there's some real key connections between the evangelical tradition and a bunch of things there and pentecostalism and yeah but there's also some jews and some white folks and some pro-trump people of color and quite a few atheists too i would imagine and so the difficulty with this kind of thing is that you can use jericho march to to paint atheists but they would say yeah but a lot of this stuff is is really christiany yeah it is it's really christiany and this is the kind of things that christians deal with and try to resolve um michael horton in the gospel coalition michael horton um conservative reformed theologian from westminster west has you know written a systematic theology not too long ago writes about the cult of christian trumpism and as a christian reformed minister the vast majority of my colleagues some of whom vote republican some of whom vote democratic almost all would probably have a lot of whom wouldn't like michael some of michael horton's theology or his take on women in office or his take on a whole variety of other social issues they would very much agree that this is a cult of christian trumpism and this is a heresy and this is you know donald trump is not your savior that slot has been taken and that slot is jesus but again there's a whole theological matrix in which this stuff is working through and part of what's helpful about these huge categories that are in very very difficult to to come to essentials is that you can actually have a conversation about the essentials because on one hand they're enormously broad but they're not they're well developed enough to get specific on certain things and to and to actually have a substantive interesting important conversation about what is essential to christianity or being a christian that's a very live topic and and it's enormously difficult but it's it's you're actually capable of having an interesting conversation about that and so it's sort of easy to slide out just because you say no true scotsman doesn't mean we're not susceptible to the fallacy i think that's the way we are so doing this historically is is just enormously difficult as many who would kvetch at all sorts of things in tom holland's thesis yet his thesis gets traction and has a degree of bite now it doesn't mean that everybody's going to buy it but that's the whole point the whole fun of argumentation and conversation and debate is well it's actually more fun when we can sort of concede points and and go back and forth and establish at least enough common ground that that we can have some fun with this so we have to use labels and language in broadways in order to try to get a handle here we're taking a terribly theoretical thing exaptation trying to get a grasp and i could just you know in my in my visible consciousness congress i just see john verveke grasping when i use these things he's colonized me sufficiently and educated me sufficiently to know these things but this is this is part of the process and and just like reducing christianity or atheism and you know atheists are only people who don't believe in god okay well there's there's a no true scotsman move too right i mean we're gonna use these things to try and have conversations that each of us decide is helpful and again the decision about what is a helpful conversation you're not going to come up with some grand standard for that there's going to be we're pattern seeing patterns where people are going to people's opinions are going to change on this and there's going to be a bell curve and there's going to be a hierarchy and all of this is stuff is going to happen so instead of acting like it doesn't happen just let it happen and and see if you can swim in those swirly waters this leads to another one of the points in his video you shouldn't listen to jordan peterson because he gives aid and comfort to the fundies and of course the fundamentalists are the big boogeymen here and well then you have i forget who it was that had the the question of if they're looking for a cab in london in a cold rainy night and they see someone with a bible and a cross hanging in their cab versus maybe they don't do that in london i don't know or new york city or or someone with you know coexist or someone with you know the flying spaghetti monster which one do you pick well actually i always comment i always comment to my wife that for me as a pastor sometimes they have these directories of like all christian institutions i actually sort of avoid those because someone who so prominently displays a fish or says i'm a christian i won't cheat you i always kind of pull back and say well why do you have to make that point so forcefully and because i know a lot of christians who cheat and con and i know a lot of pastors who do and i live in the middle of that and jordan peterson's point about a good plumber i when i look for a plumber you know i want him to be honest i want him to be competent if he's a christian or not now i i know i know some christians are very honest and competent plumbers because they're christians i know other plumbers who are honest and competent even though they're not christians and i think there are probably plumbers out there who use their christianity as a way to fool customers i mean when people trot out the bad behavior of christians to christians they act like it's a revelation but if you're deep within the tribe especially as deep as a pastor well you know this already not only because every now and then someone will confess their sin but the vast majority of time everybody's complaining about others of them you know take a look at jonathan height's book the happiness hypothesis what he has to say about gossip which i put in a sermon recently so yeah it's not a revelation to christians that christians use their christianity for unchristian ends i think that's human nature when we see an opportunity or a way that we can gain advantage or a competitive advantage we do and so i'd be not at all surprised to see atheists doing the same thing it's it's simply human but again the patterns of this recently are so predictable gays and women's with gays and women's gays and women with unwanted pregnancies are always trotted out as the oppressed people who lack eternal conscious bliss and so that warrants political priority okay it's the nature of politics to prioritize something there's always a cause is it going to be the the uighurs in china is it going to be the the armenian genocide is it going to be the palestinians or the or the or the jews or the christians or the muslims or the women or the gays or history has no lack of people lacking eternal conscious bliss i think it's everyone how do we have a hierarchy how do we prioritize well there's a there's a conversation fundamentalist christians are trotted out as the group who oppresses them okay so be it it's lots of people oppressing lots of people and i was just having a talk with someone and we'll see if he agrees to release the conversation because it was a powerful conversation because it was a powerful conversation you know the most important the the video that sort of that jordan peterson hooked him was the i'm oppressed you're oppressed everyone's oppressed we're also all oppressors we're all perpetrators and oppressed both at the same time we're involved in this okay eternal conscious bliss well the the cocaine chase the cocaine solution and the bullet chaser no that doesn't get at it no it shouldn't get at it life is precious suicide is a bad idea don't do it fundamentalist christians yeah they've got their tally sheet just like everyone else and okay now point of christianity christianity acknowledges this idea christians at least from my perspective should be the first to stand up and say sort of like the possibly apocryphal gk chester to an idea what's the wrong what's the matter with the world i am to be a christian is to acknowledge that you are an oppressor and and in fact to at some point say i am going to prioritize the fact that i am oppressor beyond the fact that i am a victim and in fact by paying attention to that instead of paying attention to my victimhood because again it doesn't it's not exactly a a broad brilliant stroke of revelation to say that self-pity is a bad idea and doesn't really lead to eternal eternal conscious bliss nor to even more common varieties of happiness but embracing one's sinfulness and confessing one's sins well maybe this is just downstream of christianity and maybe if like nicha and certain other characters we would shed all of these things and stop doing that and live into the brilliance of our self-regard again it just doesn't wash in our culture why because we're swimming in christian waters is it pure christianity no is it polluted yes do we do it wrong almost all the time what can we learn from these dynamics jordan peterson well nice should be at the top of his hierarchy because isn't nice the creator of eternal conscious bliss no it doesn't work and we all know that you know there's michigan nice well what is michigan nice well talk to someone from michigan sometimes it's called minnesota nice it can be canadian nice it can be american nice at least from new york and new jersey we were less nice that's kind of the way we were so jordan peterson expressed sympathy for the conscious discomfort of those in modernity how dare you sir be kind towards this out group don't be a jordan peterson give me a break the scientific problem to suffering doesn't really work just like hat and i think of i forget her name in the in the gene wilder willy wonka and the chocolate factory movie which was just tremendous these little morality plays i want a golden chicken papa buy me a golden goose a goose who lays golden eggs buy it for me i want it now now conscious suffering is works well and we all know this she was suffering at that point was her is her suffering deniable but you say her suffering is valid ah and civilla and her perseg videos haunt this conversation because the the achilles heel of the scientific image is value and so for all of those who sort of cover one eye and use the use the scientific image to try to create value out of the world perseg stumps in and says yeah but look at what you're doing doing this just highlights the fact that you're seeking value seems to be the most obvious thing but you know it's not necessarily obvious if this is just the way you live or try to live all the time once you exclude value in order to what achieve value you've placed value at the top of the hierarchy values again one of these things that you know and i listened to the introduction that that civilla gives in that second commentary on on jonathan peugeot and and adam friended very good kind of laying out of a a metaphysics of value and it's a it's a it's a compelling case in many ways and has a lot to be said for it now exactly how a metaphysical frame and i want to get into more videos that relate frame and religion because again they're they're not exactly the same they're not exactly the same thing and we're using frame and that model to try to learn something but again all models all models are necessary all models are limited that's that's the that's the nature of our ability to see the world we are too small we can't grasp at all and if you know this you have to decide well how then should you live there's a dogma the world is too big we are too small we are limited i think it's a very true dogma i think it's a good dogma to live by does that mean you can't know anything no does that mean you will know everything no do you find that dogma to be a christian dogma do you find that dogma to be accessible to science a lot of scientists are saying it seems a reasonable thing to say dogma can be helpful so like just happiness or eternal conscious bliss is an unwise ultimate good suffering or eternal conscious torment is an unwise ultimate evil and in my conversation with poe about you know ivan's very sharp man and and the power of the images that dostievsky can can conjure through ivan are are very powerful but you can take eternal conscious bliss and eternal conscious torment you have that child beating its breast well to me when i read ivan it just shows me the power and the complexity of these questions but i don't think either ecb eternal conscious bliss or ect eternal conscious torment really sort of captures everything because a spoiled brat is almost always unhappy and well we should we're gonna have some standpoint epistemology here oh okay so spoiled brattness is now an identity and so you should listen to the spoiled brats of the world what do they say well the solution is give me more all right well being an alcoholic is a standpoint epistemology you should listen to the alcoholic what do they say the answer is more more alcohol now most of us can step back and say i don't think so and most of us would say it would be irresponsible to just cave into the standpoint epistemology of the brow of the brat identity we say the world is larger than this and in fact if your parents when you were younger gave you more suffering you would be better and we know that but at the same time we won't say parents should always try to make their children suffer then you sort of fall into ivan carat karamatsos vision of of the suffering of children and so we sort of go back and forth and back and forth with these things suffering is notoriously unscientific c.s lewis you can't do simple math with suffering one suffering person plus another suffering person equals this consciousness is notoriously resistant to this this sort of particulate reduction of the universe and playing little accounting games with the particles now again someone might measure chemical levels in the brain and all of this but you run right into the hard problem then the hard problem of consciousness suffering is individualistic it's difficult to measure and we almost immediately jump to is that justifiable suffering so somehow making fundamentalists suffer is justifiable but allowing gays and women who want to end their pregnancy as quickly and easily as possible making them suffer a little bit well that's unjustifiable okay we're right back in the middle of value you're not getting away from it you've just created a value hierarchy you want to justify it with argument sounds like fun let's have a conversation about it and i'm sure i'll be exposed to to be using some fallacious thinking i almost i guarantee i will i guarantee i am why that's actually a function of my worldview that i get lots of stuff wrong i am morally compromised i am mentally compromised let's make a clip of this i am i am far more ignorant than i know i am not as well read as i should be i am not as good a christian as i should be all of that is true for me and that's a function of my worldview but now knowing this doesn't mean oh i know this now nope knowing it if you really know it you it actually creates humility which should lead me to listen to the arguments of my rivals and enemies that's what the book of proverbs says we're really talking about what sorts of suffering are justifiable bang right in the middle of a value hierarchy and which are not and who we are justified in giving pain to and whose and which pain we ought to alleviate we've got a dreaded hierarchy going on here and we're not going to get rid of it just because we say we don't like hierarchies all right how do you feel about air you're not going to avoid that either now in all fairness christians return the favor so it's a little game that we play and if you pay attention to youtube it's a game that gets a lot of clicks and now that i've monetized clicks i get a sense of yeah clicks make money and so put clicks and you know sometimes people will pay 30 40 50 bucks a pop if if if a couple of people or three people are really good at this game to watch them do it well what are they really looking for well on one hand they're looking for their their adversaries to be owned they're going to cheer so it's you know it's a game and it's not a bad game necessarily it can be a fun game but christians play it too communism was atheistic yeah pretty do a pretty significant degree and it's a pretty core value in that in that system communist killed lots of people yeah they certainly did you regularly hear people say you know people again trotting out communism and it's like well communism hasn't been tried well christianity hasn't been tried well utilitarianism hasn't been tried well science hasn't been tried oh okay um sam atheist is an atheist sam harris is an atheist sam harris's belief system is responsible for the cruel death of millions of people but sam harris isn't a communist and sam harris isn't responsible for the death of millions of people and sam harris seems to in many ways in the sort of secular humanist downstream from christianity way basically as i've said many times before and many others have said it uses christian values against christianity fair enough and actually if you're a christian if you can work through the details of that he's blessing us he's making us better so have a conversation with sam harris get a little upset get a little triggered you know cheer for your team it's a sporting event it's not necessarily a bad thing maybe along the way you'll learn something maybe you'll learn more watching sam and jordan go at it than you will watching the the raiders and the rams go at it okay but you'll learn other things from the raiders and the rams christians return the favor and back and forth we go and maybe just maybe we'll learn something what we're really trying to do is have a better conversation and i want to you know really give credit to to justin briarley because justin's been doing this for a long time and justin does it particularly well now justin does it a little differently than others do but justin hosts this program and and you know brings people together and tries to help them have better conversations so justin you know justin briarley and jonathan height were idw before there was an idw in some ways but justin of course is a committed conservative christian and has those conversations and then of course the idw protocol came around and has another nice new idea and we have straw manning and steel manning and and these are all good practices but again just like saying i am a sinner embracing the doctrine of total depravity doesn't mean that somehow i'm no longer susceptible to it or having a whole list of playing cards about fallacies doesn't mean that i don't commit them or on and on and on and on and on we want the good the true and the beautiful and even even that trio of words which is classical and durable and and really sort of gets at it well you know maybe if i do it in greek it's a little bit better or we're all struggling to get at this it's it's plenty fudgy again fudgy is sort of sneaking an agenda in to try and you know it's to try and get the correct i i probably heard this word first when i was in high school chemistry and you know we were warned about fudging well what is fudging well fudge means that we kind of figure out what the answer should be and we have the starting place and so we can't really do the math and so we sort of cheat along the way to get the outcome you want and of course the smart chemistry professor will take a look show your work kind of show the work and yeah that's fudgy well multiple multiple choice tests are in in are inherently fudgy because okay one answer is probably really wrong other answers are a little bit closer i don't actually have to be able to arrive at the answer correctly which is actually the goal of education i just have to get fudgy enough to grab the proper one and maybe make a good guesstimate so maybe i'll get 50 on the test even if i do it blindly we have much in common between us living our context our culture delivers so much to us that again that sort of modulates all of these answers and c.s lewis's observation that in looking back over fights in the past noticing how much in common the people had with each other even within their own adversaries things that they had in common that we don't things that are obvious to us about them that weren't obvious to each other about the rival parties it's the way this stuff goes so we shouldn't waste each other's time or trigger each other needlessly you know if we're going in for a sporting event let's enjoy the sporting event but let's follow the rules and fight fair and again watch an nfl game and you know there's grabbing on jerseys and there's holding and there's i mean they're always trying to get away with stuff and that's sort of the way we are as human beings but let's have a clean fight and see what we can do and it's actually a lot more fun if we're able to concede points and say yeah i think you're right i think that's a devastating argument i'm still a christian because you know what because all of this stuff is built around it and maybe i'll flip maybe maybe boy wouldn't that be a not really because i'm not that big but wouldn't that be a cherry if paul decided to denounce the faith or then again within christians you have all that if paul decided to bend his knee to rome or if paul decided to you know cut the kvetching paul and just become orthodox already or paul became the pope of the christian reform church christian reform church doesn't have pope but you know that's a that's a little tribal game and it's fun but see the game for what it is enjoy it for what it is basketball is fun baseball is fun football is fun card playing is fun chess playing is fun debating is fun and you know if you come to our local meetup i've got someone you to meet for you to meet because he will debate you endlessly and he doesn't really care which position he has he just likes doing it and that's what he does but at some point you also when you see that as a game say oh i want to do something else and we're dealing with suffering and john verveke his his take on buddhism i found quite interesting in awakening from the meaning crisis but you know john provides a really nice vocabulary for a lot of this you know jordan peterson sort of comes out with you know suffering is is the one thing that you sort of can't dispel that's a powerful point but then to say that all life is suffering well john verveke and awakening from the meaning crisis i didn't dig down into which episode it was kind of takes that on it says well that's not exactly not exactly true and verveke is right there's there's glory and there's pleasure and there's suffering and and and and we all sort of know that to pursue the good and the right and the holy involves suffering and in fact i often tell people you don't you very seldom go to the movie theater to to sit there and watch a movie in which everyone gets exactly what they want continuously to be a very boring movie what do we want we want to go to a movie in which there's a trial and there's suffering and and there's something to overcome that's deeply meaningful and i think about jordan peterson telling his his young son who is scared by the stuff in the movie keep your eyes on the hero that's deeply meaningful and yeah i want you to look at those frames and put them out and say oh these are psychological and yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah but we still don't get rid of them and if you watch the sisyphus the sisyphus video again um you know the case for against santa denialism that's sort of where he ends up it says well even after you do all the philosophy and and this is where world views eventually emerge even after you do all the philosophy well life is about life is about the drama and the experience of it and the show and the um you know and and and the enjoyment of it and the glory that's in it and um now he doesn't really come out with a christian answer and so christians might say oh by my tribal scales i don't really like that but okay he isn't a christian why expect him to be one it's a it's an interesting answer and he does a really credible job in the video so enjoy the video or maybe you won't don't watch it if you don't want to so is all life suffering not really but is is suffering sort of a deniable a non-deniable thing of life yeah that too and again the world is complex like that is avoidance of suffering the ultimate good no it really isn't because so what does that mean for the age to come well there's all these evocative images of of wiping away every tear well does that mean we won't strive and and there won't be challenges and there won't be adventure and there won't be the kinds of suffering necessary to have those things i don't know well well well then what about your heaven paul i'm not in charge of it well then well then why do you think it why do you think it won't get boring or why do you think it can be good well because i kind of trust the one that i think is writing it well why would you think that well because he made a drama in which the son of god hangs on a cross and becomes the victim of his enemies that's one heck of a drama we can't we can't seem to shake it and and and attempts by by other attempts to say well he wasn't really god or he didn't really suffer or god wouldn't let one of his own suffer or all all of those to me just diminish the story and so well if that's the story writer that you know leads me into the next story i'm with him that's the story writer that's the one i want writing my story now saying that both engages the adventure and gives me a degree of shivers because i see the kinds of stories he writes in the suffering of people's lives i see the kind of story suffering he writes into mabel and into into christians who suffered and and some who seem to suffer needlessly and yeah this world is full of suffering well is god writing those stories well well i thought god was good and yeah those are hard questions and you know i can take a go at it right now but my answers won't dispel these questions not like well you can split water into hydrogen and oxygen with electricity that's a good thing and that's a true thing but this kind of thing we're talking about is way way way more important and more complex than that other question so yeah so then we try and get better answers to it and again a lot of what john did in that series i thought was really helpful um you know reciprocal narrowing and reciprocal broadening to me those those seem to be better categories than eternal conscious torment or eternal conscious bliss because what i really want is reciprocal broadening i want my agency to grow and and i want not only freedom from but freedom too and and i want you know instead of realizing when my agency grows this is what happens when you become a parent suddenly you realize you have an enormous agency over the destiny of another human being and and and now just by virtue of being that creature's parent whether you choose to give that child away and have someone else raise him or raise that child yourself whatever degree of attention or neglect is going to have consequences in that person's life that they are going to live out for the rest of their natural born days that's responsibility that's agency and then very quickly we realize i am not up to this agency i am going to make mistakes yeah i am and what do i want i want i want i want well maybe maybe i want to hold back on some of the agency and maybe i want to live up to the agency that i already possess and maybe i want god to help me through this process and okay so christians want to have an argument about well what kind of process is going to be on the other side on the other side of the grave in this world is there going to be a purgatory is are are we magically transformed those are fun theological questions to answer and they're difficult questions and well well can we derive this based on scripture if we add these other catholic books to the old testament the greek old testament and include some of those books can we get a biblical justification of purgatory and and and and and why are we still talking about this well because there's there's something fun about this conversation and it's meaningful and it's significant at least to some and so not everybody's talking about it but now that i mentioned it some of you your ears are going to perk up and you're going to say well what did paul mention there well i want to learn more about that i want to know more about that because on one hand i believe that god is trustworthy and that my life will continue on beyond the grave and um well maybe i'm a little anxious about that well if you're anxious about what god will do with you beyond the grave i understand that we're all anxious about what god does with us on this side of the grave and and if god is the author well you know when we look at parts of this story that are really dark and painful and we think well what kind of story are you writing and christianity the great puzzle sort of says well it's not just simply determinism that that this that this authorship metaphor is a metaphor and it's an analogy and it and it affords certain kinds of knowledge but it doesn't afford the full thing because if you can actually fully capture something in an analogy it's no longer an analogy it's the thing itself but again going back to the other dogma we're too small to see the thing itself so so what do we want well we want analogies we want things that are our size we we're not used to we're not we're children are not quite ready for the power tools and so mommy and daddy and santa gives us a gift and there's you know little power tools that we can sort of cut and we're not going to cut our fingers off but if it's just too safe and too small and too dumbed down and too toyish well then there's not adventure in it and this world seems to provide a large degree of glory and pain and suffering and on and on and on there's more so there's there's there's more it always takes me a while to fully absorb the fancy vervekey words there's there's suchness and and moreness going on and that's a good thing so is this my last slide no we need to be a little bit anti-fragile and and you know i get triggered and i watch a video and it triggers me and then i think i'm gonna make a video right away i'm gonna i'm gonna bionic mosquito you might you might like the you might like the vengeful angry culture warrior paul but i've got to live with him and i've got to be him and the the the the going after rationality rules paul has to live with the paul that sees rationality rules as a human being and the paul who who who wants to trap rationality rules in christianity and the paul who who wants to befriend rationality rules just because he's different and and in some in some ways you know some of what's going on at the not all not all because i again i not all not all because i again i i didn't start the bridges of meaning discord joey and rick and job and and jeff you know and and um and cord i believe made this made this diagram which is sort of like the so if there's brist bridge scheme so there's the san francisco bridge and the golden gate bridge and but this also sort of looks like an estuary so there's a lot of me in in this whole project of course i've it's sort of gathered around my video but what do i want i want better conversations and better conversations means be less fragile i had a conversation yesterday with scott from bookwave and i'll be doing i'll be posting that coming up on the channel it's a great conversation i've had so many great conversations lately some of them online some of them offline and um i i just feel tremendously blessed but he made the point i think it was great you know what what do you need what do you need to what do you need to have a good conversation what do you need you know you need patience empathy and emotional control it's a lot of what you need for a good marriage or a good relationship or you know there's a lot of wisdom in that and yeah there's fun in the gotcha game you know it's and so i i don't i don't mind looking at a good takedown video now and then and cheering for my team or or sometimes you know if if you're a patriots fan or a rams fan or a dallas cowboys fan sometimes maybe the great play on the other side of the ball is the one that you say yeah you know hey i like a great play because it's a great play i like a strong idea powerful idea because it's a strong and powerful idea i respect it even if it's gripping and and it just raises the challenge because well now there's a real challenger and if i want to maintain my christian faith i'm going to have to deal with that idea and so part of me is afraid but part of me wants to rise and and defend and engage and and i don't want a weakened version of that idea i want the full idea yeah there's the hero in us and the hero's journey so but the game can get boring too because oh okay it's all the same old points all right we're not we're not we're talking past each other we're not understanding each other we want the truth we want the good and the true and the beautiful we want less boring we want more engaging you know we want that which is more meaningful we want to do something difficult we want to strive for the better and so you know a lot of bridges of meaning stuff and you know if people look for the estuary which again i always resist estuary is a dynamic and you know i think a lot of the videos lately pointing out you know tofor first came in for the randos conversation and then i you know had some time on monday so okay let's do a deeper dive and i want there's always going to be different levels at which people participate some of you listen to a video now and then some of you listen to everyone some of you listen to the podcast version some of you go to the discord some of you sort of live in the comment section we've got our vixen dixon and the queen of the firsties and and some of you write emails and hardly ever weigh into other ones and and all of that is good it's an ecosystem it's an estuary it's a it's a place where it's a place where we can talk a place where we can grow a place where we can change and yeah i'm a christian minister do i what do i want more people to become christians yeah but i also want atheists in the discord server and i want because because because then we can wrestle with the conversation and you know how what on earth will it mean when christ returns and and some of you will just roll your eyes and that's never going to happen yeah i get it we're understanding each other but i don't you know i'll let god worry about the things that it's on god's agenda and i'll worry about the things that are on my agenda and i'll worry about things that are just beyond my capacity things that i can aim for things that are meaningful things that i can own and take advantage of and i'll do those things so yeah we need to be a little bit anti-fragile we want to have better conversations and i want better christian atheist conversations because part of what atheists in a deeply christian culture do is force me to think harder about god and that's scary because well that kind of creativity and exploration is usually the seed bed of heresy but that's just part of the challenge too can i grow grow more and still stay within the fold of the church or or how can i have better perspectives on the different the different rooms in the church that the the mere christianity hallway is connected to c.s lewis's great image from mere christianity how can how can i live my best life how can it be now how can it be forever it be now how can it be forever and all of these things i think we all want so yeah every celebrity atheist video sort of gets boring let's make them better let's have christians make them better and again in terms of the vast distributed cognitive system that is real life in this world it's not just what's on screens it's what's in church and it's our our in real life interactions and on and on and on and on and on so anyway that's this video thank you for watching some of you support me on patreon thank you for that as i've said i've started a new thing on patreon where i'm taking these i it's it's really difficult with the money thing again i always try to work it out because on one hand i don't want to have pay to play too much but for those who are supporting i want to i want to say thanks in some ways and so a very small token of it is making a pdf of these powerpoints and making them for patrons only and if you i think a dollar a month i'm on that so patreon can either work per video or for a month boy if i made it per video i'd really be raking in the dough but um i have it a month and because i think it's just a little easier for those of you who want to want to give something to support the channel and who knows where any of this goes rick asked me the other day he said you know well what's how's it going with the monetization and i told him how much he says you're not even making minimum wage yeah but again this is this is a labor of love this is sort of ministry this is sort of my own project on and on and on and on and so many of you are supporting me and i deeply appreciate it and so the powerpoints for these are behind the paywall on patreon ta-da is patreon bad yeah i don't know maybe i'll start subscribe star two i don't know i don't know youtube now i have the little join button i don't know what to do with that i now youtube says i have super chats and so on friday on friday mornings at 10 a.m i should do a better job communicating friday mornings 10 a.m california time most fridays i do a live stream and if you really want to engage in that go into the discord server but now super chats are available we didn't have any last week that was all right i did my first super chat the other day peugeot was doing a question and answer and i just wanted to do a super chat because i'd never done one so and giving jonathan peugeot money is fun i like that i like giving jonathan peugeot money because i really believe in what he's doing and it gives me pleasure to give him money so that's what i do so if it gives you pleasure to give me money and it has for many of you and i don't even know i mean some i always put those little links to to it cryptocurrency because some of you are into that and sometimes people give me money in cryptocurrency i check it like once a year i was like oh there's money there and well that's handy money's handy sometimes so yeah so if you want to support the channel if you want to get the powerpoints for this be a patron you can be a patron for a dollar a month and then you'll have access to the powerpoints then maybe in the future i'll put more stuff back there i don't know i don't know it's it's interesting to just play with all of this which is what i'm doing and ideally again as a christian i sort of see that as a real benefit of christianity that christianity affords me a vision that god is trustworthy and he's in control of my life and at the same time i have agency and i have adventure and i have drama and there's real things at stake and i'm now worried about the a my life in the age to come because i'm preaching on that this week and so i'm thinking about that jesus is the son of god and i'm in his hand and nothing can separate me from his love and so i want to bless you and i'm happy when you bless me and if you're an atheist bring your best arguments that's fun bring your best arguments that's fun don't bring the weak stuff or the boring stuff that's less fun but you can still come because even if you've got the weak and boring arguments you're a human being and human beings are human beings are absolutely incredible they're image bearers of god and so yeah that's why i do conversations that's why i do this channel and those of you who listen to my videos whether you never give anything or even leave a comment just listening subscribing or even if you're one of those people who stays off youtube and never subscribes because you don't want youtube in your life some of you give to living stones church and that's a way of supporting me and if you're you pay us taxes if you give to living stones church you get a tax deduction win win so thanks for watching and again if you never give anything or if you hate my videos there's always somebody who who clicks thumbs down it's so funny sometimes i'll do a video there'll be a thumbs down almost right away it's like i have an adversary isn't it glorious but that's just me being me so thanks for watching and you know in this middle of this covid season yeah love one another have a merry christmas or happy hanukkah for some of you or kwanzaa or festivus or or whatever enjoy the end of the year love your neighbor as yourself and yeah thanks for watching