https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZYsaT36dM_k

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Something that people online have noticed is I often talk about colonizing and people sort of pause when they hear that because colonizing has become this dirty word. But colonizing is actually a very useful word and it's one of the best words that you have for what we're actually always doing to each other. The picture over here is a, I can make the picture a little bit bigger, get out of the editing mode in PowerPoint. All of my stuff on YouTube is about colonizing minds. What would I mean by that? Well, I'm trying to influence and if I say influence, people say, oh, that's not, that's a nice word. Influence is sort of a polite word where there's my line and your line. But really what we want to do is we want our ideas to, if they in fact are our ideas or if there's some other ideas that have colonized us and they're working through us to other people, to get into other people. The whole idea behind colonizing is that there are resources in the area that we are focusing on and we want to employ those resources and have those resources be put to the ends that we are seeking or the ends that are being sought through us, through this long chain of colonization. Now I'm constantly subject, so when I have a channel with a group of people on and we're talking about this or talking about that, we're constantly subject to all of these colonization efforts from each other. It might be religious, it might be commercial, it might be political, all sorts of ideas going back and forth and back and forth and we're trying to not just sort of influence people but have people become kind of repeaters, instantiations of the idea so that these ideas sort of flow through us like water. All of this is basically the understanding of what for a very long time we have understood the word spirit to mean. Jesus in the Gospel of John notes how you don't see the wind but you see what it moves and so what happens is that things sort of flow through us one to another. They can be ideas, they can be culture, they can be all sorts of things and this is a constant, this is in constant human effort throughout history. Now if you plug in colonize into the Zoogle site Geist Revelation Engine also known as Google Image Search, the first thing that comes up is Christopher Columbus and you think well what's that about and that sort of raises all sorts of questions about morals and ethics and just to study a little bit of that, it's an incredibly fraught thing but this was colonization. The Europeans came and they terraformed North America. They brought animals, they brought plants and very quickly North America sort of became extensions of Western Europe, Latin America through Spain, North America through England and Germany and the Netherlands and Russia. North America was colonized by Europe and all of those resources in North America would then be employed to similar ends to what Europe sort of pushed them into and this process continues today. In World War II for example, the Second World War likely would not have been won against Nazi Germany or the Cold War against Russia if in fact the colonization of the Americas had not happened. You want to appropriate the potential to your own will or to whatever it is that is appropriating you while not destroying that potential. That's the heart of colonization. Now on a recent podcast conversation we got into the question of whether or not Jesus was a rebel. One of the things that we noted as we went through Lent and into Easter was that Jesus was always portrayed as the son of God, the son of the great king, the rightful owner and many of these stories basically had situations such as the parable of the tenants of the vineyard when the tenants of the vineyard sort of take over the vineyard against the will of the king and the king one way or another has to recapture or retake the vineyard that belonged to him. Now it's very noteworthy that Jesus dies of crucifixion and in the Roman world you didn't crucify normal thieves. The two groups that tended to be crucified most were slaves and insurgents. Well why? Well runaway slaves are resisting the colonization that slavery basically always does. Slavery is one of the purest forms of taking a human being and subjugating them to the will of another. And when slaves ran away or somehow defied their masters crucifixion was the punishment. Now you can see this all the way down to Frederick Douglass who quite famously remarked how he stole himself and said what do you mean you stole yourself? He stole himself out of slavery and he made his way to the north. And so we recognize that in some ways what Jesus was working on is more analogous to Frederick Douglass in terms of well he's undoing something that should not have been done in the first place and that's the premise of Jesus' story. Now this is why Jesus didn't act like a messianic rebel. If you are going to kill your enemies you in a sense are losing the potential that your enemies might be able to offer to your service, to your spirit and that in fact colonization, recolonization as we might call it is very much what Jesus is about. Jesus gathered no army, he offered no armed resistance to his arrest and his execution. Jesus' ultimate claim was reconquest what had already belonged to God. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Earth was in a sense a rebel outpost and Jesus was here to reclaim but not to do so by the bloodshed of the rebels but by conquering the hearts of the rebels. Jesus claimed to be the son of God, he's the prince of creation here to retake his world. Satan and Rome had taken the world so Jesus' efforts were to restore the creation to its original master. This is where we find now at the end of the Gospel of Matthew and this is very in fact very close to what we saw at the beginning of the Gospel of Matthew in chapter 4. The devil took Jesus to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their splendor. All this I will give you he said if you will bow down and worship me. This is Satan basically saying I'm running the show and if you allow me to colonize you I'll make you second in command. At that point Jesus says away from me Satan for it is written worship the Lord your God and serve him only. Jesus says there is only one final ultimate ruler of this world and it is not you, you're a rebel. Jesus doesn't take a shortcut. The third temptation in Matthew has a window into the structure. Now pay attention here where you have worship is what Satan asked for and what is worship. Worship is attention, worship is obedience, worship is devotion and Jesus understands very well that for him to worship Satan would make him the slave of Satan basically willingly allowing him to be colonized by Satan. Now Jesus when he rises from the dead does not go to Pilate or Herod or Caesar after his resurrection and I've made this point before. I often think that well that would seem to be the way if you want to conquer the world but in many ways that would sort of be exactly like Matthew 4. Where does he go? He goes to the source, the control room as NT Wright put it, of earth which is the throne in heaven. He goes right to the top and doesn't stop at any of the rebel way stations. Now I have an ongoing conversation with my friend Jacob who doesn't believe in the resurrection and he's a Jew and he always sort of implies to me and I'm sure he will listen to this and he'll have his comment on this. It would have been better for Jesus to hang around to let the people touch him, touch the wounds in the side, do the doubting Thomas things with more people then more people would believe you and that would, well that would what? Because if you sort of think this through and if you look at the timeline of the gospel now we're right after Easter, right after resurrection, we're going to bump into ascension day where Jesus ascends and then we're going to come to Pentecost because it's clear what Jesus is after here fundamentally is colonization. Now to quote another Jewish authority, Dennis Prager who's been on Jordan Peterson's Exodus seminar, he said something in there that I completely agreed with. He said miracles don't work. Well what do you mean they don't work? They don't do what they do? No, when a miracle happens it's a miracle of healing. It means that the person is healing. But we think that when a miracle happens that that will actually colonize people's minds and hearts and sometimes it does and often it does to a degree or only temporarily but then we tend to slip back into what we thought before. You can see this in the gospels again and again and again. Peter who watched Jesus heal the sick and raise the dead and walk on water and enabled him to walk on water. Peter when it comes to the resurrection has very little faith. He doesn't show up on Easter Sunday morning. Peter in fact is always scheming with his own ideas. Just watching the miracles of Jesus were insufficient to adequately colonize Peter. Something else needed to happen for Jesus' spirit to colonize Peter to set Peter on the path to in many ways replicating what Jesus had been about. Just watching Jesus, that was part of the process. Listening to Jesus, that was part of the process. Seeing the miracles, that was quite impressive. Tended to have temporary impact but just seeing hands or side or resurrected Jesus likely would not actually colonize us sufficiently by the spirit of Christ which is why Jesus in his ascension goes to heaven which is the control room of earth. Jesus announces this colonization in Matthew 28 verse 16. Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go. And anybody who's reading through the gospel of Matthew will notice all of these mountains. In fact if you had read Matthew 4 and you hear about this mountain where you could see all the kingdoms of the earth and you'd say even if they went to Everest you couldn't see all the kingdoms of the earth. The point there is symbolic obviously that mountains are sort of the peak of a hierarchy. They're the peak, they're fat at the bottom and they go all the way to a point and Jesus preaches the sermon on the mount. Moses of course goes to Mount Sinai. Mountains have always been known sort of as holy peak places. And notice that only eleven disciples are there so we're right away reminded that Judas is no more. Peter who denied Christ is rescued. Judas has fallen away. Now again Galilee is where this all began and here I noted mountains. You have the sermon on the mount. You have Satan brought Jesus to the mountain for worship and Jesus does not worship him. And now mountain tops are tops of hierarchies. They are symbolically emphasizing authority and the power to colonize, to send one's spirits through, to motivate and change and move in alignment with that spirit as it goes forward. Now one of the things that these new little AI search engines are good for are making lists of stuff. You've got to be a little careful because they're not always terribly accurate but I asked chat GPT to make a list of all the biblical appearances between the resurrection and the ascension and you find a whole bunch of them. They're sort of dotted through the four gospels and then first Corinthians of course the apostle Paul is recognizing them. And what you see though is that Jesus between the resurrection and the ascension is already beginning his movement towards ascension. Jesus isn't sort of relating to them like he was before. He seems to be here and there showing here showing there teaching this teaching that And as we saw last week in CS Lewis's quote, this is what the disciples mean when they talk about seeing the risen Lord and understanding that something has happened and something has changed. It's sort of like your friend is moving on to his new job and so he pops in and out to keep things going until the next wave comes through which will be the Holy Spirit. Now this becomes very frustrating to a scientific age because Jesus is not sitting for our interview although he seemed to respond to the questions of others but hearing rumors of it let's say if Herod or Pilate or one of them having heard rumors that Jesus is risen might want to go find him. Jesus could be very cagey although he could be very cagey before and so you find him just kind of popping in and popping out. I kind of like my mouse right here. And then Jesus says so 28 verse 17 when they saw him they worshiped him and some doubted. Now this is very interesting because they just noted that well these are the 11 disciples that are mentioned could very well be that there are others there too but note that they told him somehow we got the message to them meet me on this mountain. You don't get the sense that they got there with him but they got to the top of the mountain going there in faith which again they didn't do outside the tomb on Easter Sunday morning until the women came back with their report. When they saw him they're collected on the mountain in faith and he appears to them and then you see this division and this is really again very honest and remarkable. Now are any of the disciples doubting? It's not clear maybe that seems to be the intent of the passage but again as Dennis Prager noted miracles don't work not like we think they work. So again here you have worshiping on the mountain and I've had this ongoing debate with my friend Sam the Unitarian about the use of worship in this passage. I think this is quite clearly a Trinitarian passage and actually in preparation for the sermon I went through all of the examples of this word in Matthew and he's right that there are places where quite clearly someone bows down before someone that they are looking for something from or someone that they want to sort of show honor to so people would do this to other human beings but many of the instances are in fact seems to connote worship partly because in the New Testament there are times when angels show up and people bow down and the angels say don't do that I'm not God and so this worship seems very much in alignment with Matthew chapter 4 that they were worshiping Jesus on the mountain in the way that Satan had asked Jesus to do to him but Jesus had refused. So clearly especially for a bunch of people who had been steeped in monotheism something is changing in their minds about him but others are hesitant and they're doubting and they've seen him and they're wondering and they're not sure and again this is very much how human beings are with colonization even if you want to be colonized by something let's say the spirit of being a great pianist it takes work and it takes time humans are both dramatically able to be colonized but also resistant to colonization that's a real strength with us and so these disciples that gathered there at least you know had enough chutzpah and faith to get there but when they got there they weren't so sure and we're going to find this process even after the Holy Spirit comes there are places in our hearts that are resilient and sort of hold back from fully believing. Then Jesus came to them so it almost sounds like you know go to this mountain so they go to this mountain then they see him a little ways off and some begin to worship and some are like just not sure and then Jesus seems to close the gap and we often see this in the resurrection narratives where Jesus is coming to the people because they're a little unsure they're a little scared and again as I pointed out last week these texts are remarkably unembroidered it's just like they're very real and it seems like Jesus often has to come and reassure them it's me don't be afraid and this in fact I think is one of the most dramatic verses in the New Testament because Jesus came to them and said all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me and I'm sure if you've listened to enough of my videos you've probably heard me say things like people come up and say oh I don't know about those miracles or I don't know about that virgin birth or I don't know about this or I don't know about that well this is a biggie all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me that is an enormous statement and it has everything to do with colonization because basically what Jesus is saying is the world should listen to me we're going to start with you we live in a culture that cherishes rebellion in fact what we find is that often people in power act like they are the outsider they're they're the rebellious people you can live in the White House and be standing up to those Washington insiders we see people playing those games all the time or maybe you're at the seat of power and you say well I'm standing up against all of these other powers that have been here before let's say the past Jesus isn't playing any of those games he's not posing himself as a rebel he's saying all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me we struggle with this crisis of authority because again and again and when you listen to when you listen to conversations on the internet people say things well who's to decide and in a sense Jesus is saying it's me I'm to decide since all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me go therefore and make disciples of all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit it's a deeply Trinitarian text and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you this is simply outright colonization of people because what a disciple does is opens themselves up to the influence of the other person and says I want to be like you I want you to teach me I want to obey you I want to pattern my life after the pattern of your life and obviously you have this going you have the making disciples of all nations and you have the baptizing which is the dying and rising again and and Jesus says well here it is this is the process of colonization now this again also sort of frustrates us because we often say well I want something spiritual I want God to zap us but what's pretty clear from the history of Christianity is this is the primary means by which God changes us now he delegates to this to his father to his followers and but it's it's very much the power of the Holy Spirit that comes through us if you think about colonization it is sort of a spirit that flows through us to make us like him but but not sort of in a factory mode but actually in a mode by which we as we are energized and enlivened and transformed by him we also become even more uniquely us because remember this is a re colonization effort from the from the warping efforts of sin in our lives now some might think well this is a bad idea because human beings they're a mess and well yeah they are but that's also part of the process this is also proven to be the most successful idea as opposed to a lot of the competition usually you sort of hold the colonization to a book Christianity of course uses books such as the Bible or maybe threats and tyranny and all sorts of ways of getting people to comply but the truth is that really isn't tyranny is not colonization because once the tyrant is no longer there with the threats to enforce the compulsory behavior or attitudes or beliefs they tend to disappear and what we're looking for is a full willing participatory voluntary transformation along a consistent line that transforms and remakes the world CS Lewis put this nicely in the screw tape letters now this is sort of spoken in reverse because it is one devil talking to another about the way that they tyrannize human beings and basically farm us and and he's contrasting that with what the Heavenly Father does to us a human is primarily food our aim is is the absorption of its will into ours the increase of our own area of selfhood at its expense and if you look at let's say evil forms of colonization in human history this is sort of a tell but the obedience which the enemy demands of men is quite a different thing one must face the fact that all the talk about his love for men his service being perfect freedom is not as one would gladly believe mere propaganda but an appalling truth appalling to the devil's he really does want to fill the universe with a lot of loathsome little replicas of himself creatures whose life on its miniature scale will be qualitatively like his own not because he has absorbed them but because their wills freely conform to his we want cattle who can finally become food he wants servants who can finally become sons we want to suck in he wants to give out we are empty and would be filled he is full and flows over our war aim is a world in which our father below has drawn all other beings into himself the enemy our father above wants a world full of beings united to him but still distinct he doesn't want to destroy our hearts he wants to as he colonizes them restore them so the in-built creational potential of them will reach out and bless the world and a cascading of blessings that doesn't stop jesus ends this with a promise and surely i am with you always to the very end of the age this is jesus plus and through the holy spirit and jesus will not give up on us his presence with us via the holy spirit his presence with us via each other where two or three are gathered in my name i am there jesus with us all the way to the end even as we stumble through this process of heavenly colonization of earth now there are many lists of commissioning texts in the old testament joshua has one of them but jesus can be with us in a way that joshua and others can't the throne of heaven is in fact invading and recolonizing the world and he enlists his disciples in that effort now colonial misery was sometimes very much what c.s lewis wrote about in terms of wanting enslaved populations or other colonized lands to be food and colonization is a fraught business we've often done we've often done it poorly and sometimes even for evil and we are constantly tempted to do so that guy just really wants to rev right outside my door we are constantly tempted to do like the devil on the mountains and sometimes we do but jesus colonization is in fact a deliverance jesus colonizing work has continued on from his group of 11 on the mountain until now and his presence and the presence of his spirit has remade human human history and continues with us into a sometimes frightening future but this is his gift through faith and is up to us to figure out how to respond now i think we can be confident that all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me when it comes to the very scattered haphazard way that we see human beings work in this world we can understand why we pause but jesus says all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me and we are to go and in a sense colonize each other in the way he colonized us thinking about what lewis has to say about freedom while others fight with swords we tend to lean in with love we don't look to destroy our rivals but to have jesus colonize their hearts just like he has colonized us going baptizing teaching to obey everything that he has commanded