https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tAN3M9QcD7o

 And we go to this new building, and everybody runs and races at the beginning of class to go to sit down at their desks, because it's every man for himself, every woman for himself. And we sit down and we get our stuff ready and organized. And I noticed that the girls that, you know, the two like really smart girls in class are starting to have all these images on the top of their desk, just laid religious images, you know, Jesus carrying the lamb, mother and child, you know, all these different images. And I'm like really intrigued. I know what they are. And, you know, my family isn't particularly religious. My grandfather is very much on a very simplistic form. But I woke up to this girl and I said, what's going on with these pictures? What's the deal? And she goes, oh, well, my mom and dad gave this to me. And they said, you know, if you have a hard quiz or a hard question you don't know how to answer, you just look at those images and pray and God will give you the strength to, you know, do well in school. I'm first grade. I'm a kid, right? Okay, this is so I go, I want that power. I want that juice. I got to get me some of those pictures. So I go, I go home and I said, Mom, I got to tell you there's this power, okay, where you like, you get these pictures and then you pray to them and then like you do really well in school. I got to get this. And she gives me some of her stuff that she has, you know, from her like sock drawer or whatever. And and I look at them and I'm like, no, this doesn't have the juice. This isn't real. I want like good quality stuff, you know, like don't give me an image with a wooden cross on it or like an image with like some a rock formation. No, give me like, I want the face of Jesus. I want the angels. I want the whole thing. So we go to this. My mom took me to this Catholic church a couple blocks away from our house. And and next to this, there's the church, there's a small little kiosk with a bunch of books and tchotchke stuff. And of course, all those little cards, you know, that people keep in their wallets or their pockets or whatever, with usually prayers in the back of them. And I, you know, get a whole set of them, you know, now I've got like my set of like top five, you know, and my mom's like enough. And so I laid this out on my table. Now all of us in class are doing this. You know, we got our, you know, and the teachers walk in and they look at all of our tables and they're just they don't say anything, but they're like, yeah, this is a religious bunch. And then and then we kept doing this for years until we get to about middle school. And this one guy, Mr. Thomas, he comes into class and he's not a teacher. He's someone who was a business owner, but wanted to try teaching and, you know, having fun with his life kind of thing. So he shows up, he's teaching us Armenian, and he sees all of these images on our desks and he goes, what are you guys doing? What is this? And we tell them, tell them, look, we pray to this and then we have power to do well in school. It works really good. And he goes, you really think that praying to these pictures is going to make you do well in school? And honestly, all of us after class, we're going to pray to God. And he goes, you really think that praying to these pictures is going to make you do well in school? And honestly, all of us after class, we were concerned for his soul. We're like, oh, this guy's a heathen. It was amazing.