https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=0cgmmw65DIU

 recording. All right. So today we have with us a bunch of regulars from the channel. We have John Van Donk from sunny Southern California. We have Rod Hugen from beautiful Tucson California or Arizona. Wow. And we have Job from the other country where each of us have descended from in one way or another. Rod yesterday coughed up on voices that he's fully Friesian. Completely so. I see you in a whole different light now Rodney. All four of my grandparents purebred Friesians. So what are you doing with those Delft blue tiles they don't fit in. Wow it has come to this. Okay so the only thing tougher than a Frieslander is a woman who's married to a Frieslander. That's probably true. So I asked for this convocation because I thought it would be a fun conversation. Job I have many of you know I've met Job through this channel. Rodney I've known for years and years and years and John Van Donk I've known for a few years but I derive tremendous joy from my relationships with these three men. And so I thought I want the four of us in a conversation. I think that would be fun. And then I said well what do we talk about and Job had some ideas and I liked his last idea which I'm going to read. What I'm personally very interested in gentlemen is how each of you has been experiencing this movement. I have to figure out what this movement is over the last two years. What have you found? Where do you think it's going? What role should you play? What role might the church play? So that's our topic for conversation today. And all four of us are good interviewers and so Job has very much established his credentials in the discord server and on the randos united channel. So who wants who should let me ask this who should we begin with? Obviously the guy from the mother country who came up with a question seems like the obvious choice. Okay Job what movement is this? What on earth has happened? Yeah that's it. Why oh it's it's it's what he's been asking basically. And he puts a different piece. That's what the hell is going on. Just a minute before we get too far one of the things we might want to do is do some muting here because the way that zoom works if any of us makes noise while Job is talking he tends to get drowned out. So we might want to practice some of that if you can figure out how to use the mute button. Some of you old timers who don't know how to use computers very well. It's okay I ended up figuring it out. Okay. Anyway Peterson wonders why he tracks all these people. What's going on? Well we've sort of he has identified this phenomenon but he also as a funny amusing side effect has seen that it ends up getting particularly young men back into religion. But not just young men also young women and older all the variants on both. And as far as I would call it a movement. I mean that's just because I see this discord sprouting out of it. I see you Paul getting swamped with requests for calls. People seem to be screaming out for this sort of stuff. And I think the discourse a pretty big factor in showing that that there's a need for this thing that well I don't know what it was before we gave it shape in discord because I can't imagine it didn't exist. But I think it was isolated in small groups and maybe in individuals through different channels. Now so why don't you flesh out a little bit Joe because there's about 300 some people on our discord server right now. And so there's way way more who are going to be listening to this. And I should probably do like a introductory video explaining how it is and how to get on and all of that. But but this thing I just had lunch with Benedict in fact today and this thing is just really impacting people deeply. Yeah I mean as far as activity versus membership there's of course going to be a discrepancy. I think we have at least let's say we have 60 active members and activity varies through time zones. We have the European part coming online that the Americans are dominating in amount of members being active. So you can really see it pick up at about European dinner time in general. And then usually in the morning when I wake up there's like loads of messages and pages of backlogs to crawl through. That's kind of becoming unhandable at this point. I just kind of got through and but the conversations are about all sorts from simple jokes to really deep philosophical conversations that we actually had to move to a separate channel because it was just absolutely drowning out the main channel in deep metaphysical conversations between a subset of members. But also people split off and make their own content. Like I started a reading group with a couple of people who were really grief-observed and suddenly there's another reading group reading Gierkegaard's From Sickness Unto Death. Like hey I didn't even know that. It happened totally outside my I thought I was aware of whatever was going on in this area but I had no idea. That was such a great surprise. Esther's doing conversations. Jeff and Luke and it's just going places and I'm really curious to see where it's going further. We've had some very emotional interactions where people struggle with deep let's say addictions and existential issues and you can see that the community is very warm and engaging and let's say not very judgmental really trying to help. I hope it can stay that way because you know you see sometimes some debates happen and people disagree. So particularly today I said that I hope that this Discord server could embody Peterson's Rule 9 is that assume the other person knows something you don't. So we can still disagree but we can respectfully disagree and just still learn from each other. And I do hope I'm just kind of going to go on. Would I like this to go? I would like it to go further into human interaction. For instance I'm trying to get to Frankfurt to meet with a couple of people who are around Frankfurt but then already I'm asking myself what more could that be than hanging in a pub and chatting on how much we like Discord. It's got to be more than that. So I said to Andreas who's one of the members said hey what about if we could do a little bit more I said to Andreas who's one of the members said hey what about your pastor are they busy? Could we maybe do something with your pastor? I don't know what it's just I'm just spitballing but how could we take this great online thing and bring it to back to the human interaction which I think is fundamental. That's fundamental in church. You need to see the other Emmanuel Levinas said that you can see God in the face of the other and we can do that on Discord. We can come close but it's not the same thing. We can do zoom calls but you're still not sitting next to each other. You can't put the hand on the shoulder of another when they're confessing their troubles and I'd like to do that but I don't know how but I think this Discord is a great starting point but I'm not sure if it's if it should be the end point. To me it shouldn't be the end point and as far as what role can the church play I've been saying to people who say oh this is my church you folks are my church and so no no this is not your church go try out some other church. I don't know which church try a Lutheran church try a church some guy with a beard once told me just go try a church and I'm stuck there for a year now so I can only advise others to try a church and I get funny comments like look look at Joe you know advising the atheist to go to church fine cool I'll take that role but I think that's the role the church can play. I can just keep talking. Well what what so tell me Job what so yeah those who don't know so Job Job reached out to me very early on we had a conversation Job Job and I've had four conversations and we've sort of been you know Job Job you've sort of been the archetypal bucko in some ways through this whole thing and oh god no and you've now been ordained pastor of the Discord and I mean what so you went to church what role did church play in this for you you've been doing that for a little while now and I know that you're still kind of sorting out your relationship with the church and how beliefs in god are not god I mean how has that what role has that played in terms of your whatever movement you're having. Well first off what I enjoyed I remember going the first time to church and I walked inside and I did not burst into flames that was a win I was really happy about that but what I liked about church is is the people especially at first the hymns pissed me off and the sermons were weak and I just wanted to talk to other people because I found out very quickly that these people didn't have the type of faith that I thought they had they had struggles and questions and they weren't so sure oh great so do I maybe we can talk oh well sure you can come over for dinner oh we're having this group dinner why don't you come and then you meet all these people and it turns out well this person goes to philosophy club oh well how about that and this other person reads books and this other person writes poems and and here I came in expecting all these people know what they believe and the people so far who I've met don't they don't and that's really then you meet because you have a connection that you can can can discuss things over and then I just went again and again and again and it became sort of a part of the week now I tried not to go that didn't help so I kept going and well then eventually I mean I didn't I I still don't take part in communion I don't think I can that's that's because I don't accept the incarnation and the resurrection we can talk about that since today I had an hour and a half discussion with my pastor on similar things but the church doesn't mind I can just sit in the upper balcony that's fine I don't like it because it places me outside of the church but the church is open to me and they were okay with me becoming a member it was all cool so now I have this great place I know loads more people I've been I've been borrowing books from other people I've been I've been over at their house for dinner they've been over at my house for dinner so that thing I really wanted turned out to be church and it's the last place I would have looked so yeah again Paul thank you uh it's my it's my pleasure I'm I'm I'm so glad and and in your case though you had you already had some friends who were in church and that was a big help yes lots of people in the fire department were going to church uh the fire department is I live in a quite conservative village and so there's like you know two two churches down my street and one another street further and there's like 12 in my town I think 24 000 people and one of the first questions when I joined the fire department 11 years ago I was like well which church you go to and I just moved to this village I said I don't and I said well how can you have morals I said well in Matthew it says you shouldn't judge me about that and then it was okay because I'll slap you at your own book don't come at me but they would sometimes ask why don't you come to church because clearly you have a background you have all this knowledge because you know yeah I was interested in religion and now you went to churches as a kid but they would sometimes ask like no no no no and then at some point we had this with the we had this you know with together I kind of all came together with Peterson and for all your videos and having a training exercise in the church and kind of noticing oh yeah this is kind of nice to be in this building there's something here and then at that same evening the co-worker of on the fire department became he said hey I'm going to be confirmed as an elder would you like to come so there's been some interesting synchronicities in that way that it all came together I'm sure why not and then combined with you advising me to go to church well that's how that went Do you guys have any questions for Job? Hey I really have an appreciation for the the gathering face to face right I I was just talking to somebody on Facebook this week who thought I was deaf because I partially am but it's only partial and but I was born not able to see very well almost legally blind and I was born blind almost legally blind and so for the first eight years of my life I kind of stumbled around in the dark and um but all of my other senses just really are way over the top so my hearing was outstanding sense of smell sense of touch taste all of those because you depend on that when you're blind and are almost blind and so um so being in a room with someone just from the sensory perceptions is so important to me because I I don't know do you smell fear I do you you know do you do you taste anxiety do you like do you I just feel deeply often and I and I think as much as I love zoom and I love having conversations across the sea with people I don't even know except from these kind of conversations and some writing I love it because the face to face matters and and then it's harder when you touch somebody when you're looking them in the eye you know we live in this meme driven world where we just spout off platitudes and memes and and we live in that world and that's not that's not real that's that's it's a starting point it's I used to say there's this generation has more ways to communicate than any generation in history and does less of it than any generation in history and um when you talk about actual communication like in-depth communication um on the big issues of life um so so I'm really impressed uh Joe with with that part of your story the necessity to be together in a room and then I think there's just there's a spiritual connection I I really appreciate what you said about walking into a church building and feeling something it's not it's not just I don't know there's something about about um proximity that matters and it matters deeply and so um and that's certainly been my experience and it's my longing and it's it's also my difficulty with this whole medium it's the it's the the difficulty I have with with connection through it I realize it's real but I but it's it's not the depth that I long for um I mean I would love Joe because I hear you're a great cook uh to come over to your house and sit and eat dinner and that would be a highlight of a trip to the Netherlands for me and um and I would love for you to come out to Tucson and I can make you my famous tamales and and uh we could hang out I I think there's something about that because I think that it's it isn't just the words at the village at the church I pastor we often talk about listening beneath the words because people use words all the time but you have to listen beneath the words to hear what's really going on in someone's life and to understand what's really happening and so um so I just appreciate that perspective and I am glad that that it's not just oh we can converse on the discord channel beautiful as that might be um that we can actually go to Frankfurt and sit in somebody's living room and talk uh my mother-in-law's name is Juanita and she uh is from the hills of Arkansas and she once worked as a bookkeeper in a Mexican restaurant and the nice little Mexican ladies taught her how to make tamales she taught her daughter who taught me so we are totally kings and and in Rod's church Rod in your church you have a you have a meal together not just as the ceremonial meal of the Lord's Supper or communion but as a church as a congregation your church is laid out as sort of a big living room and you have a meal together the kitchen um we we designed the kitchen before we designed anything with a long serving line um and multiple ovens and um and refrigerators and so forth for the sole purpose of eating together because there's something you know I I when I read scripture Jesus is always he has his greatest reputation is he's a drunkard a glutton and a friend of sinners how great is that right that like how do you get the reputation of being a drunk and a glutton if you're not eating and partying and hanging out with people who do so I I just love that that picture of Jesus and um and so yeah being around there's something about sitting down over dinner um that opens our mouths and our hearts to each other and um and you can't do that on discord or on zoom or any other way although I could I could go grab a tamale and eat it I suppose in front of you it would be cruel and I can testify that what Rod just said is totally true because I went to the to the conference that the village church put on last year and about 40 50 percent of it was eating together and it was a it was a lovely experience and you guys do that very well I do have some questions for um for Joe because you know you rolled into this church and you tell me that you didn't find it very difficult to discover that other people had questions also and then somehow you snuck in there that you became a member of that church and I appreciate you making the distinction yourself about whether or not you participate in communion but do you think there is something unusual about that particular church that in fact the asking of hard questions is encouraged and scofflaws and atheists like yourself are allowed to be members yes how would you describe that church as unusual compared to other churches now first off my my church experience is limited um I've been to the the let's say the more conservative denominations on on a few occasions and I I don't get I I have to be careful the somewhat more conservative churches seem to be a bit more illiterate for instance I I am part of a sort of church men's discussion group of a more strict church I was invited by a firefighter and for instance there was the the the story about obeying God which was illustrated through the sacrifice of Isaac and so we talked about the story and this and that and I said well could it be that this story is symbolism no no no definitely not I said could it not be about that this particular tribe did not do human sacrifice while tribes around them did could it be to illustrate that no it happened okay that's that but I I noticed that when I tried to engage in a well what could the underlying meaning be that that there's a very literal thing that shall not be torn at while I'm getting the impression that at my current church and not everybody cares but there are people who I can discuss that with well at the more stricter well at the more stricter churches there seems to be more the case of that's not for you to think about and that can put I can imagine that that can put people off like well here I have a question and I'd like an answer I do not like to hear the answer that I should not get an answer or not or even think about it so that's that's also discouraging me from joining a bit more stricter church because how do you think that church came to be like that let's see well there was a guy and he took a hammer and a bunch of things he had thought about and nailed them to a church door basically that's that's how it started now but but how do you think the church became like that your particular church my church yes how did your church get to be so open and I think it's the usual schism of people like no I don't believe this I'm studying my own church and then a bunch of people join them and and you you eventually end up with a church where now for instance that's one thing I have for myself criticized in my church as much as I love it is that most of the sermons are Jesus loves you you can be happy about that happy happy joy joy let's sing another hymn and I'm like wait a second where is my responsibility and suffering I need to hear this too and I don't get to hear that and and to me there should the church should the church should oh god here and here I go on my preaching chair the church should tell a person how to be or at least help them figure out how they should be and that Jesus helps you with that awesome because we need all the help we can get but to kind of lay a proper foundation for what what how you might behave that's that's I wish I heard that a bit more in the existential sense but then again then I'm imposing my wants on a church that I've barely been in so but that stuff you hear in the church a bit more but in the church that be other things so you know it's important you got to make a choice and you're going to suffer either way so but how the church became that way I mean honestly John I think it was just schisms and and I mean for for instance there was this Nashville document a while ago which which was divisive people took stances on that and the church I go to was pretty clear in that anybody's welcome and that was pretty explicit okay so they took a stand on that and and then they but we also recently had a a meeting where a local politician was there in the evening which was about identity and meaning and why are people leaving the church and meaning and why are people leaving the church and why aren't they coming back and and what what should the church do and I said well isn't this the issue with the fact that God is dead and that we lost the narrative and that we we can't find this new narrative and the church tries to impose its narrative but the church doesn't know either because it's constructed a whole bunch of narratives so to any outsider it looks like yeah it's not like they know so I don't know I'm going on a tangent but this the church I'm in seems to also still be figuring itself out like in the last church membership magazine this is an 800 member church they changed the they changed the requirements for you to partake in communion you don't let's see I have to get this right you didn't you did have no long you didn't have to any longer I think except the sacrifice of Jesus you had you just had to love God and I'm reading that and thinking what it's kind of fundamental though to take communion to I mean so legally I can now but I'm not gonna because to me that's not what communion is about I better accept the resurrection first so that just because and the reason was that that the the it was divisive that not everybody could partake was divisive like yeah but but but to make I don't know I I can't really judge that because it's very easy to judge but if I'm not in their shoes and I'm not making those decisions but it seems sort of it seems sort of strange to me that well we have an issue that this thing is perceived as divisive then we'll remove the barrier but now where is the essence yeah so I I'm going to sound like a conservative but I sometimes wonder if churches should should just change in order to in order to bring something forward to the order to reach out to others we have we have a particular thing in the Netherlands is that the the more conservative streams variations they either remain stable in size or they grow and I think that has to do with size or they grow and I think that has to do with that they are very clear in what they stand for and what they don't stand for and the only way those churches change is through schisms I think that might not be true and then I sort of wonder where we're looking at churches that almost appear secular but not really because because God loves you and I'm not saying my church is particularly like that but well I think the reason why this whole question and this whole conversation is particularly relevant is that we are doing two things we are saying okay in this day and age of a lot of questioning and discussion and conversation and the way that people are often disconnected from each other because of their use of high-tech electronic media and the need for them to come together we the four of us seem to have concluded that the natural place where this should happen is a church but we're also saying at the same time that not every church is capable of welcoming all the randos and all the buckos and all the other people that Paul Van de Klay gathers around himself and then we're also saying that well there's also that thing about church about the essence of church that gets lost when you open your doors to anybody and everybody and you don't want to offend anybody and you don't want to draw any barriers I know that in seminary I learned about the overture from the Ocheyden Iowa class or congregation that once upon a time wanted to have a separate curriculum for Sunday school kids as opposed to the covenant youth because after all they were very different and now we have a two-tier church membership that was the point that was made in the in this particular class two tier church membership one for the people that really get it and one for the ones that don't and so it sounds to me like in your church people go to great lengths to make you feel welcome I mean once upon a time your pastor discouraged you from partaking in communion and now the whole church is informed that it is okay for all people like Job to participate in communion this is a change in church policy possibly precipitated by your presence there god I hope not no but it's not out of the question so then then okay then we're we're really saying okay well what church are we welcoming people into what church what kind of church is Paul going to send all his listeners in his channel all his subscribers what church is he going to send them to the ones that are capable of welcoming them and inviting them in and practice hospitality on their terms or is there a part of the the actual core identity of a church that needs to be reserved for those who believe in the core doctrines of that church personally oh sorry Rod go ahead no that's fine I this is particularly interesting to me because we do have two tiers of membership each year we have a belonging service at the village and you sign up for a year and that's coming up next month and so we're going to have this belonging service and to do that you go up and you sign a covenant you say for the following year this is my community I'm going to submit to some of the what you know to what the leaders say to these basic doctrines etc the resurrection being one of them which is huge right and then your because you do that you are most assuredly deeply part of who we are and you can teach and you can lead and you can do all the things that members do we have a second tier of membership which is and we kind of call it I don't know we've never really come up with a name but that there's you're sort of the cousin right like you have a family reunion and there's the family and then there's these distant cousins that are there and they can come and they can also participate and they can say this is my community I don't I'm not sure that I believe in God I'm not sure I believe the tenants of and I'm not willing to sign this covenant but I feel deeply that this is my community this is where I belong this is this is these are people who love me and who I love and I've come to care about that they think about me and I think about them and so I want them so so you can also just basically make that statement and say this is my community without the without the specific doctrinal stands and so forth but that's but and I appreciate what you said that's limiting right that limits your total participation where much as I consider you a lovely pastor joke you're not you're not gonna you're not going to be preaching at the village anytime soon unless you can preach on the resurrection of of Jesus and say that's a real thing and I believe that right so there's going to be and I think that's just important I think that doesn't change hospitality hospitality is knowing where the other person is and then inviting them as far as they can go into what you do and I think actually those agendas work on both sides of the equation so Paul you you sent a young man my way um recently uh Nathan McCormick and and uh his girlfriend Darla and they came and they're not professing to be anything other than atheists and they're not pretending to be something that they're not and I attended their little philosophy discussion group I unfortunately missed last night due to the ministry stuff but um I intend to be part of that and they invited me in and they were excited that I was there and we conversed and and I asked what's the purpose of this group why are you gathered what what you do what's what's the what's your point why do you gather well they're trying to you know they have Jordan Peterson aficionados and they have they have philosophy studiers and they have different people who are in some ways disaffiliated in other in any way other than this group that meets on Tuesday night well um I I appreciated that that Nathan and Darla came to church on a couple Sunday mornings ago and then returned the following Sunday and are talking about being you know regularly part of our community I love that I love uh I love the conversations but I realized in talking to him that he has he has an agenda too his his agenda is to increase the communication between people of faith and people who um are atheists like he he wants to take away the all the judgment and the yelling and the screaming and and have face-to-face conversation so he comes to us with an agenda I like that I'm not upset about that at all I I find that refreshing and exciting and good and and try to engage that and so he's always looking for common ground so I'll say well at the church we do this and then he says well I do this and and so we're trying to find that those those common spaces which I think is the essence of hospitality and the nature of hospitality and it's the nature of being together is yeah we don't think alike and we don't have the same experience I can't he cannot possibly convince me that God doesn't exist it's not going to ever be possible because I have these deep encounters with God and they're precious to me and hold on so that's my so so he's not going to change me and in some ways he's deeply true to his roots and he doesn't believe and that's and I'm fine with that except there's this one percent of one percent of one percent and maybe chance that maybe Rod has a lot of doubt and sometimes some event will change his mind and he won't be a preacher and a follower of Jesus and and and and he would say the same like and there's that part of me too that we actually change completely the other thing I think that you said was talking about he's you mentioned who do I where's the suffering right where's the struck like if if Jesus loves me and everything is great but where's where do I suffer and I think that's a huge question and and I think that's a huge question for atheist and Christian alike it's what do you do with suffering and what do you do with understanding its purpose from you know a theological point of view but also from just being in this world you know I love I've always said Jesus's greatest promise is in this world you will have trouble like that's that's a powerful promise like he doesn't say you might have trouble or some of you will have trouble or it's going to be difficult for a few of you he says in this world you will have trouble and and and that's that's a truism that I can hang my hat on forever because that's it's experientially true and I look around me and it's true so what do I but then what do I suffer for like what's what's the suffering for what's the purpose and or who do I suffer for and so I um so I think just in talking um with Nathan now with you and others I think there is this place where we can converse about um hospitably and kindly and then also like I have a longing for you and for Nathan and for Darla to know what I what I know right that like there's something deep inside me that knows something like that I've bet my life on and so I want to share that I want to honor that and at the same time I want to hear what you've staked your life on and what you truly deeply believe and I think that for me has been the joy the whole Peterson thing the joy of knowing Paul VanderKlay and watching some of his videos I I told the philosophy group I probably ought to read Peterson's book saying I don't even know what these things are about um and they all kind of laughed at me and then two of them admitted they hadn't read it either so that was impressive um but but I'm not looking um I think there it's more than just looking for to find agreement it's looking to see humanity in each other and to honor each other and to truly love each other which I don't um and create space to question and to think and um and to be loved and to love and when you say it that way with using those words to me it almost seems like enough it almost seems like if we do that then we have fulfilled the law if we do that then we do what then we do what God wants us to do and so um it is a little bit hard for me to to wrap my head around uh the fact that that yeah how do I say that um the the idea of creating what I refer to and I've had a conversation with Paul about that something like an outer court ministry can I can I hook on this yeah um a couple of things because I think this this is what you're talking about John first off I love the synchronicity that you and me are both wearing a red shirt and Paul and Rod are both wearing a blue polo now having said that and we both speak Dutch fluently yes okay go ahead yeah in the in the church magazine there was an opening for a pastoral worker and I figured I've been doing this stuff on this court maybe I can do that in my community and really become more more a member of that community because I've said a couple of things just in this conversation and I want you know I love my church they welcomed me you know they they never asked me like oh do you believe or not really grateful for this place so I figured I got to do something back and maybe I can be a pastoral worker so I approached an elder and he said oh sure and so we kind of explained and we talked and then the head of the church council walked by says is job going to be an elder no but I don't know what expectations these people have of me but he said okay we're going to discuss it tomorrow in church council and I will give you a call the next day and I discussed it with some people in the discord and some people were positive and some people said this is a really bad idea because you can't give people spiritual counseling and I agreed and I said you know church council says no perfectly fine I totally support that so they gave me a call and they said well the pastor was really happily surprised and you know you're gonna have and I was gonna have a conversation with the pastor today anyway so why don't you discuss with him and that we have another meeting with you with the pastor in the elder I'm sure why not so I had a conversation today with my pastor and he said we ended up we ended up not going through with it because I said well I don't believe and I think that might be a bear he says what are you talking about that you don't believe you clearly do because he says if you didn't believe you would have you would have stopped Peterson's first video when he wouldn't have kept watching he wouldn't have talked to some pastor from California multiple times and do all the stuff you're doing fair point I can see that but what we ended up deciding because he says you're reading all these books and you're doing all these things what I would like to do is you are on the edge of of sea and land you're walking on both sides there are more people like you and I'd like to put you out there to meet them and talk to them and that's I think what John was going to the outwards ministry is what I said yeah I want to show what in what's in these walls that people don't know and they think they know what's in these walls but they don't because I didn't know either so there's got to be people like me who who haven't gone since they were a kid or they just never went and they might be looking for something that's in church and they don't know so I'm not entirely sure how this is going to take form but I said how about I do this I'm going to make YouTube interviews with church members just hey who are you what's your life been like why did you come to church what what are you struggling with what are you aiming for what's on the top of your hierarchy sometimes with the pastor maybe you know if the pastor is an extra guest and basically I'm being a stealing lying pastor because I'm taking Paul's idea and I figure maybe that could work then we could because what also irritated the pastors that our church website's kind of static we can put that on there maybe do a podcast show what we're doing that we're very much an alive church and through that reach out to people and another thing he wanted me to be a co-host for was a sort of a reading group or a discussion group on what is there what is more about meaning making and about which could hook very well into the meaning crisis and we could perfectly well open it up for non-church members and we should probably open it up for non-church members so John I mean could that be something like like what you what you were thinking of you are muted John you need to unmute yourself no very much so sorry about that very much so because um well I too met with my pastor today and we had that same very same conversation as to what do we do for people who who are not 100% on board with every inch of doctrine that we profess and the package in our church is rather comprehensive you know it includes christian education and blah blah blah blah and you know all the all the hoops that people have to jump through in order to be fully vested in this church there are plenty of people that are not there they some of them come because if they don't come to church their wives are going to cut them off and so hey this is a high risk situation I better go to church so the Rod just woke up sadly I hear that story you know but but but and and and then I also know the same population that you just spoke of the people outside that are interested in the crisis of meaning and that want to compare notes with other people about that so there's this there's this there's this huge gray area of the of the the area between the nuns and duns on the one hand and committed Christians on the other there is a spectrum there and right in the middle there is a whole bunch of people that that don't fully belong but they're not quite ready to walk away from it all either so then what do we do for them on their terms that the the phrase on their terms is hugely important for me because um it's it seems so typical of most churches that we do our programming and we do our um our preaching and teaching on our terms on the terms of the church as dictated by seminary perhaps or by our core curriculum or our doctrinal convictions we rarely engage with people on their terms and and I think there's something to be said for that and to provide a space where that is possible um that's kind of where my head is at with all this and I'm I I was amazingly surprised that that my pastor this morning over lunch seemed a lot more um um receptive to that idea than I had expected I I think that he realizes that there is a a hard to reach audience out there that are not going to come jumping in and and and sign up on the dotted line and become covenant partners for the year and uh no they they they're curious they may want to see what this is all about they they come with loads of questions and and their own specific need for community that their own specific need to belong somewhere so yeah and go I I think it's kind of interesting like there is no distinction in reality between the people who sign the covenant at the village and those who don't right as far as how they interact how they have conversations what groups they are part of but I bet it affects your preaching but there but but there is something about leadership and there is something about taking a lead role and and and incorporating you know we have a sign-up sheet that we pass around every week and it's because everything is done by volunteers so our kids ministries and all this kind of stuff so there are people who sign up to do to go meet with the kids or work in the nursery well I don't know that you have to have signed a covenant to to go rock a baby in the nursery like if that's what I wanted to go rock the baby's nursery right right so enjoy yourself and and encourage us and help us and because heaven knows there's enough work to do and there's plenty of people to to engage I think but I do go back to I think to your um like what's the essence because if the essence of like the there's an essence of church and and if we walk away from that then we're just a nice we really are truly a great social club where we talk about morals and and and wonderful things like that and and how to be together and be friendly and and know that somewhere god loves us but it's there is I don't know there is a dividing wall and I and I don't know where I try not to draw it because it's not my job um I just who did god put in front of me well that's the person I'm supposed to love who who am I meeting with today well that's the person I'm supposed to love um who am I talking to now that's the person I'm supposed to love and care about I um so I don't I don't get too hung up on you know oh now you know that said we do have a members meeting and we're gonna have it this this Saturday called the drumming circle and we and everybody comes but there are people who won't who haven't signed our covenant who will come to the drumming circle because it's just another gathering of of the church as far as they're concerned but at the church we're going to talk about our purpose our reason for being our values why we do what we do um and then people can say uh you know I'm 80% on board with that or 60% on board or hey I'm just starting out I'm 10% on board or I'm not I don't I just wondered into the wrong building sorry um we don't know why they're there but I there is something I don't know deeply um it's fascinating to me how God brings people into our community it's the same fascinating way that he brings us into relationship with each other like job there is no way on God's greener that I could ever possibly be sitting around for two hours on a or an hour and a half or however long this is going to be on a on a Wednesday afternoon having a conversation with having a conversation with someone I've never met right and but yet somehow through this strange thing of 47 billion years ago Paul and I sitting in Grand Rapids is you know Vinny's trying to close down a 24 open 24 7 uh restaurant having deep conversations about life and somehow that changed and created this friendship between a guy who's in Sacramento and a guy who's in Tucson and then out of that grows this whole thing and then we do we go a year or two without talking and then we have these deep intimate conversations so there is this connection and then somehow that leads to my conversations with you which is so delightful and so fun and yet um what comes of this right like is there deeper understanding deeper humanity uh deeper relationship peace in the world uh more joy what comes like what's the purpose so I got I want to shift gears here and let's go back to our um we have a line here and it's the line that brought this conversation together and I'm gonna we put Job on the hot seat for a little bit so I'm gonna put Job in the uh in the question asker seat and he can he can badger any of the three of us if he wants to uh because Job says why what I'm personally very interested in gentlemen is how each of you have been experiencing this movement over the last two years what have you found where do you think it's going what role should you play what role might the church play I think we've um so Job I'm gonna put that back in you and give you the give you the pointer and uh go ahead and have at us well the first one definitely is how have you experienced it and I'm very curious whether that's very different between the three of you I think it's different for Rod hasn't been sort of in the mix of it the way that that uh John and I have Rod kind of got roped in recently with uh with this young couple but he's been following along and part of what I've loved about this it has been I for years I have you know listened to Rod's stories of the village and and seen what that church has been able to do in terms of gathering people from a huge diversity of stories and bringing healing and he just recently told me when I was talking to him it used to be that he had all there were all sorts of young women who were coming into the church needing healing from things in their past and so on and so forth and now he seems to have a whole stream of young men and so I think it's I think it's just been fascinating how one of the things that I've been appreciating as we've sort of you know we have the Jordan Peterson moment and that seems to have been receding a bit and now at least in my conversations this meeting crisis seems to be a better framework within which to understand Jordan Peterson and understand other things in our culture so it's been interesting for me to see how this connects with other things outside of necessarily those interested and impacted by that Jordan Peterson moment that we've had for the last two years but but yeah so and and Vendankh of course got in early because he's the schemer and he had a plan for my life and and John will not be quiet until he achieves his purposes somewhat like the Lord so there we go yeah and he sits back there quietly well the one thing that I do want to observe about Rod is that I went to the conference about how to be the village church and it was totally clear to me that if there is to be a church that with with eyes wide open and with all the honesty and authenticity that you can muster up to think through the issue of two-tier membership I think you guys are it I am so impressed with the massive amount of engagement of so many people and yet the clarity with which you uphold the fact that hey you're not in until you're in and and and that that I am pretty sure well actually not pretty sure I'm totally sure I've heard you guys do it you and Eric both you you preach to both categories of people when I said earlier about leadership I wasn't talking about whether those second tier people would be in leadership no you you the leadership of the village church you always keep your audience in mind when what and you recognize that that there are people there that are 100% in and then there are other people there that are asking questions and that are not so sure and that are on the outside and they're kind of looking in and I think that that is a dynamic all by itself to be able to juggle that act to to and then to find the rituals that encourage people to get a taste of of what it is like to be fully in what what would it be like for me to be fully in you guys have amazing ways of sharing the table even if you're not sharing the communion table you know we we share the table and you can use it as an as an entry point as an illustration this is what it means to be with Jesus he shares his table with all the rest of us and then you have all kinds of symbolic stuff that you can you know work with at that time I also want to jump in away from Job's question a little bit and but back to what you were saying Rod about the essence of the thing I wonder how much we actually allow Jesus earthly ministry to inform our understanding of the essence of the thing who who did he hang around with and what categories of people did Jesus employ in his earthly ministry and I understand that that in the final analysis it is about the about sacrifice and about the redemptive work of Christ I understand that that those are all important mysteries for us to tiptoe around but one of the things that we can be more clear about is that when Jesus decides he's going to have dinner with whomever he wants to have dinner with there is a there's a significant model there there is something to be emulated there is there and I I just think that you guys at your church do that really well but the size of your church and the location of your church and the leadership of your church also lend themselves to that so then the next question is okay how can another church buy into that model of how to how to figure out how to have a holy of holies and then the holies and then an outer court ministry and what does that look like you know what what what would how would we need to modify our policies and procedures in order to really create a welcoming space for people who are not 100% in and and and and and and and I think that I think that your question about the purpose of it all is legitimate but at the same time I think that there is also such a thing as setting a table and welcoming people to come and eat there is something sufficient about that I have food I set it on the table you may come and sit down and that's good enough and and I think that there there is and and I think that there is an element of of that that I really want the church to be able to validate and and not everyone is capable of validating that because there are too many guys that come out of seminary who who haven't had a picture of being welcomed into a community for its own sake now I'm getting a little bit closer to my little my my own personal journey of how to get how to get connected to a church and I don't really want to use that time here that's probably not the right place for it but but there is there is something mysterious about joining a community where people live life face to face in including all the suffering and the hard questions that come along with it and and and not necessarily have to have the ultimate destiny and the ultimate purposes in the forefront at all times I'm not sure I'm saying it right but what do you hear me say and for job job for to answer your question from my perspective I'm not deep into this movement I I'm deep into meeting with young men and young women who who I mean I got a church full of 20 and 30 year olds so there's a ton of conversation like what you're talking about why I'm why why did I get involved or what what draws me it's all you know like Paul and I are friends it's relationship it's always relationship right I Paul's doing something cool so he says hey Rod you should be a part of this and so I'm going oh okay that yeah Paul said I should be a part of this I'll I'll listen to him and then he says you should start a meetup group and I'm thinking heck no and John you said the same thing and I was like I I don't want to start a stupid meetup group I don't know how to do that kind of junk I have no interest in that I'm busy enough as it is I have enough coremented souls in my life that I don't need to add more of them and so there's this whole sense of why would I do that but it's the same way you know if if um if Paul says hey I bought a new a man in refrigerator and you ought to see that manual that came with that I've read it from cover to cover it's great Rod you should read it well then I'd read it because Paul said I should and I like Paul and we're in relationship and he's always steered me right and given me you know given me good advice however some stranger says to me hey you should read Jordan Peterson's 12 rules saying I go well I don't care who are you and um so I think there is that intimacy the the relationship the intimate relationship that calls us to be together and so so yeah now now that forms and then around that you know people are gathered and so I don't just become friends with Paul I become friends with Paul's friends and he with mine and he shows up at the village and I and you came to our conference and um and and now so I think that's how it works and so I'm on a very fun end of it and in some ways not I don't think I'm on the front end of it philosophically I'm at the front end of it with the particular phrasings and words that are going around now and the you know this whole movement on discord and the whole movement on uh with with Jordan Peterson and as well I'm on the front end of that but in some ways it's a new expression of a same old thing right which is I think Paul's on Mars Hill and he's reasoning with the philosophers and he's quoting poetry and he's and then some believe and some walk away and some think he's crazy and uh it hasn't changed it's the vernacular changes and in some ways there's surges and I think Paul's right there's a surge of young men that are coming to the village seeking relationships seeking intimacy um trying to make sense out of life and part of that's North American culture perhaps I don't know but there's some cultural things around that I was just at a meeting of about 25 pastors and they were talking about what are the what's the cultural realities of Tucson Arizona depends on where you live and who you're next to and uh it's amorphous I think we try to define it and we lose it um because in the end it's just I gotta love the person in front of me I gotta talk to the person in front of me I got a next door neighbor I've got people asking me questions about God blah blah blah so so that answers job's question I hope are we wearing you out job are you are you getting sleepy up there and uh no I'm good I'm trying to work through the problem uh Rod you said that it's a cycle so there's surges uh yeah cycle and surges are different cycle is predictable surge just hold it is atheists coming back a known surge a non-surge a known known okay no yeah um I in the last five years have had more con conversations with atheists than I've probably had in 30 40 years before that so yeah there's there's something interesting there's there's a searching going on in broader culture I think as we you know people are looking to get out of I don't know there's a uh culture doesn't work life doesn't work and when life doesn't work what makes it work and oh maybe those people over there know and maybe they're so there's a searching I think that's going on that's that's that's a surge in history I don't know that it's a surge in um and maybe a small surge in recent history particularly I never know like is this a broader worldwide thing or is this just a North American thing or is this just a Tucson thing or is this just a people I happen to hang out with thing but but I really have had more conversations with about atheists people who say I do not believe in God what the heck are you doing why do you believe in that um how can you believe in that and well but it seems to me that yeah it seems to me that another another perspective on that would be that we are also living in a day and age when it's become a whole lot more socially acceptable to identify yourself as an atheist so that in in in times past you may have had lots of conversations with atheists without knowing it because they were all outstanding members of your church and they showed up and paid and paid into the budget and and and meanwhile they were really getting ready to walk away from it all um I'm not saying that that actually was true in your particular church but I am pretty sure that all the nuns and dons that we now identify as such you you can't be a done without having once been a an insider you can't be a nun without having it kind of deflected against what you were in the past which was identified as a Christian believer or at least a member of a Christian church or at least part of a Christian country and so in in some fashion right now because it has become more socially acceptable to identify yourself as an atheist or a non-believer or an agnostic that opens up a whole world of conversations at any level but including with pastors and I um the other thing is as I think even in this conversation we tend to think of of church as that building that we go to on certain days of the week for certain activities which is actually the antithesis of what I think church is. Church is a couple of us gathered in living room talking praying thinking like church is you know Jesus says wherever two or three are gathered right there I am in the midst of them there's this whole sense of church is is in the intimate relationship it's and so I think um I think as American males certainly um and as the young men there's a social isolation there's a there's a low level depression if not outright depression there's um I got it and I did the I mean part of my journey is I was chief financial officer of this big auto parts corporation I was an elder in the church I was a president on the school board I was you know I had my degree in business administration and was ready to run the world and make a lot of the money and I didn't find it fulfilling it wasn't what I got everything I wanted and it wasn't what I wanted and I think so often I hear that story repeated and you know so my solution was to go deep into depression spend a couple years there um pile a lot of stuff on my poor wife um and family um cause a lot of hurt um which is hard um to remember that I did all that but came out on the other side with this grand search for meaning like um and and even in talking with um with Nathan and Darla talking to Nathan the other day you know he says this group is searching for a big t truth well aren't we all you know like that's what's a big t truth and in some ways in really deep ways I found big t truth but in some other ways we're all still searching and looking and we're looking for meaning and we're looking for relationship and we're looking for that which is gives me purpose why should I get up in the morning why should I go out the door and when you're in depression dark depression you it's it's the most narcissistic thing in the world right it's it's all about you and it's all about who you are and it's all about your longings and your desires and you're angry with the world and you're mad at stuff but that's what happens you know God says and I mean when we revolt against God in the garden um we become our own gods you will be like God well that was the longing well now when you're your own god and life doesn't work out who the hell are you going to blame like you can't blame you can't you don't want to blame yourself but that's but you're your own god you make your own rules you do it your way so then I think what comes out of that and that's why I often think there's a lot there are a lot of people who profess to be atheists who I think are just really really pissed off for god they're just really angry I don't know that they don't believe I think they actually believe they're just mad because they couldn't have it their way and so I think there there's that kind of stuff going on in all this movement and I think that that's helpful to me because in some ways I think that's my journey as well so to come up on the other side to find joy and pleasure in life and in god matters to me and then like I said before I want that for my friends and I want that for people in relationship okay any other picking you want to do job picking or questioning probing I just I don't I don't even know we have a real solution to this this thing like we seem to have we seem to have found this this positive thing this potential where where can we aim it and and I don't know that we've aimed anything to begin with we sort of play around with it and and it seems to stick here and there like with the discord server but again I'm going in circles with that I think it's there was this recent article in the Atlantic about the secular churches some of the assemblies that sort of stuff the problems they had that they tried to have the secular church secular church poets reminded me of what you've said about the Canadian lady I think who lost her faith or read of osprey the atheist Canadian pastor Canadian pastor yeah yeah it reminded me of that and like recently so recently I was at a conference at a bar and there was a person there we had we had a conversation and they're very much on on the woke left and they said Joe we're assholes we're all assholes and I'm in my usual I can't help making jokes and say I'm a Calvinist I get it I thought you were a Lutheran you were a little while ago you were talking about Lutheran no but later he asks I was like no I wasn't being serious but you know I do go to a church and so and he didn't know that so then he asked me explain like well what does that mean and it's not really very developed for me yet but we had a conversation later at a bar that was just about very emotional things and suffering and crying and and I noticed I just I I give him lots of like I listen to him and then I say some things and notice all I'm doing is is is talking religious to him and he's all like yeah it's so useful these things you're saying and I'm thinking you're the last person who'd sit next to me in the church because to you churches are not what what and like how how how do I even because as soon as I say well you know if you if you think this sort of stuff is helpful you don't like coming with church church with me they're like oh no no no no I'm like yeah because two years ago I would have said the same to me so I didn't I don't know how to solve this you're pastors what am I supposed to do so where do you want to aim it where do you want to take it what what I know I need I need people to find out that these churches are not what they think they are and that we are as humans fundamentally religious creatures and that that religion can be used as a tool the way I use it now you three might not agree with that but that's the only way I can currently approach it that might change I can't guarantee that but I I can help other people the way I was able to help myself and the way other people help me then I'm happy because I've I have an existence I didn't even know what's possible two years ago and and and it's gonna sound stupid but last night we were having firefighter training we're done we're all cleaning up we're dragging all the hoses out just chatting and laughing and I'm thinking this is it and and I used to be sort of that would sort of be happening to me like I was still doing the thing cleaning up the hoses but now it's more like you're right there with the other doing the needing the thing that needs to get done the meaningful thing and and then I think I almost see it and that sounds dumb but I think that's the closest I can get see if I can get others to see that sorry Paul then keep going that that's where I was going to end with that I think if I can give that to to the people who I see who suffer I just don't know how to how to package it up nicely I mean it's nice it's nice to be a fisher of mammoth you got to have the right bait well and I actually think well if you listen to my mark sermons a little plug there from my own sermons if you listen to my mark sermons I mean the the greek is a little you got to be these are catchers in chaos of people and you know so the verveki stuff so a lot of people out you know of course people kind of gathered around me because of peterson but then you know straw and says oh go listen to that verveki guy and verveki so he's given me some new language and some new tools and so he talks about four different ways of knowing so there's there's participatory knowing there's perspectival knowing there's procedural knowing and there's propositional knowing part of what in a sense our earlier conversation in here revolved around was the was the propositional knowing because these propositional elements um very much are a standard part of church profession and the christian reform church now all of us in a sense what all have all of us together is rod's church isn't technically christian reform but rod is ordained in the christian reform church jove you're you're from the mother church and there and and john and i are part of the christian reform church but the christian reform church along with many other churches have this propositional knowing as sort of the these are the boundary markers these are sort of the stakes in the ground that give the messiness of life certain places certain benchmarks to locate ourselves by and that's an important system and and if we think about that as say benchmarks or boundary markers it's good to kind of know where you're standing but if you're having a conversation with a group of people and then there's kind of a poll over here and there's a poll over there where sometimes you're in my yard and sometimes i'm in your yard and we're going on there's also participatory and perspectival and procedural knowing and i think part of what we've been talking about in this conversation and what you just described jove is maybe you don't have all four ways of knowing this yet but they don't all come in see churches like to have them come in order basically because of the boundary markers because churches because their institutions are sort of like bean counters where we're going to put all these people in these beans and so in the village you have the the real members who only sign up for a year and you have the cousins now now cousins are different than brothers and sisters and they're different in certain ways and there are moments in which those differences are really important but there are other there are many ways in which cousins are sort of like siblings and so life is sort of that way and all those ways of knowing are mixed up now churches would love it if people kind of went through in order but the truth is that we don't and i think that's part of what your pastor job is kind of hung up on he's looking at you and saying hey job's job's just ticking away at these knowing things but proposition you know propositional is a little late and you know doctors have this with kids well you know rodney's growing up gangbusters look at how big this kid is but he can't seem to pay any attention in class and then you know they put eyeglasses on him and bang you can see and you know this is the way life is in this crazy broken fallen world also a glorious world so i you know i there's there's lots of cool stuff going on and i'm just happy to be a part of it and i'm for me it's just enormously gratifying and humbling to to to have a role in it so but i think those four ways of knowing are really helpful to try to sort out okay well we got stuff going on here and okay but paul if i may of course you may john you wouldn't stop you if i said it i can't exactly i'm going to keep right on talking so so so we are now observing that that while job is really good at knowing let's say three quarters of your knowing types and is somewhat deficient from a certain perspective in in the propositional uh knowing of certain doctrines and we are making it sound as though he is the deficient one and he is the one that should catch up and he is the one that should conform to our expectations but my point is that i wonder and you said it very succinctly that we as a christian form denomination put a lot of eggs in our identity of knowing basket and so propositionally and so and so i wonder if if we have a kind of responsibility and i and i and and i'm still kind of hammering away at what kind of church was able to embrace job and how is rod's church unique in that it embraces a lot of non-propositionally conforming people i think that the burden is to some degree on the churches also to to maybe um reduce their emphasis on propositional knowing to make the truths a little bit more accessible to the uninitiated and and i say that to to create a space and a platform where where perhaps the the the the the propositional truths important and real though they are are not front and center as the markers of our sense of belonging to this community is that a legitimate way to talk about it for now i well i think it's noteworthy that job himself you know when you express the fact which i agree is quite likely that they're probably they're in their local church they're probably tinkering with the um their boundary markers because of job because what job has done is added some new dynamics into their community now i would i would say that most churches and most christians believe that it is finally god alone who draws the lines and that is that is really important to say and there are plenty of places in scripture where it's clear that the bible itself has an understanding that lines are imperfectly seen and known here below one of the great places you know one of my best illustrations for for jordan peterson is the unauthorized exorcist where in the gospel of mark there's some guy running around casting out demons in jesus names and jesus name and jesus disciples decide they should maybe enforce some intellectual property and so they go ask jesus if they should make him stop which would be a fun thing to kind of watch we're going to beat you up if you stop you know unless you stop casting out demons in jesus name you know it's going to be bad for you um and jesus says leave them alone now what's with that um and there's lots of ways in scripture and so most churches have a certain amount of formality in which they say well these are some posts but in practice the churches are usually quite flexible and i've seen this in many many situations and this is why i think in mature wise organizations they are really a little hesitant about you have to understand what rules are and what exceptions are and you need to be able to navigate that world and because you have both rules and exceptions you understand that rules are rules but there are exceptions and so that's usually best figured out on the local level but again all of those things have to sort of come up nationally and and into the broader assemblies and so we work those things out as we go but i think it's helpful to recognize you know some of these some of these this new language in terms of there's more ways of knowing which we've always known it's been built into our languages for years than this and so we as the local level work through these things i think it is finally important that these these propositional truths over long periods of time matter and and another thing that i've learned in the last couple of years because i've done a lot of learning in the last couple of years is that many of the things that we deal with are not necessarily so important in the time frames that are important to us we want something in the next two three four days months years but many of these things probably have importance in terms of centuries and because we don't live lives experientially self in terms of our narrative over centuries we don't appreciate that framework but if you look at the church over thousands of years over thousands of places well you can appreciate that perspective so we navigate here below and it's it's not unlike if let's say you're hiking in the mountains well on the map you see there's this wiggly line it goes here and your app will tell you the elevation and all of that but when you're actually walking it there's roots and rocks and turns and all these particularities and so what we do actually is we navigate all of that complexity in the procedural often in the perspectival and that's in fact what we're doing but still having to talk about the propositional because it's a very important and useful aspect to the entire thing love it yeah i'll incorporate that in my banner article good job well uh i was gonna reflect on how i just noticed like after this church i'm really happy there what do i do i start like this and this and that i don't like that that's i should i should keep my damn hands to myself but no you shouldn't because you are such an important person for that church and you don't appreciate it but the other 799 people that have been in that place for years who haven't seen a lot of people like you darken their door they know how important you are because you are learning for them um you are and that's why your pastor who is no dummy i've picked that up from listening to just watching how he's navigated your interesting situation he's using as i call in my channel the spirit of finesse he is feeling his way forward so you're guided by all of the signposts and markers but you do have to feel your way forward rod's church is one enormous experiment in an improvisation experiment in an improvisation we make it up every day as we go no doubt yeah rodney was a failed church planter who bumped into eric and and the christian reformed church had enough money to say i rod just do something worthwhile and boom here's this church that comes out of it and there's annoying aspects is it how's its relationship to the christian reformed church and all of these difficult things but it's beautiful and and there's amazing ministry and people listening to us would probably think that village church that must be a mega church in tucson not quite what is it if you're in tucson two weeks two weeks ago i counted how many people were in both services there was a 180 people which was really cool then we had a labor day weekend and the entire church would camp and they were like 20 or maybe 40 people in the morning service at 25 at night you know it's like oh wow that's just like that's kind of funny i appreciate that too and then i the rest of the story is um so my friend andy littleton and uh and nick lang my they're planting another church in tucson called mission church and they decide they want to become part of the christian reformed church sort of at least they knew they want to get ordained in it they want and they're trying to figure it out right like how do we become part of this so so andy says i'm going to become a commission pastor just like rod and just the other day he's going to get examined in two weeks uh just the other day um the guy that's overseeing andy decourt who's overseeing kind of what he has to do um submitted all the documents that he's had to fill out from all the books it's it's it's a half inch thick right it's he was saying well it's only it's it's just all this paper that has to be you know because you've got to make sure your eyes are dotted and your t's are crossed and he's done everything and he's read this learning plan this is a guy who started five years ago with nothing and now they have a building with 100 people in it every sunday we're being all from scratch just because we've been walking together i've seen i've got to see this whole thing close up but we still have all these standards and all these expectations and requirements of the real people the the pastors the and and joe what i love about you is your you bring the light to people like you walk into the village and they challenge everything we believe and they they don't believe what we believe and they don't think the way we think and they don't have their culture is completely different and we're just all stumbling around going like i used to say every every time like the village changes every person's life who walks into it and the truth is and that's a truth that is absolutely true walks into things our lives like changes our culture we change their culture they change our culture it's mutual and and if you don't understand that then you're going to miss out on all the beauty of what of what happens in a church and so yes you and why can't i be a member why can't i take communion why shouldn't i do this those are fabulous questions because it makes us wrestle with stuff we don't have to wrestle with it we're all on just singing the same tune and and you only get that from people who try to get in poor andy and he's trying to get in and he's like holy cow there's a lot of requirements here and then do i want to jump through all these hoops just so i can say i want to be part of this family this group this understanding of what the church is maybe but even on a on even on a on a much smaller scale for the four of us to have that schmuck from holland refer to himself as a pastor and we all know what he stands for right we all know what he believes and doesn't believe and you know what happens he makes job you make each one of us rethink our own roles as pastors because we are now all of a thing all of a sudden at least i am thinking hey so this is why people refer to job as a pastor what is it that they see that makes them think that he is a pastor it's just and what no no no no that may well be that may well be but this has this has gone way past the joke stage way past the joke stage that's a guy who writes a lot of uh humor and and does a lot of that we tell the truth in humor we and so they're joking they ain't joking buddy right and and and i i just speak for myself just the fact that you have a way of articulating what you do and how you reach out to other people around you forces me to rethink how i fulfill my own role as a pastor and how i interact with the people around me and i think we all do that and i think that that that is kind of the nature of the beast and and i appreciate what you bring to the table a lot i think i put my hand a little while i'm quoting you i put my hand on his shoulder and we wept and cried and yeah right exactly yeah if that is the pastor i'd like to know what the heck it's procedural knowledge yeah you know how it's done i mean more that i don't need i i now i'm concerned that my church is changing their rules because i happen to wander in in there but i don't want them i hope they don't because it's not their problem i'm figuring things out i i i mean if if i look at my hierarchy what i want is to be knee deep in that church at work trying to make sure more people find out about it at work trying to make sure more people find out about it and and he says i'm not a pastor evangelism i'm screwed yeah yeah well if you are we all are so fucked no but honestly it's it is so don't think i don't see the irony here when i when i was younger i was like i will see the day that religion is gone and now i'm like these buildings are essential and we need more people in there so yeah i see that but i can't help myself if this is what i must do then i'll do it and and then maybe i'll have peace with myself but i i need i need that church to to so i'll just lie to myself and say they're not changing for me they're just doing their own thing cool fine but just keep saying that job yeah and and and whatever i believe or don't believe well i don't know i'll figure it out but in the meantime i need to make sure that we keep this momentum going that's how this whole thing started see see at first where you said this email like yeah we need to have a conversation with three other pastors like oh no they want me to stop pretending i'm a pastor but uh no it's not like that no we want us we want you to stop saying you're not a pastor yeah i don't know that needs at least university education also that's not going to work out at least in this country where we take this stuff seriously this is not the u.s we're over in the u.s lucy evangelical kinds oh wow well this was a fun conversation this took some interesting turns how should we wrap this thing up i don't know okay explain the resurrection to me so i can properly internalize it you we got 50 minutes you still haven't figured out how people learn you it's okay there's propositional there's perspectival there's participatory and i would say the discord i haven't been watching your videos hey jope are you experiencing some kind of new life right now yeah i'd be lying if i said i wasn't right right right yeah i was at that it's not the same thing that's what my pastor said and i don't agree so it's interesting because i asked him about this and he said well the resurrection is look at jesus as the ideal state of human existence jesus was the perfect human that's how humans should be and that if we follow him that is what gets reborn continuously and if i'm perfectly honest with myself that reminded me of how certain people would explain reincarnation in western buddhism like well us constantly working on ourselves that's how we re-incarnate from a fallen state to a enlightened state it's all the same stuff so uh go ahead paul so i was listening to now rod won't know who these people are i was listening to esther and trip talk to adam and they got into a they got into an argument about the resurrection and in my opinion uh esther and trip took it in a totally wrong way if you read c.s lewis's i think it's in miracles if you ask c.s lewis what is the resurrection he'll say everyone's fighting about those first few moments that happened on easter sunday morning now this isn't to deny what happens in those first few moments but jesus resurrection is qualitatively different from jesus raising gyrus's daughter or the young man who he met going out of town and all of these things because the resurrection is the beginning of new life now is it archetypal yes is it symbolic yes now you you can probably believe it's archetypal and probably believe it's symbolic you're a little you know skeptical about the historical thing i think your issues aren't so much with um i think your issues are probably more philosophical than anything else but you're already beginning to embody the archetypal and the symbolic the historical will come i think but it's it's it's because and what if there's one thing that i've not if there's one thing there's so many things that i've learned but one of the things is that through the whole jordan peterson thing i am more convinced than ever of the historicity of the resurrection because not because i can somehow imagine 2000 years ago what happened outside of a tomb but because just like i can believe that there was a big water accident in southern california that created the sultan sea because i can see the sultan sea now i wasn't there to see the water accident where all kinds of water was diverted and it made some crazy inland sea i see the sea and and that's n.t wright's argument for the historicity of the resurrection do you want to believe in the resurrection look at the church and so i i think you know i you're just a you're just a late bloomer on the propositional stuff but all of that is so easy to believe because of the history of the west for the last thousand years so i'm not concerned it'll come the day is young homeless guy's at my door you guys keep talking i gotta deal with him a second wow i love it yeah that was a good attempt it's like he's done it before we uh we have a guy that hangs around our church too it's really fun to like interact with him and then it's yeah food today and and then and now he just walks in like he owns the place right it's you know goes over the refrigerator get some food walk fast so see you later and watch that so that is a fun i have a homeless guy in one of my jbp meetup groups and uh he's a good guy to know also what i love about andy's church here in tucson is they don't call them homeless people they call them houseless people because here because here you have a home i think that was like the coolest thing that's one to steal isn't that like here here are homeless people not homeless people here are houseless people um they don't have a place to live but they have a home and i just yeah i makes me weep every time i hear it i just ah yes that's what i long for because most of us are kind of creeped out and like okay another one another needy person but yeah well if if if there is to be any kind of a specific conclusion to this conversation at all i mean there there is i hope that i hope that you have a little bit of a picture uh job of how the rest of us uh have experienced this phenomenon and and where it takes us for me it has very much pushed me back to the local congregation and the fact that i am able to have those kinds of conversations right now with the leadership of crosspoint church is really encouraging and i'm very very grateful for that but we all need to be giving each other language about how to do that and we need to be um i think that we need to be somewhat supporting one another in in very real ways which i know we do and so i'm not concerned about it but but there is there is a i think there's just something really cool about knowing that there's four guys thinking about how their church life and their churches can can can put them on a path of connecting with with uh with a whole world out there that that our church membership is still somewhat isolated from and to build that bridge and to make that connection i think is kind of a worthwhile endeavor so i'm glad to be part of it and joe i greatly appreciate your endeavor to show the goodness of the church to show the meaning of the church the the joy of being part of i think that's huge right um because i think to take away the animosity to take away the distancing all the stuff that we do to create distance um and to create and to say no this is this is actually a safe space it's a good space and it's not generally it's not all completely true as most truths aren't so it's not comprehensive that you can't just walk into any church and be because there's the west borough baptists and all that kind of stuff as well um but there's but in general i think um i appreciate your endeavor to create um uh to to lessen the distance between uh those who are atheist and those who are part of part of a church i don't think i'd be able to not do it but i appreciate it yep yeah yeah yeah it's what makes you a pastor man it's it's weird but it's good all right yeah i'm not saying it's meant i'm gonna stop the recording then we can have a little after show and um thank you all for watching and uh as if i have to tell people to leave a comment they just love commenting there won't be comments for this one they'll they'll i'll show like you know if i turned off comments for this video can you imagine the outrage nothing controversial in here at all oh gosh you mean you are gonna post it paul oh yeah i'm gonna post it i would i definitely gonna post this one yeah one of these one of these days i know i yeah anyone shut one now thanks for watching