https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=c00ZSxhHw-A

 here. So hello and welcome back to Climbing on Mount Sophia. I'm excited today to be joined by one of the pillars of this little corner, Paul VanderKlay. This conversation, this background, I've come into this little corner by means of Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Pagio, and then John Vervecky has become one of the fundamental influences in my life in a lot of ways. And so I hadn't engaged your work too much until more recently actually as a function of starting this channel. Some people connected with me through the John Vervecky conversations that I've had and it's been really lovely. But kind of because of that, I've started to watch some of your videos and really enjoyed obviously just getting to know you kind of through this virtual means. And then we had an exchange on Twitter or a little bit of an exchange by means of some other folks in the corner about this whole notion of what do we mean by the word Christianity? And so that's kind of the direction I want to head. And I'll lay a little bit of background so you kind of understand my question. But welcome to Climbing on Mount Sophia and thank you so much for coming. That's good to be here. So I guess I'll just jump right into it. The, because probably everyone who watches my channel watches and they know who you are. So I've been having this struggle and there's two different aspects of this question. One is like what does it mean to call yourself a Christian in kind of an existential sense? Like there's that whole question and I'm interested in getting into that. But first I'd like to ask a little bit of a different question which is since engaging with John's work it's become really important to me not to equivocate the words I'm using. And for me that really lays itself out in terms of when I am trying to articulate something and even just understand my own experience of the world, if I use the same word to mean the same thing every time it's stable for me. And then that gets even more significant in conversation with others. And so I'm running up over and over again against this term Christian and Christianity. And it strikes me as it's so terrifically equivocated that I've kind of stopped using it but it's still like you're forced to use it. And so I'm trying to grapple with like how do I use this term in this language to refer to this like behemoth of a thing. But anyway so there that's my issue. I didn't hear a question. I see reality, I see the problem. And to note, to see the problem says a lot of good things about you because in some ways for Christians Christianity is reality. Like Christ is reality. You know the apostle Paul in the New Testament, so Jesus you have kingdom of heaven, kingdom of God in the synoptics, you have eternal life in John, and then you have in Christ in a lot of the Paulian literature. And so you're quite right when you know and this is where some of the work of Tom Holland is helpful because you know his backstory he was a, you know left the church at six years old or something and just got a university degree, was interested in history, wanted to be a great writer, started writing vampire novels. That didn't really do it. So then he wrote Rubicon which is you know he was he loved dinosaurs, he loved the classical world, and the more he studied the classical world the more he began to feel the distance between the present world and the classical world. And then he wrote this book on Islam and Islam's, basically Islam's creation story of Islam itself. And there's a lot of historical issues with that. I mean people think there are issues with the origin story of Christianity, just compare with Islam. It's not even close. And so then he starts going on the road promoting his book and really annoyed a lot of Muslims. And they, one guy finally said to him, you know, why don't you study your own religion? He's like, well I don't have a religion. And then he writes this book and he begins to realize that the western world and to a degree any place that's been impacted by secularity is deeply, deeply formed by Christianity. And even the, even those pushing back against it, I mean this is what Peterson was pointing to when he, you know, the atheist, he would say the atheist you're not really an atheist and of course they'd get all offended. The sanct of Christianity. Exactly. Atheism is sort of the secret second sister to the church. And so what does that mean in terms of this word Christian? Who is a Christian? And especially because you have all of, so I'm going to talk to John and Jordan B. Cooper this week. And I was listening to Jordan B. Cooper's critique of John again and just thinking about how these issues are so difficult to untie and unpack. And you know, John with his interest in pursuit of neoplatonism, this stuff has been together for so long. I mean, Augustine, you know, was into, was Manichean for a while then deeply neoplatonic. I was talking to Al Walters once on this listserv and he was talking about, you know, what of his interest in Augustine is, is neoplatonism. And you know, John making the observation of the deep connections between Aquinas and Platonism. And some people have said, you know, Christianity is Platonism for the masses. So there's no getting around Christianity almost anywhere in the world, even places that want to be ostensibly secular and anti-Christian. And so yeah, the term is, is tremendously fraught, which, and then just in, in common use, well, are you a Christian? Well, what do you mean by that? As someone who lives in Saudi Arabia, everyone in America is Christian, except for maybe a few Muslims and Jews, but everyone else, all the atheists are Christian and they've got a point. So what then does it mean to, in American terms, to be a Christian? And when you're in church, you have this in depth because a lot of what churches do is tell people who are ostensibly Christian or self-identify as Christian to say, you're not real, you're not a good real Christian. You should be a better Christian, a more real Christian. It just, there's no end to this dilemma. Okay. So when I guess what I'm hearing you say is like, you want to make like Christianity is this thing that underlies, it's like this operating system that a whole, like everything we know of as culture. And I, and I agree with this, with this version is like, there's, there's, and it's, it's embedded in the grammar, as John likes to say, it's, it's so deeply embedded in the strains of thoughts that we, that we all stand on. And even, even the strange ways in which it's fully self-critical of itself, it's still standing on itself to start with. So yeah, like, and, and, and that's the way that it's like this, this collective form of ideas, almost that's running on this. But then on the flip side, so there's that thing that's happening. And then there's all the layers that stack up off of that with all their distortions and things. But then on the other side, you have this, okay, individual identifying with this thing. Which gets like, so all these layers on either side, there's mismatches and it gets totally confusing in that way. Does that seem like? Yeah. And I think that's part of the reason why in the, if you look at the 1970s, so I laugh every time someone complains about Christian nationalism, because that has been the default position of the United States from its inception, even though, I mean, deism is, is a strain of Christianity. You have all of this. So then, so then in the 1970s, you had this born again movement and Jimmy Carter was so-called first born again president. Chuck Colson, after, you know, he had been Richard Nixon's hatchet man, and he meets somebody in Washington who starts talking to him about Jesus. And he basically in his book, born again, you know, comes home and tells his wife that, you know, he's a Christian now. And she's sort of like, I thought we were Episcopalian. And so I think part of the reason all of that personal relationship language emerged in the, in the late 20th century was an attempt to differentiate the lived existential participatory thing that then, you know, evangelical churches in particular, called a personal relationship with Jesus Christ with sort of the Episcopalian mainline background noise that was pervasive in American culture. And so then what a lot of evangelicals did and, and what, and you see Catholics do it. And I think that's part of what we see with people who are becoming Orthodox and this all movement there, they're appropriating it, they're making it something their own. And so, because they have to, they have to gain some distance from the background noise. I mean, you could call that in some ways, a degree of self-transcendence, but it also has to be personal. So, you know, I've looked at the first, so is John stuff coming out today? Yeah, it's coming out today. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Yeah. So I looked at that. I got a, I got a sneak peek at the first one and, you know, all of the, all of the stuff that he wants to do, the participatory, the procedural, all of that stuff, we didn't use those fancy words and some, you know, evangelical church someplace, they called it a personal relationship with Jesus, but that's the functional equivalent. They needed to make Jesus participatory, procedural, perspectival, and not just propositional. And that's why that emerges in the evangelical church. Yeah. It's almost like, so I guess before I had talked about the overall historical level of the ideas of Christianity, and then you have the persons, but there's this other thing, right, which is what Christianity is in itself, which is something like the person of Christ, right? And a means of participating in reality such that, you know, the theosis idea, such that you're in communion with reality as it's supposed to be, and, you know, you're, it's no longer I that live, but Christ that lives in me. And so that thing in itself, it's almost, I guess the way I see it is like there's the thing in itself, and then there's all of us and our various positioning or posturing in relation to that thing. And based on that is where we get the kind of historical overlay of what Christianity comes to be. And because it's so vast and because it's so significant, we get this massive confusion because there's just like the number of postures held in relation to this thing bleeds out this this historical framework that is just in cultural framework that's very, very like bizarre and confusing at this point. I think the quest for the thing in itself is analogous to what I've called a monarchical vision. We want and it's and I think it's it's sort of sneakily once again an attempt to distill Christianity or almost anything else into the propositional. You will never, you know, I do not think our little brains or even our little traditions can capture the thing in itself. And that's, you know, that's I think that's recognized by various theological statements that are both Protestant and Orthodox or Roman Catholic. You know, when we talk about God not being knowable, it doesn't mean that we can't know anything, but we cannot contain God. And so every time we have this quest for the thing in itself, that's just to me another version of the same game of propositional capturing. And I think the motivation for that is if we if we think we can capture, well, how would we capture probably propositionally within a within an abstracted box, if we think we can capture the thing in itself, then we can wield it. And I think fundamental to Christianity and to I think fundamentally fundamental to anything that is not idolatrous is it cannot be wielded. You cannot wield God. And I think idolatry is fundamentally the attempt to wield wield God through a statue, through a practice, through a set of propositional beliefs. If I if I do these things, then I and it's just it's idolatrous because we then want to replace God. And fundamentally, the posture you need to have towards God is not idolatrous. It is I cannot I mean, I can't even know my wife in herself or my children in herself or my church in itself. And so to sort of say, well, I want to really define Christianity in itself. That's that's nothing you are capable of by virtue of who you are. Yes, absolutely. Because, well, I mean, that's the move of original sin already, right. But it's abstracted up like you're taking the original sin thing that you can do just in yourself in the world, which is to predicate your belief of what reality is on your own reference point. And then you're abstracting that up a whole other layer to the layer of the religious. When you're doing it and then projecting it away and in a way, it gets more and more powerful over time. Right. But every time that happens, there's there's a you know, it's almost like there's a there's a cascading effect of negative space that's created in the world because of that sin. Right. Like that's a sin, but it's a big it's a high level sin because it throws off a whole thread. And then everybody downstream of that thread is like missing. Like they're missing a whole ability to reference frame. But yeah, the first three commandments, I am the Lord your God, you shall have no other gods before me, you shall not make a graven image. And that, I mean, I think people don't realize the revolutionary nature of that commandment. And that commandment isn't merely the commandment to don't make a little statue. That's that's the specific manifestation of it. But even Protestants who are iconoclastic can violate that commandment in a sense by saying they capture God. No. And and that's why you worship God. You don't capture God because you can't. And if there's anything that you should learn from from reading the Bible, in my opinion, is that you the posture you have towards God has to be one of a servant, one of a receiver, one of a worshiper, not one of a master when you and we subtly slip into that role all the time. And it's so easy to do. Right. It's so pernicious because and because it's always the third commandment of Jesus, at least for me. Right. It's the third. It's the temptation of virtue that gets you. Right. It's the it's that moment where I'm like, I need to defend this virtue because this is threatening it. And I'm going to use the Bible to do it. That's right. And it's like now you just now you're in charge of making the thing happen. And it's like now, well, you're not doing the thing anymore. Right. Right. And, you know, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. And that fear, I mean, sometimes it can be, you know, afraid. Sometimes it can be reverent awe. But it you fundamental in that is recognizing the asymmetry of the relationship from the beginning. And many, you know, many religious traditions get that. But it is it is tremendously difficult to maintain it with you need a religious tradition, because obviously, you really can't live on nothingness. And even once you say, well, I live on nothingness. Well, there's your dogma. I mean, you need you need something. But and so you have to you have to maintain a posture of obedience, submission, reverence, worship. Yeah, it's like you can scale that up. Right. It can be scaled up in the in the way that, you know, we can abstract out these layers of the thing and put them into things like dogma. But they they're only used as dogma pointing upward, if that makes sense. Right. Like as soon as they turn around and point downward, it becomes, you know, the inverse of Christ's the first will be last and the last will be first. And he was greatest must be servant of all. It's like if as soon as you start enforcing this dogma top down instead of using it as like, hey, this is a way if you want to come up. Like those are different things. They are. You know, think about it. Think about it analogous to let's say, are you married? OK. A relationship. You have kids. I have a 10 week old. Oh, you just get started. I mean, you you know a lot about your wife. She's and yet she's a mystery to you. Both of those things are true. Yeah. And so I've been married 35 years and I know you might be able to make an argument that I know my wife better than you know yours just because we've been together longer. But even when you say it, though, you begin to if you say it and you think about it, you begin to realize how fraught even that statement is because I'm continuing to change. She's continuing to change. But what's amazing is that after 35 years, there's some things that, you know, I can pretty if you're going to like this, is she not going to like this? And then so then now I've got five children. I've got five adult children. Let's say one of them comes to me and says, I'm thinking about doing this for mom. What do you think? So it runs both ways. There is dogma with respect to my wife. Sure. But but even the dogma, I mean, you can't even contain my wife with the dogma, much less the creator God. But there can be things to know. And there's there's information and knowledge that you can pass along. I mean, all those things are true. It's it's just we do have to continue to realize our limits. But even even so, let's say you do something and you your wife doesn't like it and you thought she would. Then it's like, well, didn't you know? And it's like, did I know? Didn't I know? I mean, did I did I really want to give this thing to you because I wanted to give it to you? Or was I thinking, you know, it's and we have that's right. And we have this. We have this all the time, just with other people. And so psychologists will talk about projection and, you know, transference, counter transport. I mean, it's enormously complex, even just with other human beings. Yes, yes, yes. Yes. And even with even simpler creatures like dogs and cats, we certainly know our dogs and cats better than we know our spouses or our children or our coworkers. But the art of knowing is no simple thing. Yes, yes. That's yes. So thank you. That's phenomenal. And so I want to take all of this that we've just built is like this is like this is fundamental to this thing that we mean of Christianity that we're trying to participate in. Right. And I want to try to talk about that with people. My difficulty is I often try to talk about that with people. And what they see is literally the opposite of what we just talked about. They see a repressive system that's engendered, you know, difficult things into the world. And that's a particular like viewpoint of it through all these distortions. And that's like that I don't I don't mean to say anything about what that is in terms of its content, but I'm just like, how do we talk about these in a way that we don't spend all the time just like trying to pull apart like, you know, I don't mean what you think of as Christianity. I'm trying to talk about something different. Does that make sense? It makes perfect sense. And part of the reason part of the reason on my in my channel, what I spend a lot of time doing with is just people's stories. Because, I mean, talk about what one of the things that I said this morning, I listened to Rosario Rosaria Butterfield, talking to Beckett Cook, and she's got two individuals, both who had lived, you know, you know, very gay lifestyles, and both of whom had pretty dramatic transportation, or transportation transformations. And it was Rosario Butterfield, she her story is pretty famous now. But, you know, when you listen to her tell her story, it's just a story. And now she's got a whole bunch of other, I mean, she's been writing books, and she's got a whole bunch of other messages that she's sending out. She's got a particular, you can sort of place her in a particular bucket of Christians, in terms of a whole bunch of things. Fair enough. But the story, there's a level, there's a level to reality that stories capture. And, and it's a very durable layer. It's not perfect, but it's a very durable layer. And, and usually, again, what we want to do is, is give people deliverables. Where, and again, what is it, what is it deliverable? It's usually procedural, or it's propositional, it's an abstraction that you can just apply to your life. And that's, that's completely human. It's totally well and good. We should all make use of the deliverables around us. But if, if, and I wouldn't, I'd back off of Christianity and using that word, because once you use that word, people whoop, we're just right there with people. And it's back off the word and tell the story. And again, even the, even the New Testament phrase, I mean, be ready to share with people the hope that is within you. That's a very story oriented. And it's, it's, it's automatically, it's all four P's right away. It's perspectival, it's procedural, it's participatory. What, what hope do you have within you? You know, it was interesting in her, in her talk with Beckett, she was talking about the fact, so she was a university professor, I think, in University of Syracuse. She was a tenured professor in English literature and gender studies. And she was basically going to write a book about these horrible evangelical Christians, but she's a serious scholar and a researcher. So she decides to research and she got all kinds of letters from hate mail and love mail from people on different sides of the gender fight. And she got one more particularly interesting letter from a pastor and, and she just began a relationship with him. And, you know, one of the things that she noted was that in her, sort of in her religious context, everything was political. And it was all about politics and activism. And, you know, they were, they lived and died on that hill emotionally. And one of the things that really impressed her was that clearly these conservative, reformed people that she was dealing with had strong views of all sorts of things, but they didn't live and die in their politics or their activism or anything. They were living and dying in Christ. And that meant a certain amount of freedom from the ups and downs of, and you can apply this to churches, the ups and downs of Sunday morning attendance, the ups and downs of the YouTube algorithm, the ups and downs of all of these things, because your life is hidden, your life is hidden in Christ. And you know that all these other things are going to happen. So you, what you can really share with people is you. That's, that's the most real thing you have to share with them. And you're going to have ideas and abstractions. I also often note that, you know, obviously in Christian circles, let's say you look at the apostle Paul, if the apostle Paul was walking around today, what opinions would he have about all sorts of things? The truth is they'd be all over the map. And perhaps some of the people who count themselves the greatest followers of, of the teachings and writings of the apostle Paul, he might hate their guts. They're just living in totally different realms because we take these things, we have to abstract them. We have to build models. We have to build systems. None of that is bad or wrong or anything, but there's an unrealness about it. That is you are more real than that. And so what you should actually share is you to the best you can. It's remarkably difficult because even just look at Jesus, he spends three years. And one of the things, so when I was in college, you know, I grew up in a minister's home, went to college, went to a Christian college, but didn't think to myself, you know, I should just read this Bible and, you know, well, what do I think of this Bible? And, you know, I had read stuff in the Bible before I'd been to church all my life, but I started reading it as a young college student thinking, this book is strange. You'd think given the Dutch Calvinist stuff that I'm looking at, that you'd think it would look more like a catechism or it would look like a tome of systematic theology. And then you've got Jesus walking around and, you know, they're having fights about, you know, healing on Sunday and he has all these crazy sayings and it's like, this is truly strange. But yeah, it's still, it's still, you know, changing people. Well, what's with that? It just goes from there. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, I guess like, this is kind of, I guess this is tying together a bunch of things for me with the way you said that, because it's been really important to me to learn about some of the neoplatonic stuff and especially DC Schindler's book Plato's Critique of Impure Reason and starting to get this sense of the ascent and return in the cave and the world of ideas and the world of appearances and all these kinds of things. But it's like, almost one of the things I'm seeing in what you're saying is that you have to like use the appropriate medium for the level you're dealing with. And it's like narrative, narrative is the appropriate medium for narrative trauma. If we're going to be, if we're going to be participating with the world in such a way as to bring the gospel, the good news of redemption into it, which means something very real and embodied. If we're going to do that, I needed to get clear about the ideas. I needed to go out of the cave so that the idea, the thing in itself became clear to me, it became clear to me that it was not me and it was not in relation to me, I was in relation to it. And then if you're going to go back down and you're going to like say, say participate the enactment of forgiveness, like that is like what that means is agape. That means agape on the level of the individual narrative where what connects to people, what connects us all to each other is the subversion in that happens when the narrative is engaged with agape because the narrative level only resolves with forgiveness through agape, something like that. Well, and if you look at say something like forgiveness, let's say, oh, I'm going to learn about forgiveness. You can go to Amazon and find the top books and because Amazon likes all these little micro rankings, you know, top book and forgiveness. You can get, you can get, you can read that book and not learn anything like you would learn if let's say someone close to you betrayed you and what that would call you to. And then what forgiveness looks like. And again, all of this language is an attempt to approximate it, but even just look at the language where you would, looks like looking is a very, you know, receptive enterprise. And that's the Christian life. That's what you do. And, you know, this is one of the things I appreciate about, you know, what John is trying to do. He's at least recognized that, you know, I love what he said to Jonathan and Peugeot about Plato. I mean, the way we taught Plato, which is stupid. And it's not that those dialogues are unimportant and they are important. They've shaped Western history. All that is great. But life is to be lived. And if anything is going to be of any use, then yeah, having the painful, difficult thing of having to forgive someone, if someone pays attention to it, is far more instructive than the best book you can find on the Amazon list of forgiveness books. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I really appreciate this conversation because this is actually kind of, like, I've, there's a real insight in this for me because I'm, I'm seeing this way in which, like one of the things I've just been like kicking against is this feeling of exclusivity about Christianity. And that's been like, that's been like one of the thorn in my side that's driven me down this whole path. But once I've, once I felt like I was able to make peace with the actual idea itself, then I'm trying to figure out how to communicate it or, or walk through it. And, and there's become, there's something of like this, you know how John always says, put on my grave, neither utopia nor nostalgia. Yeah. Yeah. And I found that to be so helpful as like an existential, like I use it almost like a Cohen, because I see in myself in this way, there's like this utopic vision of like, man, if we could get Christianity right, if you all just could understand it. But then what, then what, tell me, tell me, then we would all just live, right? Like just live now, which is always, which is always the teaching. Yeah. Yeah. And that's a, that's a fun exercise to do when you, when you watch someone being, you know, either dramatic, either towards disaster or utopia, it's like, okay, what, what, what then? And it's, I mean, think about, think about how to be a Christian towards your dog. You can talk, you can say anything you want to your dog and they're only going to get 30 words. Okay. What is, what is, what is living the life of Christ towards your, towards your pet? What does that look like? It is a, it is a life that is lived. And again, we're, we're not going to get away from having to talk about things, have abstractions, have models. We're not going to get away from any of that because that's a function of, for a certain subset of us. I made a video, a number, a few months ago, you know, basically, I don't remember the title of it, to the effect of, you know, why, you know, why so often unsophisticated Christians are better Christians. It was something to that fact. If you, if you'd look at my channel and you'd search sophisticated, you'd probably find it. But because I saw that where you got all these smart people who've read a lot of books. And again, I, I, I love all this thinky talky stuff. I really do. I need it. I need it for me. I need it for my heart. It's just part of how I'm wired, but I so often see and live amongst Christians that way outperform me. And if you ask them a question about doctrine or dogma or, you know, anything that's, anything that's supposedly really important right now in Christianity, whatever the, the newest fads are all over the map. And they're always fads. They can't tell you a darn thing about it, but you know how, you know what they know how to do? They know how to love other people well. And I will take that over a world of really brilliant people who are tremendously well read because, and that, that isn't to say that that lack of sophistication doesn't sometimes cause trouble because sometimes those unsophisticated Christians can get duped or blindsided or, I mean, none of us are, are infallible, but that, and that just demonstrates the fact that life, life, life, life is to be lived. That's, and, and there's, there's so much in it that we can't control. And this is in a sense why, you know, this doesn't sound tremendously Protestant. A lot of these words sort of have dual, dual tasks within models, but why there are saints, why there are exemplary Christians among us. And, and part of the irony is that sometimes people are exemplary Christians in one way, but not another. Mm-hmm. And, and, and we can't often tell where those boundaries are. And so, so we follow these saints and sometimes they got things right, they got some things right, they got some things wrong, and we're tended to dismiss them because they got a particular thing wrong that's just as much a function of our perception of them too, and our value hierarchy. So, but yeah, Christianity is to be lived. Part of the difficulty, especially on YouTube, is that we're looking at each other in this little thin screen and this little window. What do you know about me? What do I know about you? It's tremendously unreal, but it's better than nothing apparently, because we're still watching. Well, it's interesting because like, like, when it, when you start off thinking about the ideas, like for me it was so important to disentangle so many things that were manifesting in negative ways in my life. Like for me to become purified or sanctified or, or whatever, necessitated a path through this kind of, call it intellectual world where I had to understand what was going on for me with Martin Luther, and I had to understand what was going on for me with Augustine, and I had to understand what was going on for me with Kant and Descartes. Like once I understood those, then I could start to see, but that, you know, and there's a way in which, like, there is good time to be spent in, in pulling apart these knots, because if you're able to pull apart the knots in a way that people can hear you, they can now be free of that knot. But, like, you know, Jesus didn't write down his words, neither did Socrates and neither did Buddha, but they've had, you know, those are three of the most outsized effects on the world of all time, because what the, the, the being of truth that came through them generated such a field that downstream of it, we could, you know, we could climb into these worlds and build all these, you know, you can build Hegelian philosophy. But I mean, it just sits there, right? Yep. Yep. Yep. No, that's right. That's exactly right. It's a castle in the sky. Yep. And, you know, I'm, I'm in the same boat. I wouldn't have, oh gosh, how many hours do I have on YouTube right now? I mean, I do a ton of it and, and so much of my channel, you know, it's conversations or it's, it's me trying to untie knots. And, and I found for me, whether it's blogging, I did that earlier before I did this, or it's on YouTube, I find it helpful to, that's what you do too, as a community, you sit around in a circle, here, you got a big knot, we're all going to work on it together. Yep. And YouTube is sort of a way that we do that. It's imperfect, but it's, it's better than thinking alone. Yeah. Yeah. And for me, my experience is like, I hope that the content that I put on YouTube is of service to people. Yeah. But I, that's actually not the primary reason I do it. The primary reason I do it is because it, it, it helps me get disentangled. Yep. Yep. Yep. I wouldn't be talking to you if it wasn't for this. And this is, this conversation has led to an insight for me. So maybe in some way it's inherently selfish, but I hope it's selfish in the way that it makes me more like Christ and thus makes others like Christ. Yeah. Yeah. Right. And, and so I think, yeah, like it's, it's, it's funny because it's that attitude. It's having that kind of attitude with all the different layers kind of simultaneously. Something like that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, and we don't know. So we, we untie, no, you're, you're exactly right. It's then my channel, I try to explain that to people sometimes because they'll watch my videos and say, gosh, he's rambling in videos an hour and a half. We, he didn't get to the point until the end. That's because I didn't know the point until the end. Yeah. And I, you know, and sometimes I don't know the point until after the end. And I'm thinking about the video and thinking like, gosh, I got to put a title on this thing. What, what really was I looking for? What insight did I grasp? And, and then I, you know, then I just tell people, you know, I'm, if, if my video was helpful, you know, I'm glad I can share it with you. But if you say, I can't sit through all that, I'd say, I totally understand. I'm sure I probably couldn't either. So, um, this is just, this is just my process. And as long as YouTube is going to give me free bandwidth. Okay. I guess I'll keep doing it. Um, because I, I have found it, I have found it helpful for me. And, and the reason that it's helpful is that it is facilitating community because part of, so again, I noticed I was sort of a little bit dismissive of abstraction or implementation or giving something, someone actionable, but we do need that. And part of, part of why community works is that I can learn from you. You can learn from me and others watching us will have other observations. And, you know, it's in the, it's in the book of Proverbs all over the place. I mean, you know, listen, pay attention. Don't just listen to your friends, listen to your critics, um, even listen to your enemies. And if you're humble enough to learn from them, your enemies can bless you. And, you know, many wisdom traditions have noted this for a very long time, but it doesn't mean it's easy. Yeah. Yeah. And it's, you know, at least for me, it's always the return. It's often the return to the, the, the space of abstraction now that allows me to come, to come back to that. And I think that's like, well, I don't think there's anything wrong with that. I don't, I don't want to need to go back there. I want it to be, I want to be, I want to live in such a way that I don't need to go anywhere else in order to be here. Right. And so now it is that way. And so here I am, but yeah, here I am. But yeah. Well, I think there's, I don't think we should be too embarrassed by going there because when you think about what abstraction is, abstraction, I often will do, I did this for a while on my lot, a lot of my videos, you know, you've got lower and upper register, upper register is sort of the, the world of the mind and the world of the mind is, is heaven-like in some ways. There isn't decay. And so going there and visiting there is not a bad thing. It's that human beings are deeply connected between both and, and to actually attain it is, is a good thing. It's just that this, in this, in this world, this up here is, it's, it's to serve the lower. It's very Peugeotian. The upper is to serve the lower and the lower is to support the upper. And as long as that dynamic is functioning well, it's a, it's a very blessed thing because we, and that's, that's, that's the reason you have the desire to, to know the thing in and of itself. Yeah. Because really like, like that's what it means to be in the kingdom of heaven is to actually have both things coming together at the same time in real life as a real particular person. And that's, you know, what it means for the kingdom of heaven to come to earth. I think. By kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. It's right there in the Lord's prayer. Yeah. But it's not some kind of like future abstracted event, right? Like that's, I think one of the things where we get really tripped up is like, you know, whether it is in the grand narrative or not, I don't know, but like, at least from what it's trying to say to me, what that text I think is not suggesting to me is that somewhere in the future, that that prayer is asking like Jesus to come back in the sky and judge everyone. But that prayer is actually asking that that is realized as a function of my life, not in a totalizing sense, but in the particular being of my life. Yeah. I don't know that those things are separable. Okay. Okay. Because well, we, we so live, I was, so my wife and I are going through this, this, this very interesting series on Hulu. Guys named Ramy, R-A-M-Y. It's about a, it's about a, and his, a kid who's grown up in North Jersey and his parents were Muslim immigrants from Egypt. And he's just trying to figure out if he wants to be Muslim or not, and trying to figure out his life. And there's one episode where they really, it's quite a remarkable series. Different episodes often focus on different family members. And the one episode on his father, his father had lost his job, didn't want to tell his wife, didn't want to tell his family was getting tremendously stressed out because bills weren't getting paid and all of this stuff. And finally, his son, he blows up at an important family meeting and his son goes out to him and his father says to him, you know, I, I live in the future so that you can live in the present. And I want you and your mom and your sister to all live in the present. I'm going to live in the future. I mean, I'm going to think about the bills. I'm going to think about, and, and as human beings, as we live in history, we're almost always forward looking and forward leaning. And I often, it's so funny because it becomes a cliche in our culture. We'll live in the moment. And I think, well, like my dog, like the apes in Africa. No, we, we don't, we don't get to do that. We do have to, we do have to navigate that. So that we're not simply living in the future, but the future does orient us. And, you know, I, the, I mean, John was talking about this, the double, the sacred double is different from what I talk about the secret sacred self. The secret sacred self is a much more gnostic. That's, it's a sort of Gnosticism that's in our culture, but the divine double, that's what John calls it. You know, where we are, there's a future, there's a future you that you want to become. And there's, there's absolutely nothing wrong with that. And, and in many ways that has to line up, that has to go all the way to the top. And that's what we do with, you know, when we talk about the second coming of the Lord, thy kingdom come, thy will be done and earth has in heaven. All of that just lines us to the future because we are creatures in time. And I think, especially for us, if, if we sort of take the skeptical route of saying, I don't know about the second coming of Christ, or I don't know about my participation in the afterlife. I, I think that sort of cuts us off at our knees and it doesn't help us sort of orient ourselves properly. I think, I don't, I don't think we can actually function without mentally projecting ourselves into this future. I think that's just part and parcel of how we live. And, you know, I know John and Jonathan have gone back and forth on that. And I think they've sort of arrived at a certain, at a certain detente with that. But I remember Peugeot saying in one of the early conversations, I mean, I think it's fair to say that existence isn't itself narrative. And the last conversation that John and Jonathan had, I thought was really good on that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Existence isn't itself narrative, but I don't know that we as human beings can seriously operate without it. And, and you get that by reading in scripture. I mean, just look at, go through your Bible and try to find all the places that it talks about the life of the age to come. I'm going to use that language because I think it's a little bit sharper than some of the other terms. We have no idea. Yeah. Our streets really going to be paved in gold. I mean, we don't, we don't have any idea. And all of the, you know, the apostle Paul basically probably talking about himself, you know, caught up into the third heaven, you can't articulate it. That, that actually sounds very reasonable, but I, I think we have to still use our narrative future leaning orientation to actually achieve the transformations that we're looking for. And part of the reason I believe that is because in watching, let's say the modernist fundamentalist fight in America, I don't want to discount the modernists, but I think the path of fundamentalism for all of the pitfalls and things that fell into actually in many ways was more reliable because they didn't naively jettison the symbolic narrative language. And I think more modernists got lost because they didn't appreciate, you know, it'd be like if you're trying to make your way through the wilderness, say, I don't need that map that that map is not the wilderness. No, it isn't, but it's gonna be really helpful for orienting you to get through an actual wilderness. Yeah. Thank you for that. That's it. You know, this is interesting because this is like, this has been one of the things that I've been working with for a while is, you know, I, you know, I first showed up in that dialectic with, with Jordan and Jonathan and, and, and John, and at least that was the first I heard of it where, you know, John is making it, is insisting that narrative is not the fundamental, um, ontology. And, and so, like, at first it just kind of bothered me and then slowly I started to work with it. And as I've worked with it more and more, I, um, I don't know, like, I think all this territory gets very tricky because it depends on which side you're speaking from, right? If I'm speaking from the side of like me in my particular mind, making sense of the world, that's one side. And then there's the other side, which is kind of the transcendent reality that we're pointing to, but we're talking about how to orient them or orient our relationship to them. So there's a weird paradox happening where it's like, okay, narrative is fundamental in this thing, right? Like if I don't have narrative when I'm, when I'm, uh, working through my life, it's, it's fundamental there. And in that way, well, no, I'll come to that argument later because this is an argument I want to make at the end of this. But then on the other side, there is some kind of transcendent thing that is real. And I know that at the end of the day, it's all okay because it has to be. And so you need a narrative that gives you that while you're still in the narrative. But when you're in the narrative, there's, and you perceive that as being fundamental, you almost are forced into some utopic or you're, you're almost forced into some utopic slip. There's a little slip there where it's like, as soon as Jesus is actually coming back, when things get really bad, like there's a slippery slope. So it has to be like, I think, I think John's point in this last conversation with, with Jonathan was really important to say that I don't think that I'm not trying to do away with narrative at, by any means, I'm just trying to say that. And I think really the argument he's making here is like, you're not the center of the universe in your egocentric state. Really, when you make this shift in your head, you notice how your life is being lived and it's constrained to a certain space and you're constrained by forces you can't understand. You do have agency in it. You, you are a real agent, but it's all more complicated than you can know. So just do your best and be in it. And so I think, I think that is where I've gone with that problem. And it's led me to this point where I think, like, I want to make the argument that Christianity as, as, as the story of Christ and this whole thing is like the, like the completion of the narrative such that you can drop out of the narrative, but you don't have problems with it. Right. Cause there's all kinds of other traditions that drop you out of the narrative, right? Like Buddhism, you drop out of the narrative, all these, there's all kinds of ways to drop out of the narrative, but they, none of them like bottom out the narrative in itself, right? Like the claim that Jesus became, becomes incarnated and actually dies and actually rises again. It's like, it bottoms the whole thing. So for me, I guess Christianity has become a non-narrative narrative. It's a narrative that finishes the narrative and allows me to engage with reality in a non-narrative way. Think about, so you're, you're 10 month old boy or girl? Girl. Girl. Okay. I bet you can look at your daughter and not construct a narrative. Now that narrative isn't terribly present to you, but if I were to ask you what's your daughter going to be like at three, what's she going to be like at five, what's she going to be doing when she's seven? I mean, you're just going to, there's a narrative back there. It's pretty fuzzy. There's a narrative back there. It's pretty fuzzy. It's pretty implicit, but it's all in there. Absolutely. That narrative will not happen as you think it will. I can, I've got five kids. They're all in there. One's in their one's in his thirties. All the rest are in their twenties. I can promise you that, but you can't help, but have that narrative. And that narrative is very useful for you, but it's, it's much more like a big sheet of a big map that you're always editing. And there'll be points when something happens and that narrative gets violated and you will mourn or lament. And sometimes that narrative gets violated and you'll celebrate. And, you know, and you know, your wife is in there too, and the kid and parents and friends, I mean, there's a whole world around it. And I think it's helpful to think in those terms that the narrative is inescapable. It's just simply too deep in you. This is an operating system that you are using and it's, but it's going to be flexible. And, and, and I think if we think in those terms, the, when we think about Christian eschatology, that's super helpful because of course there are, I mean, Christian eschatology is one of these areas that there is by no means agreement on in the church. You know, there's, you know, there's the dispensationalism, there's the, you know, pre-email, post-email, ah-mail. I mean, there's all these different schemas and there's no agreement in the church on this, but narrative itself, I think it's, I think it's inescapable. Now, how you handle that narrative with respect to your relationship with your daughter, it's pretty darn important because what, there's going to be some opponent processing in your relationship with that narrative. There's going to be times as a father that you insist on this narrative with your daughter and there's going to be discipline, there's going to be tears. I mean, there's going to be all kinds of drama in play because you're going to be like, these are things you do and these are things you don't do. There's going to be other times when you're going to have to give way, your narrative is going to have to yield to all sorts of other things and you're going to be right there in the middle adjusting the whole time. And I don't know that that is tremendously different from our relationship with narrative with our lives moving forward in Christ because again, back to where we started, thinking about our relationship with Christ in relational terms more necessarily than in in theoretical terms helps and that's when you begin to realize the dynamic nature of the mapping and unmapping. Yeah, I think I agree with you for everything on this side. For me, I don't know how to say exactly how there's something else for me too. There's something else for me because there's a level of my experience at which I mean, it's the kind of level that I've only touched through meditation and kind of like mystical kind of experiences. But you have that with your daughter too, right? You come into her room, she's 10 months old now, so she's probably starting to stand up in the crib, right? 10 weeks. Oh, 10 weeks. Yeah, sorry. You're just getting started in the mystical relationship between you, especially the mother's already, the mother's ahead of you because she, I mean, you might have felt a little rubbing on the belly, but she's way ahead of you in this, but you are going to also have non-narrative mystical experiences as a father. There are going to be moments of transcendence. I've had a couple already. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, just like there was a moment, like there was this moment where I was actually kind of out of my own way and I was like, I had her there and she was just staring into my eyes and like, yep, yep. And I was, I have all this stuff about agape and all the stuff that I'm trying to like embody and participate in that moment. And it was a very, very profound experience. And it's not narrative. No, I get your point. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But then you're going to have, then your narrative and your non-narrative are going to be in conversation with each other because you're going to desire more of those non-narrative moments. A birthday party is in a sense, the interchange between the narrative and the non-narrative. You're using the narrative to set up a non-narrative, which is the celebration of her, giving her that, Americans often do giving her a big piece of cake or something on her first birthday and gets it all over. Yep, yep, yep. Yeah. Well, I think I've enjoyed this a lot and I'm not sure if now feels like an appropriate time to end it for you. I'm kind of feeling satisfied. That's okay by me. That's okay by me. All right. Well, thank you so much for coming. Any final things you want to say or? No, it's a delight. I love doing this. And I haven't watched too many of your videos, but you know how YouTube is, you start watching a few and they keep serving up more. And so I've caught some of it and I just want to encourage you to keep doing what you're doing and keep climbing that mountain and keep thinking and sharing and thinking in public and thinking with others. And yeah, continue to enjoy continue to enjoy your marriage and your child. I mean, I am dumbfounded by our culture where people so quickly are dismissive of one of the most challenging and potentially joyful things. I mean, people want to travel and go visit other countries. And it's like, if you have a child, it's an adventure like you can't imagine. And it's a lifelong adventure. But when I was young, I was too dumb to know that. I didn't know. And now my kids are young adults and we just had the holidays. And boy, now there's nothing like having the kids home for the holidays and hoping that soon there'll be some weddings. And then at some point, it's one of the great gifts of human life. It's one of the most challenging. So congratulations and pursue it. That's a whole other mountain in and of itself. Indeed. Yeah. Well, thank you very much. That's very kind of you, first of all, and appreciate the encouragement. And yeah, so far I've been attempting to take the role of fatherhood as seriously as I can from the perspective of trying to understand just what's going on. And it's been quite a roller coaster. So thank you for the encouragement. I appreciate it. Wonderful. All right. All the best. All right.