https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qH54i-2SjgM

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Two weeks ago we looked at what I called sort of the default American religion, which I think I called it altruistic hedonism. And it's a religion that prioritizes your emotional state from one moment to the next. It also assumes that your emotional state from one moment to the next is generated by the good circumstances around you. These circumstances can be physical, these circumstances can be relational, these circumstances can be social, and so you try to generate them as best as you can. To be happy is the best situation possible, and you do that with money, beauty, pleasure, and you try to go from one euphoric positive experience to the next. And if you can string all of these together from the time that you have a conscious autobiography until the time that you die, well, I guess then you've been a success. We looked at this a little bit in the light of the Netflix show Selling Sunset. But this arenic pleasure dome that these women live in, and they should be the happiest of all people given that they're the most beautiful, they have the most money, they have the most opportunity, they have fame and fortune and everything that anything can buy. But what we find in the show is that the show is actually about gossiping, backbiting, envy, reputation, savagery, etc. And many of these women struggle with marriage, which is interesting because again, if you have a rather shallow view, you believe that marriage is just a function of getting the best possible mate, and of course these beautiful women should be able to get the best possible mate, but many of them can't seem to make it last or stay, and they struggle with it. The show has a spirit, and the spirit is vicious. That vicious spirit of reputation savaging is why people watch the dramatic spectacle. And I hate it when my mouse goes away. There we go. Now one of the videos I made this week was a, discussed what one of the people that I'm in regular conversation with when he asked, what does it take to make a man, to move a man? What does it make to have transformation? Joe Rogan expressed the anxiety that he has over news out of the Middle East. Eric Weinstein talked about how the very rich tend to be very preoccupied with trying to figure out how they can forestall the apocalypse that we always seem to be on the precipice of. The whole world is watching what's going on in Gaza and the Middle East unfold, and everybody is there to sort of tell us what we should think about this or about that, but what can actually give us peace? Now last week we focused on practices, and we talked about how there were a group of people that basically said either these are the requirements, these are the practices that are required to come to Jesus, or these are the practices that will enhance your coming to Jesus. If life is one way, life plus these practices is sort of a plus. I generated this, I'm often generating images with AI software, and this rather strange one came up of two women looking almost exactly alike, except one bears a cross. Now Paul of course says that Christ has rescued these Christians in Colossi and has put them in a new place, and that Christ is enough, and that Christ will be with them, but he does have admonitions for them, not necessarily with respect to the practices that they must do in order to somehow attain a higher level, but this is what he writes. Now this is a very strange way of talking. As I mentioned, you have been raised with Christ as in the past tense, and most of us would say, well I'm expecting my resurrection from the dead in the future, but this very much gets into the way Paul talked about our union with Christ. Something in us, something of us, in fact something central to us, is in fact bound by Christ, embraced by Christ, and united with Christ, and this was done in your baptism. Basically what he says is that you should focus your attention, you should set your heart, which is sort of the center of your being, on Christ, and let that center of attention and focus guide your actions as you live, awaiting the finality of that reality. Remember Jesus says, where your treasure is, there where your heart be also, and basically Paul is saying, make Christ your treasure. Focus your attention on things above, and now that's a little difficult in our world, we tend to have sort of a physicalist posture. He's clearly talking about heaven, well what is heaven? Heaven is sort of the control room of earth, heaven is the place from which earth receives her sustenance. Christ is, he sits at God's right hand, now that of course basically talks about Christ is administering God's will on earth through him, he is in a sense God's right hand man. Not on earthly things, now what does this mean? Does this mean we shouldn't care for things that are going on around us? No, that's not what it means. It means that our focus should be looking up, and in looking up we understand what things are happening down here in a better light. He says, you died in your baptism, you died to yourself, and you live in Christ. Your life is hidden with Christ in God. Now heaven is the spiritual source, it's the ideal, it's the head, it's what your life is pointing to, it's what your goal should be. The love of your heart, well we all, this is in competition in many of us. Who or what is the goal of your life? What is the love of your heart? What do you want to become when you grow up, as it were? Spirit culture drifts you in one direction or another, but Paul admonishes to keep their focus on Christ. In Romans 6 he said basically, you died to the world, live that out. Don't keep living for the world. United with Christ in his resurrection, you are united with Christ in his crucifixion. Now you were hidden with Christ in God. A few years ago this dress became famous because the question was asked what color was this dress? And I don't know if I have the picture exactly right because a lot of this sort of depends on color temperature on a screen, but many people looked at this dress and said it was blue and other people looked at this dress and said it was gold. The world sees you through its light. We all look at the world through interpretive lenses and basically what Paul admonishes the people to do is look at the world through the lenses of Christ. Now this can be most clearly seen with Christ on the cross. Everyone looked at Christ on the cross as Jesus losing. Jesus is losing in terms of the fight that everyone imagined he was having. But from the perspective Paul now gives, well, and the crosses that we place all over our buildings and sometimes around our necks, in fact at that moment he was achieving a victory. A victory for himself, a victory for us, a victory over that which steals and robs our life, a victory over the age of decay, a victory over sin and death itself. Christ is leading his returning saints from heaven as a glorious army and this is the reality that we are to put central to our imagination. And then he says this rather strange thing. When Christ who is your life appears, then you will also appear with him in glory. Now a lot of people if asked what is your life, their life might be their grandchild, their life might be their bank account, their life might be a new car, their life might be a romantic relationship, their life might be their job. Christ Paul says Christ who is your life, this is your identity. This is where your entire life flows from. There's a competition for this life. What do you live for? What would you die for? I was reading this book about basically different ages that we've been living in. There was the age of sincerity where everyone lived for their attempt to fulfill the traditional roles that they had received by virtue of their birth or by virtue of their station, their class or their caste. And then in the modern period we slip into this age of authenticity and everybody tries to live to embody their true self which they imagine is somehow down below, something they need to somehow discover through some rather mysterious blend of experimentation and expression. And he goes on to say well we have now entered this age of profelicity where everything is about your reputation, your image that you cultivate in your social media feeds, you cultivate it in how you are perceived. You are in that sense, your life is in all of the images and all of the reputations that you're constantly trying to maintain in the world around you. Christians believe they act before an audience of one because Christ is their life. And so that finally it is not simply expressing your traditional roles, it is not simply finding exactly out, trying to discover your secret, sacred self. It is not curating a profile or a reputation in public feeds. It is Christ. That's where your life comes from. That's what your life is for. Your life is bound up in him and when he appears, well, everything that you've done and said for him will suddenly make sense to the world. C.S. Lewis displayed this. This wasn't so long ago that I used this illustration, but it's a great illustration. C.S. Lewis displays this in his book The Great Divorce through this character Sarah Smith, who in the world was a nobody. Well, she was a nobody for anybody that sort of looked upon her. She was perhaps poor. She perhaps looked ordinary. People didn't pay much attention to her, but there in heaven she was celebrated. And why? Well, she was one of the great ones. Every young man or boy that met her became her son, even if it was only the boy that brought the meat to her back door. Every girl that met her was her daughter. Now C.S. Lewis asked, well, did this cause problems with relationships? No. Those on whom it fell went back to their natural parents loving them more. Few men looked on her without becoming, in a certain fashion, her lovers. But it was the kind of love that made them not less true, but truer to their own wives. In other words, Sarah Smith was a little Christ. Christ came, in a sense, from heaven through Sarah Smith to the world. Christ was her life. And finally, when Christ is revealed to the world, the Sarah Smiths of the world will suddenly receive the glory that this world does not give. Since then you have been raised with Christ, set your hearts on things above where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God, and set your mind on things above, not on earthly things. Realize that what things look good now won't necessarily look good in hindsight. Start a perspective of heaven looking at the blind, rebellious earth and rework your priorities to align with the coming kingdom of the resurrected Christ. Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature, sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires, and greed, which is idolatry. Because of these, the wrath of God is coming. You used to walk in these in the life you once lived, but you now must also rid yourselves of all such things such as anger, rage, malice, slander, filthy language from your lips. Do not lie to each other, since you have taken off your old self with its practices and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in the knowledge and knowledge in the image of its creator. Here there is no Gentile or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all and is in all. The old ways of life are common. We see them on Selling Sunset. You find them in the roughest neighborhoods of the world, and you find them in the wealthiest neighborhoods of the world. Buried beneath money and wealth and power and affluence, they are common. It is all over the place. And what's interesting is that, unlike sort of the practices that people might prioritize, there's something beneath this new way of life that almost everyone in the world values. There are no barriers to it. Rich and poor, any nationality, rich and famous, poor and anonymous, people of good or bad reputation, it's available to all. In the book of Galatians, Paul gives a similar list and calls them the fruit of the Spirit, and he says, against such things there is no law. That's a rather remarkable thing. Therefore, clothe as God's chosen people, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourself with compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness and patience. Bear with each other and forgive one another. If any of you has a grievance against someone, forgive as the Lord forgave you. And over all these virtues, put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity. If you read 1 Corinthians 13, if you read Galatians 5, you find this is a theme that Paul speaks about again and again and again and again. Clothe yourself with these things. This is the wardrobe given to you as adopted children of Christ. Put on Christ's clothing. And again, against such things there is no law. And that's a very strange thing. With many beliefs and many practices in the world, people debate about it. This is good, this is bad, this is good, this is bad. This list never goes out of fashion. Last week we talked about why does the Bible tell people to stop doing religious things. That's what I entitled the sermon. Your practices are going to vary from time and culture and they will be understood in many different ways. And the risk of self-righteousness remains by the show of piety. Ever notice that cross-culturally people love these virtues? They sometimes get expressed in slightly different ways, but when people understand what's at the heart of them, they love them. Even evil genocidal dictators want their lieutenants to be filled with these virtues. Because if they're not, they're of no use to them. Compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience. Bear with one another, forgive one another. If any of you has a grievance against someone, forgive as the Lord forgave you. And over all these virtues put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity. You want something practical? Let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts. Since as members of one body you were called to peace and be thankful. Let the message of Christ dwell among you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom through Psalms, hymns, and songs from the Spirit, singing to God with gratitude in your hearts. And whatever you do, whether in word or indeed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, the Father through him. And again, another illustration that I've used often. Well, why do you repeat illustrations? Well, not everybody catches every single sermon or video. And what is repeated, well, we remember. Eric Little, this man, this sprinter, this very famous man, swept up in the Japanese invasion of China in the Second World War, put in a prison camp. Now, Langdon Gilkey writes a lot of very interesting things about some who were religious and some who were not religious in the camp and how the camp tested and exposed who they were. Eric, shown like the sun. The man who more than anyone else brought about the solution to the teenage problem was Eric Little. It is rare indeed when a person has the good fortune to meet a saint, but he came as close to it as anyone I've ever known. Often in an evening of that last year, I, headed from some pleasant rendezvous with my girlfriend, would path notice, he doesn't exclude himself from the selfish ones who would rather pleasure himself and his girlfriend than help these teenagers, would pass the game room and peer in to see what the missionaries had cooked up for the teenagers. As often as not, Eric would be bent over a chessboard or a model boat or directing some sort of square dance, absorbed, warm and interested, pouring all of himself into this effort to capture the minds and imaginations of those pent up youths. This is Christ shining through a saint in the world. But pastor, this doesn't come naturally or easily. No, that's true. It doesn't to me either. This is why Paul writes the passage. This is why Paul exhorts the people and says, this is who you are in Christ. It's not a secret self down below. It's your life in Christ preserved in heaven. This is who you are to live up to. This is who you have already become. So start becoming it now. And remember, you are not saved by your performance. This comes in gratitude. Look for the fruits of Christ's work in you. Since you have been raised with Christ, look at all the words he uses. Your life is now hidden with Christ in God. When Christ who is your life appears, then you will appear with him in glory. Put to death therefore all of these things, for these the wrath of God comes. And you can name the list. There is no Gentile or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all in all. No matter where you came from, what nationality, what your circumstance in life, this Christ in you is available to you through his spirit. Therefore, as God's chosen people, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourself with compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness and patience. Bear with each other and forgive one another if any of you has a grievance against another. Forgive as the Lord forgave you and over all these virtues put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity. Let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts. As as members of one body, you were called to peace. And be thankful. Let the message of Christ dwell among you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom through Psalms, hymns and songs from the Spirit, singing to God with gratitude in your heart. And whatever you do, whether in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him. I can't think about this enough. I can't focus on this enough. This is in fact the application of the admonition to think on things above. Let this become the focus of your attention and practice it with those around you. Amen.