https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=gFw-rI1IZv4

 Hi, this is Paul. As you can see, I'm back in my office in my little studio. So I got the mic and I got everything all set up so it all works nicely. I very much do want to continue working on the American Protestant establishment, its demise or rather its how it changed to become no longer religious or distinctly Christian. So I will get back to that maybe later today. I'll do a video on that. But I was listening this morning to The Rest is History. They have, there are two tracks of The Rest is History. There is just the regular free podcast that has ads, but then there's The Rest is History Club and you can join The Rest is History Club by paying pounds. I managed to do it with a credit card which translated my dollars into pounds so I'm a member of The Rest is History Club and The Rest is History Club. You don't get ads, but you also get all of the episodes right away. When I saw that, I thought, oh that could be fun, and I didn't really think much of it, but now that they're actually putting out different episodes this week on Putin and the Soviet Union and Russia and the background and history of all this, I was really happy for it because this morning as I was sitting in a gas line at Costco, because gas at Costco was $4.80 and you know over here at the Chevron it's $5.50. So as I was sitting in the gas line, I thought it would be a very fitting thing to listen to the all about the Ukraine and Russia as I'm paying almost $5 a gallon for gasoline and really enjoying the fact that I could catch up on all of the episodes at once. I even thought, well maybe, I wonder if there'd be, I wonder if, you know I put out an episode once a day, I wonder if, and sometimes I sort of stack them all, I wonder if there would be interest in the channel and me just putting them out as soon as they're ready to go for, let's say, a special tier. I've resisted doing the special tier thing, but I could do that at Patreon or the little join button on YouTube, and so you know what I don't want to do is have to have people pay for something. There are lots of ways that you can listen to this without any ads, you can just listen to the audio podcast, you can watch it over on Odyssey for free with no ads, so if you're a little bit industrious it's not hard to not have ad breaks in the middle of my, in the middle of my meanderings. But anyway, so I very much, I very much like the Rest is History Club. There is a Discord that goes with it, I've only been on there once or twice, but it is a way to support Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook, who I really enjoy, and that way you can hear all of their Russia things at once. Now, I, so I was listening to the first one and, and it was, it was excellent, I was really enjoying it, but as I was listening to it, I, I began to think about, you know, religion is, what we mean by religion is so big and broad and a big part of it is sort of the sum of our dreams, and they started out here by talking about Russian exceptionalism, Russia as the Third Rome, you know, some of these things that we've treated in some of the previous podcasts, but, but also communism and its utopian, in some ways, sort of a Christian vision of what, let's say, obviously it's in, in via Marx, it's completely atheistic and materialistic and this worldly, but, but the attempt to arrive at the kingdom of God as such, or at least the, the kingdom of, of, of humanity's godness in the state, and, and really that comes to full fruition in the state, and whereas liberal democracies at different spectrums sort of deal with the state as God and the state as utopia and the state as great insurer, and of course we're talking about liberal hegemony and liberal democracies and all of this, but in many ways that the, the pursuit of the communist dream was all about kingdom come, and so it was a deeply religious thing even though it was atheistic, and, and in that way it's, it's always sort of ironic when I hear atheists say, oh yeah, the Soviet Union was religious, it wasn't atheistic, atheism has never been tried, oh okay, and, and this little section of the podcast talking about the Soviet Union in the 70s, I thought was really interesting, so I'm going to play a little bit of it. But something that, as we said, can be traced back to the Tsarist period, but obviously gets a particular refinement under communism, where what had been the Russian Empire becomes the Soviet Union, and as the Soviet Union is one of two superpowers and sees itself charged with a historical destiny, it is the midwife of world communism. That has sustained it throughout decades of transformation and upheaval. By the... In other words, just earlier in the podcast, they were talking about Russian exceptionalism and to a degree American exceptionalism, and the point I made in a previous podcast that is I think part of nationalism and the vision of nationalism is built into a sort of exceptionalism. Now, now obviously probably depending on the size and scope and power of a country, that exceptionalism will either be large or small. It's, you know, I've got some Dutch background, so I feel a little bit, you know, a little bit of Dutch exceptionalism, but when I talk to people from the Netherlands, I don't hear a lot of it. And, you know, I made the comment about how stubborn the Dutchmen were because they're plastered between the North Sea and they've got England and France and Germany, and I made a comment about that. And my friend, Tim Blackman, who is an immigrant from the Netherlands and a minister in the Christian Reformed Church, who's... I love Tim. Tim says, yeah, all of 10 days. That's how long the Netherlands lasted against Nazi Germany, all of 10 days. And so part of nationalism breeds a certain degree of exceptionalism. And so when you have a great people, let's say, so in my church, there's a wonderful guy named Kevin who grew up in... his parents left Iran and under, you know, at the transition from the Shah into the Islamic Revolution. And of course, this Persian exceptionalism, the Persians have a degree of cachet and pride about their great world empire. The Jews, you know, have a particular sort of exceptional... they're God's chosen people. And so there's that. And, you know, sort of part of nationalism is in fact a sense of exceptionalism. This goes back all the way in anthropology when I made the point before out of, you know, even the Navajo, that their word for themselves was the people and everyone else is not the people. And anthropologists find this all over the world. So Russia has sort of the third Rome and you get a sense from Putin in this. And you have the sense of that empire lost is sort of the breeding ground for desperate grabs at things like increasingly it appears that the attempt to swallow Ukraine has been a desperate grab and a lot of Islamic terrorism was sort of a desperate grab. And it sort of feeds on this. They talk about it, Dominic and Tom talk about it in a later episode where it sort of feeds on resentment sometimes. I was watching another piece that was talking about wokeism and the resentment of that. Oh, our proper place in the world at the top of the world, we would be there if not for and then fill in your cast of characters. For Putin, you know, partly it's Gorbachev. For if you're woke, it's, you know, it's white cis male hierarchies. If it's, you know, there's always resentment always breeds on something has there's a villain in the world and they've done us a disservice by stabbing us in the back. They they didn't play fair. And so now they have the upper hand. But but with this with this grab, with this suicide mission, with this Leroy Jenkins, we're going to somehow set the world right. So built on that Russian exceptionalism is sort of built on in some ways. And this this sounds rather counterintuitive because growing up in the United States in the 60s and 70s. And in the 80s, in fact, you know, there was the Soviet bread lines and empty store shelves. I mean, they became sort of a meme before we even had the word meme that, you know, to be to be a Russian meant to drive a lot of and it meant to wait in line for bread and it meant to, you know, basically have really crappy consumer goods and to always have to deal with corruption. And, you know, living in America and living in the Western world, this is the land of opportunity and we can have the best gadgets right away and we have the best technology and we have the coolest we have the best arts, at least the popular arts and we have the coolest singers and all of that. And really, in a lot of ways, what we have here are two different visions of kingdom of kingdom come of the kingdom of God on earth and the Soviet Union, at least everybody has a job and everybody gets a meal and everybody gets apartment. Now, you might have to live in some gray black monstrosity that is deeply ugly, but at least you have a roof over your head. OK, at least you get three square meals, at least you get an education. And of course, you know, during the Cold War, they would always brag about the fact that, well, at least Cuba has, you know, socialized medicine and everybody gets a doctor in Cuba. And at least if you grow up in Cuba, you get an education. But if you're right across in the Dominican Republic, well, baby, it's on you. Well, which vision of the kingdom is correct? Is it is it one of security? I think of that C.S. Lewis quote that I use sometimes from the from the problem of pain where we don't have security in this life, but we have plenty of thrills. That's sort of living in the West. Well, the whole idea of communism will give everyone security and maybe not not everybody's going to have more than another. And you're not going to have fabulously wealthy people, but at least everyone will have security. And what's interesting to me about that is that, of course, right now, to a degree, well, it'll be very interesting to see how this whole Ukraine chapter sort of disrupts the whole woke anti woke world. I wrote a substack this morning, somewhat summarizing the video that I posted this morning, but but but sort of getting a little bit more detail on, you know, you America really gets dangerous. And I took a clip from the Iron Giant, that great scene when, you know, Hogart wasn't that the little boy's name? Like he's they shot at him and he's hurt and the giant thinks he's dead. He just raises up and he he's he's militarizes and he starts going after the tanks. That's what happens when John Wayne and Sheila ism get in bed together. It's like, yeah, seven wars since the end of the since the end of the Cold War. America is the is the is the great crusading. You know, it's so funny to me where you can create, you know, Jesus and John Wayne and and American militarism and, you know, American civil, Christian nationalism and all of this stuff. But boy, you know, put some crying kids from Ukraine on TV and watch Americans decide they want to be the Lone Ranger. It's it's it's so utterly predictable. We've done it again and again. The Spanish American War, First World War, Second World War, Second World War. We got attacked. So then we, you know, had a had a reason. But yeah, we jumped into Europe. We're going to clean up Europe first and then we're going to go deal with the Japanese. So, you know, Vietnam, this is this is America. This is what we do. And, you know, at least when when mom and dad, dad being John Wayne, mom being Sheila ism, at least when they're fighting, we don't go to war. But, you know, give give America a reason one way or another to have mom and dad get together and the guns come out. So anyway, that's you know, I've really been chewing on that. And it's just like, are we are we are we that reactive? Are we that easily played? I mean, any any parliament member from Ukraine can, you know, get on American TV and. You know, and I'm not trying to make light of Ukrainian suffering or the brutality and the injustice that Putin is putting on the country. I mean, I think that's the only way to do it. But you know, we can we America wants to be so uncritical until it's so full of itself that now it's going to become God in the world and set the world right. And every time we do it, well, I don't know, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq. Really? Are we really going to commit to the Ukraine for the long haul? Are we really going to are we willing to commit to the long haul? Are we really going to do what in the Ukraine? Really? Anybody think that through? No, not a lot. We just we just the mere neurons get going and we want to bring justice and yeah, justice, justice can be justice in our own hands can be about the most potent drug around. Anyway, you got me monologuing. I got me monologuing. Let's let's get back into these two visions of the Kingdom of God. Seventies, when Putin is coming of age, local destiny, it is the midwife of world communism that has sustained it throughout decades of transformation and upheaval. By the seventies, when Putin is coming of age, that sense of purpose and of destiny perhaps is starting to fade. It's the age of Brezhnev, a man with kind of insanely huge ideas about what's going on. And you can kind of rigor mortis starts, isn't it? I mean, they're all kind of basically dead. They are constantly getting colds, but keep them in their beds for five years. They wear nothing but overcoats. They wear things under the overcoats. I've never seen any evidence for that. You're right. So it's always snowing. So what's going on? So Putin is born in Leningrad, St. Peter's. And Holland just nails it. And those are those are memories from my youth because you always see the military parades and you always see those those old people up there behind above that wall. And it's always freezing out there because it's the October October there in Moscow would be cold and they're all up there and the military parade is going by. And, you know, they're all old men. In 1952, when he's from a working class family, his parents work in a factory overcoats. They wear things under the overcoats. I've never seen any evidence for that. I've never seen any evidence for that. So Putin is born in Leningrad, St. Petersburg in 1952, and he's from a working class family. His parents work in a factory and he goes to Leningrad State University in 1970, I think, and he's there. You know, it's very, you know, in that way, sort of the rough Canadians or the Americans from the West, it's, you know, humble roots and up from the bottom. Five years. Five years. And he's a very, you know, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, five years. And so he comes of age in the Brezhnev era, as you say, and it's an age of, it is not an age of revolutionary zeal at all. So you mentioned communism and a sort of sense of communist zeal, but that really isn't what typifies the Brezhnev regime. The Brezhnev regime is all about stability and there's a kind of ordinariness to it. So for most people who are alive in the Soviet Union at that point, the Soviet Union is all they've ever known. And everybody in the world, you know, in America and Britain, in Western Europe and in the Soviet Union, thinks the Soviet Union is going to probably be around forever. You know, it is, as you say. And that's right. I remember in grade school in the seventies and, you know, on the news, it was always the nuclear count. How many nuclear warheads does America have? How many does do the Russians have? And, you know, how many troops do we have? How many tanks do they have? And if it, you know, as a little boy, you know, grew up reading a lot of stuff from the Second World War, of course, Vietnam War was kind of, oh, that's, that's not, that's not a good war like the Second World War. And so it's sort of fascinated and anxious and, you know, wondering about this great foe that we have in the Soviet Union. One of the two superpowers. It's sclerotic. The economy is producing enough to keep people happy. So they're fed. They've actually got more consumer goods than ever before. You know, Robert Service in his history of Russia says, I think he uses the phrase, most Russian workers had never had it so good as they had it in the 1970s. So they've got fridges, they're going on holiday there. You know, life's OK, but relative. That there there's the vision. OK, you've got a refrigerator, you've got food in the fridge, chicken in every pot. You maybe you'll have a chance at a car. You have a secure job. You're going to have a pension. You're going to be taken care of. Is this the kingdom of God? Well, you know, you see this mapping on to the current, you know, at least before Ukraine, the struggle between Sheila and John, let's say in America. But what about what about zest? I remember last time I was reading Plato's Republic relishes. They they must have relishes. The particular translation of Plato's Republic, you know, well, we're mapping out the the ideal city and and certainly they must have relishes. Well, well, well, the desire for relishes sort of sort of torpedo the kingdom of God. Relatively, they've never had. I mean, they've never had it so good. But relative to the capitalist West, of course, it's falling economically. They're starting to fall behind for and. And so here's here's the question. Is it. Is it just security or is it sort of opportunity slash meaningful ambition and pursuit? And these these tensions within Christian eschatology are are are not small because, you know, in terms of the Bible, many of the eschatology, you know, they're going to wipe away every tear streets paved with gold. But one might. And this is in some ways in the anxiety of the atheists. If you go back and you watch The Good Place. You know, The Good Place now, it's been out long enough, and I think you can see the whole thing on Netflix. The end of The Good Place. Here's a spoiler alert. The end of The Good Place is once again death and annihilation. And the argument being made by the. By the atheists, putting that together is we can imagine nothing that will finally satisfy our ambition. And so once we have everything, we'll get bored with it. And so then about the only thing that will give meaning to our life is the threat of annihilation. And for the threat of annihilation to be real, we actually have to have annihilation. And so the end of The Good Place has people just walking through a door into nothingness. And there it is. All of existence. Poof. Gone. And you hear that in the celebrity atheists with respect to, well, heaven would be boring because it would go on and on forever. Oh, so much for commentatorial explosiveness. So it's very interesting that in some ways what we have in the drama between. And there is, you know, if you go back and you listen to one of the early episodes on the rest of history, you know, there is a degree of again, Christianity sort of suffuses everything underneath. And we have all of these children of Christianity, you know, picking different things. And so Marx's vision of, well, we don't believe in God anymore. So we're just going to have this this materialist evolution that continues to go and and and social and class struggle that continues to evolve. And but do we do is our final state stability and sufficiency or is our final state meaningful pursuit of ambitious dreams? The prosperity, the apparent prosperity of the 70s is based on a fiction. So it's based on a sclerotic, incredibly complicated, top down sort of system, you know, the sort of parodies of sort of state planning and tractor statistics and all that stuff. They're all they're all rooted in truth, but it's also rooted in high oil prices. So high world that they're almost living a bit of a bit of an illusion because when the oil price falls in the 1980s, that's going to pull the rug out from the from the system. And now this is fascinating because if you grew up in America, of course, you might remember the the oil embargo, the OPEC embargo, and then the gas lines. Again, I just sat in a gas line this morning again, but it's a Costco gas line. So it's not a real gas line. I can get as much gas as I want if I want to pay for it. But, you know, because I'm a cheap Dutchman, I'm going to go sit in line at Costco, which probably economically makes zero sense. But, you know, I told my wife this morning that I'd wash her car and I would fill it up with gas. And these are the trip little, you know, tip to you men out there. If you want to keep your wife happy, you know, take care of her car. Trip for the tip for the ladies out there. If you want to keep your man happy, the way to a man's heart is through his stomach. You know, these are these are hackneyed old cliches, but there's a lot of truth to them. And they sort of they sort of feed on this question of eschatology as stability and eschatology as meaningful pursuit. What does the kingdom look like? And in some ways, the West versus the First versus the Second World, the industrialized democratic West versus the communist world sort of sort of banks on this, at least until the kingdom falls in the communist world. And as you say, I mean, he's not Stalin. You know, he's nothing like Stalin. He's not. It's still a very autocratic system. It's one that represses dissidents and shoves them into psychiatric hospitals, but it doesn't kill lots of people. So life kind of goes on. And for a young man like Putin, his ambition is to join the KGB. Supposedly he applies to join and they say to him, you don't apply. We contact you. But they kind of make a note of him because they know that he's loyal and hardworking and all this sort of stuff. So for him, he thinks he's going to be he thinks he's joining the intelligence service of one of actually the world's great power because the 1970s is a terrible decade for the kind of the United States. It's the decade of Nixon and Carter and Vietnam and this sort of introspection and the Soviet Union. And again, sort of kingdom compared to what? America in the 70s. I remember well, I lived just outside of New York City and New York City was always teetering on bankruptcy. I was sort of a news junkie as a kid. My parents were news junkies. And so, you know, for fun, I listened to I listened to news radio, WINS 1010. I was at 1050. Give us 20 minutes and we'll give you the world. And I'd listen to that while I'd be playing. You get this little vision of little PVK in his room in the attic. I'd be playing these Avalon Hill games by myself. It's not chess by yourself. It's, you know, refighting Stalingrad with with squad leader and little cardboard squares. And in the background, I just listened to news all the time. And, you know, New York was a New York was a mess. The economy was a mess. You had oil shock. Well, apparently all that oil shock in America was was really a wonderful thing for Russia with all that oil union. There's a sort of sense that the Soviet Union might even be winning the Cold War. Burying them, burying them as yes, as Christoph said to. So I did a Freddie and Paul show. And again, hey, hey, Freddie, I just mentioned our show. Freddie doesn't watch these videos. But, you know, Freddie's always like, oh, when are you going to mention the Freddie and Paul show on your channel? So more people will watch. Well, a couple of weeks ago, we had Fancy Nancy on and she told the story of the Rippon bomb shelter. And she called me actually the next day. Because apparently one of her cousins listened to it. It was a little older, remembered a little bit better. But Nancy was talking about the Cold War and just remembered Khrushchev. We will bury you. And I guess that made a deep impression on little girl Fancy Nancy back in the 50s. And she remembers it well, said to Nixon. So there's this sort of false image, I think, that people have about their own society in the 70s. And there are some people at the top of the Soviet regime. So in particular, the man who's going to succeed Brezhnev, who's a man called Yuri Andropov, who is the head of the KGB. There are some people who know that there are deep problems that Russia has. I say Russia, the Soviet Union has huge problems with alcoholism, with absenteeism. The meaning crisis. I mean, when I was listening to this, I was thinking, well, John Verbeke in the Soviet Union would say we have a meaning crisis. We have all of this alcoholism. We have all of this stability, but we have no meaning. We have no happiness. We have nothing to live for. Well, for some people, living is just stability and repetition. For other people, living is the pursuit of your dreams and rise or fall based on, that's sort of the plucky American independence. That its birth rate is struggling. That's high rates of corruption, all these kinds of things. But Putin doesn't see this as a young man, I wouldn't have said. Well, two questions. First of all, Putin, is he a committed communist as a young man or is he a committed nationalist? What's the balance there? If you read and I like how Holland puts that, is he a nationalist or communist? And the question is really what vision is energizing and motivating him? Sort of his semi-official biography says that he enjoys reading Marxist, Leninist books when he's at school. I mean, I think it's a bit like Christianity, Tom. Is it? It is. Dominic says that to Tom. In this sense, there's a difference between being a Christian in the second century AD and being a Christian in the 16th century when everybody's a Christian. And you're not a radical, you're not a rebel. You're not necessarily a Christian. Well, you might be in the 16th century. Well, and right there again, you have sort of the tension between kingdom come as everything you need or kingdom come as the chance to get anything you want. You might not be, you might not, you might be a good Christian, but none of those things. You might just be an apparatchik. And I think he's a communist in the sense that he's listened to everything he's been told. And that provides his frame of mind. He's listened to everything he's been told and that provides his framework. But I don't think he burns with the zeal of social justice or with revolution. Actually, Tom, I don't think, I think a lot of the people who are running the show don't burn with revolutionary zeal. OK, that was my other question. But I think before I ask that, let's take a quick break. Break them into slightly more digestible and we did club. So that's very convenient for me, less convenient for you. My argument to have it at Banbury station, sadly, was vetoed. But the whole rest of the history team will be there. And of course, if you don't want to join all that and you are kind of four years, three years or so. When you're in the club, you don't have ads. But this one, we had a long ad for the club itself. And I didn't, I didn't join the, is it the Athelstan? I didn't join at the Athelstan level because what you get with the Athelstan level is actually get invites to to hobnob with with Tom and Dom. And I, I don't think I'll be buying airplane tickets to London just to hobnob with Tom and Tom and Dom. Nothing against Tom and Dom, but yeah, the time and the the time and the cheddar to hop a plane from the good old Sacramento Airport to London. Maybe someday when I plan a trip to Europe, I'll I'll I'll join the Athelstan level to make sure I can hit the meeting with Tom and Dom. I mean, I mean, he's I mean, basically, he's incapacitated for the whole period of his fall of the USSR, the creation of Russia, the Russian Federation in the 1990s and the rise of Putin. And of course, if you don't want to join all that and you are absolutely bridling and furious at having the stories been interrupted by this shameless self-promotion, don't worry, you can carry on listening for free and we will get right back to it right now. Yeah, that is enough shameless self-promotion. Right, Dominic. So you were just saying before the break that a lot of the people at the top of the Soviet Union are not burning with kind of revolutionary communist zeal. And the question I asked you was on Andropov. He's the guy who notoriously has the cold. Lasts for what, kind of four years, three years or something. I mean, he's in I mean, basically, he's in. And again, I love this because it's very much my memory of it, too, that, you know, you'd always have on the news. Well, we haven't seen the leader of the Soviet Union for for how long. And, you know, it's sort of like if you kind of watch North Korea, it's sort of the same thing. Capacitated for the whole period of his term of general secretary. Yes. And then he succeeded by Chenenko, who is kind of in many ways even more moribund. Are these guys people who, you know, Andropov is a very smart guy. He recognizes them. So here you get in the sense, you know, if you sort of play on communism as a as a heretical variant of Christianity, you know, are these people true believers? Do they do they really believe in in the system that the system will bring greatness? But of course, you know, poor Russia was only, you know, they they confused high oil prices with God's favor, let's say. And someone might say the same thing about, let's say, the kingdom of David and Solomon. If that was only because the the Mesopotamians and the Egypt and the Egyptians were to were to internally divided. And that's what allowed, you know, it wasn't God's favor that allowed David. It was it was the it was the poverty of Egypt and Mesopotamia, of course, if you're if your God is yet another thing instead of a God working through. Anyway, we'll leave we'll leave that alone right now. The Soviet Union has huge problems. Is he a believer, though? He doesn't question the system. He just thinks that the system needs a bit of tinkering. You know, apply the spanner here, a bit of oil there and it will tick along fine. He doesn't question the mission, I suppose, is what I would say. So, I mean, Chinenko, he's a hack. He's just a party hack. Andropov is clever. He was the Soviet ambassador, I think, in Hungary during the Budapest uprising. So he has taken from that a belief that you have to be you have to be strong. You know, you have to suppress dissent. You can't let things. But he also has taken a belief that you have to get in ahead. So, you know, you can't let yourself get in a situation where thousands of people are in the streets. You have to keep changing the system to make it work. So I don't think Andropov is in it. He's very severe. He's very strict. He's very anti-corruption. And he's clever. And he has read forbidden books. And he as Soviets. And this is another interesting that the elite are allowed to read forbidden books. And if you read something like Brave New World, of course, the elite there. Well, what do we want? We want someone to manage the sheeple to make sure they have, you know, will be benevolent managers of the sheeple will make sure that they have televisions and inane things for them to watch and refrigerators and bread in the stores and a car in the driveway. But not two or three cars and not a particularly good car, but at least a car, because that's all you really need. And we can if if we make sure that everyone at least has all of these things, then then that's enough. But, of course, the the managers of the sheeple, they need to know the bigger, broader world. So that's sort of the to keep changing the system to make it work. So I don't think Andropov is in it. He's very severe. He's very strict. He's very anti-corruption. And he's clever. And he has read forbidden books. And he as Soviets, sort of the top brass are allowed to do they're expected to do to inform themselves. And he's surrounded himself with aides who are relatively free thinking. But he's still I mean, everybody there believes in them that their model must triumph. And they believe they're in a global competition with this with the United States. Absolutely. Yeah. So inform themselves. So so Kingdom has come, but the war isn't quite over yet. And he's surrounded himself with aides who are relatively free thinking. But he's still I mean, everybody there believes in them that their model must triumph. And they believe they're in a global competition with this with their true believers. United States. Absolutely. Yeah. And so he is said he was head of the KGB. He's general secretary during the kind of the coldest days of the Cold War in the early 80s. Yes. So he he is the guy who's in charge when Reagan is lambasting the Soviet Union as evil. Even. Yeah. And it's 99 red balloons and two tribes. Which is very frightening, by the way, for the Soviet leadership. They they think the Americans are going to attack them. Well, I mean, we did a podcast about this for Taylor Downing about nuclear war. They absolutely terrified that the Americans are going to attack them first. And of course, we were terrified that they were going to attack us first. But yeah. So Andropov takes over Brezhnev dies. I mean, Brezhnev basically died multiple times and was literally brought back from the dead. He sort of resuscitated and dragged around as this sort of embalmed figure in the late 1970s. Andropov succeeds in November 82 and is there to February 84. And as you said, he's basically ill the whole time. I mean, they literally, you know, on one side of his bed, there'll be the man with the nuclear briefcase. The other side of his bed will be the nurses keeping him alive. And then he can you imagine the scene if a guy with a nuclear briefcase is like. What do you do? He dies. Now, the person he wants to succeed him is the crucial figure in this podcast. And for Putin, a figure of utter ignominy and shame in Russian history, as indeed he is for a lot of Russians. And that man is Mikhail Gorbachev. That's the man that Andropov wants to take over. But he doesn't. He's too young. So the other people in the Politburo, they bypass him and they get this old hack, Chornenko, who is another sort of, I mean, he's dying when he takes over. And I think about Ross Douthat's book Decadence in this too. You have the sense of this generation that just won't let go of power and sort of Eric Weinstein's ideas about the boomers here too, that, you know, we had Trump and Biden, again, two classic boomers, if you will. And they just won't let go of power. And, yeah, who will be the next generation that will step forward and will any exers ever be president? And he's there from February 84 to the spring of 85. So what was it about Gorbachev that Andropov had seen? That's a really good question. So Gorbachev is a generation younger. He's the youngest guy, I think, pretty much on the Politburo. He joins in 1980 and he's 49, which is incredibly young by the standards of the Soviet leadership. And he has glamorous wife. He does. Right. He's a very clever wife. And so now we get the sense of, I mean, you don't imagine Brezhnev's wife, you know, sort of leading the way. But now we have our young leadership. It's sort of like Bill and Hillary. And it's now it's Gorbachev and his and his you know, these are these are up to date modern people. Very important. I mean, hugely important figure for him. His chief advisor. I mean, his real his real soulmate. So Gorbachev is from a place called Stavropol. He's from a little village called what's it called? Privolnoye, I think it's called. And he's from peasant stock. He's bright. He's super. Another another, you know, self-made man up from the up from the bottom. For bright. He's gone to Moscow State University and I think he's read law. He's got a birthmark on his head. He does. He's traveled. So he's been aboard. He even went on a three week driving holiday in France with Raisa. And they sort of drove around France and said, God, you know, this place is so much better than Soviet. OK, so so what's what's kingdom come? Is it is it opportunity or it's or is it security? Union. You know, this is the sort of classic thing that often happens when people are posted to the West. He actually one of his chief aides, one of his chief advisors is a man called Alexander Yakovlev, who'd been ambassador to Canada and basically had exactly the same kind of crisis of confidence. You know, you got to Canada. Oh, my God, this place is great. I'm. It's Canada. Well, maybe it's maybe it's kind of like cold Russia. I mean, maybe it's kind of like Western Russia. I mean, they're both northern and cold. And I've just ticked off all my Canadian listeners, of which there are not. There are not a few. But when Gorbachev becomes general secretary, yeah, he's still a believer. I mean, he just because he's got nice camembert in France. It doesn't mean that he's absolutely, Tom, absolutely. He's a believer. He is he is idealistic. And this is one of the great problems with Gorbachev. Now, Gorbachev is a fascinating character, because, of course, everybody listening to this by and large will think, oh, Gobi, a nice guy, you know, Nobel Peace Prize winner, top man. Of course, in Russia, he is regarded with absolute contempt. And I have to say, when you when you start to dig into the story and you think about Gorbachev in a in a slightly more detached way, I mean, we've done a lot of weak and failed leaders on this podcast. And although it pains me to say it, because he's an admirable man in so many ways. I mean, but when he leaves office, he's only in there for six years. And when he leaves his country, has completely and utterly fallen apart. Now, some people would say that's because the problems are too great. But I think Gorbachev, I think almost all historians actually, who really work on this, people like Robert Service or Vladislav Zubok, who wrote a brilliant book called Collapse that came out last year, the fall of the Soviet Union. They would just say Gorbachev is a complete and utter disaster. Why? He's idealistic, Tom. He's he's bright. He and race have have spent loads of time talking about the future of the Soviet Union. They like talking to other kind of intellectually kind of people. Gorbachev is also very canny. So he's been able to get up the kind of greasy pole. He's part of why I love this podcast is just it's just their turns of phrase is able to get up the greasy pole for patrons like Andrew Poff think a lot of him. He says to race it when he joins the I think it's when he joined the Politburo. He said, we can't live like this any longer. And he's determined to fix the system. But he goes about fixing it in such a politically incompetent. I mean, again, it slightly pains me to say it. But he fixes it in such an inept way that absolutely everything gets worse. He does too much too quickly, too many different areas and everything falls apart. And you said, was he a believer? He's absolutely a believer. So Vladislav Zubot brings this out really well in his book. He says, you know, Gorbachev is obsessed with Lenin. I mean, this is so much like that. You're parallel with your Christianity stuff about people who, you know, people who would kind of all have a Cromwell or somebody reading the Bible. And this is this is Dominic making this point. I mean, he's always given Tom a hard time about Tom's obsession with Christianity. This is Dominic to guide them. Gorbachev has Lenin's sort of works on his desk, and he will sort of dip into them in the way that people sometimes dip into the Bible. He will dip into them to try and get inspiration for what he needs to do. And he becomes convinced. He is convinced that the Soviet Union has taken a wrong turn since the 1920s and it needs to get back to Lenin's vision. He idealizes Lenin and he thinks Lenin had a vision. It's a more democratic, free, open, creative and if I can get back to that, we'll establish true communism and then we'll turn this sort of sinking ship around. If you can turn the sinking ship around. So that's that's quite a kind of abstract sense of mission. But I maybe I've got this wrong, but I thought that he was also focused on a very specific problem, which was that the Soviet economy was massively distorted by defense spending. So they're spending what? 20, 25 percent. It's probably not. That's actually been exaggerated. It's about 15 percent, I think, is the estimate. Quite a lot. It is, but it's if he's going to if they're going to, you know, guns to butter. Yeah. Then they need to make things up with the West. So he does that very effectively. I mean, he's very good at that. Yes. He definitely kind of removes the chill from the Cold War very effectively. So which is why people in the West rate him so highly. But as someone who is ideologically committed to Marxist Leninism, I mean, it's a definition of the job that kind of trying to construct an economy that will provide Soviet citizens with all the kind of consumer durables and gizmos that you get in the West is bound to fail. I mean, there's just no way it can be done. No, I don't agree with that. I don't actually don't agree with either of those things. So first of all, the defense spending that has become a very comforting myth that the West tells itself about. The Soviet Union, particularly in America, that we crippled. We won the Cold War. And I had never heard anybody argue against this myth before. So Dom is very much right there. By increasing defense spending so much that they couldn't keep up. But most historians, I think, would now say they could keep up. I mean, they had defense spending. Yeah, they've done it since the 40s. They could they could have carried on doing it. I mean, that defense spending is not what brings the Soviet Union down. Second point, I forgot what your second point was, Tom. Oh, consumer durables. Well, there is a very good example of a communist country that has embraced a consumer. China. That's China. And the Chinese, I mean, Deng Xiaoping supposedly said something to the effect that somebody his son asked him what he thought of Gorbachev. He said, I think Gorbachev's a complete idiot. Yes, but this is communism with Chinese characteristics, which basically means a kind of freedom to ignore aspects of communism that don't gel with with making money. But but Leninism, absolutely. I mean, Leninism is all about kind of collectivization. It's all about suppression of private enterprise. But I think most historians would say, well, first of all, that's not what Gorbachev himself thinks. He thinks Lenin's new economic policy in the 1920s after the Russian Civil War did allow some space for limited private enterprise and that they can move towards a mixed economy. I think one of the big problems with the Soviet Union is it's become so reliant on imports paid for with oil revenue, and it's completely failed to develop its own kind of consumer industries. And and it's amazing when he says that. Wasn't that today as it isn't Russia just basically continued to be just oil and wheat. So it's like Saudi Arabia with snow. A bit. Is that what the what do they do? They spend their own money on snow. No, but I mean, it's the side, you know, notoriously economies that have lots of oil to be dysfunctional. Well, yes, Iran is a good example from the 70s. We talked about Iran a lot in previous podcasts. And I think, yes, it's incredibly dysfunctional. I mean, it's unbelievably complicated economy. No one I mean, when Gorbachev is given that they're talking about this thing called the law of state enterprise, which is going to be this law that's going to allow a little bit of more freedom for factories to keep their money and to invest it and those sort of thing. Gorbachev says at one point, you know, I basically don't understand this. And nobody really knows. Well, I feel sympathy. I mean, basically, he's trying to he's trying to amend a machine for which there is no instruction manual. I think there's a degree of that. But I think he's also you see, the thing is, he's trying to mend this machine, which has incredibly complicated kind of supply chain networks. And and it has this weird cashless system that enterprises use with each other, whereas citizens use cash and you can't change one to the other. I mean, it's completely mad. But that's the way it's a bit like any massive sclerotic institution. Once you start to fiddle with it, it becomes very difficult to stop it from falling apart. But the other thing is he combines this with a piece. So he has the perestroika, which is restructuring, which has political and economic developments. But he combines it with glasnost, which is openness. And that's in the wake of Chernobyl. So Chernobyl, the explosion at Chernobyl is in April 1986. And after that, Gorbachev thinks, well, I need to I need to increase the speed. We need to have more newspapers. We need to have more discussion. And why is it? Why does Chernobyl have that effect on him? Because I think he's he's shocked by the incompetence, by the coverups, by the ineptitude of the managers, by the way the atomic industry has been run, by their lies, all of that kind of stuff. You know, Gorbachev, of course, he's complicit in covering it up a bit because he's the general secretary and he kind of feels like he has to. But he still thinks, OK, we need to, you know, we just need to be more open and we need to be more creative. Crucially, he one of the things he does now. His personality got the better of him. One of the things we haven't talked about at all, which is very important for understanding Putin, is the Soviet Union. And I know we have a lot of very kind of to us young listeners. The Soviet Union is not anything like a nation state, and it doesn't even really see itself as an empire. So it's got 15 republics going all the way from Estonia. And it's a mad state in many ways. It's existed, you know, one form or another since the 20s. But it's got going all the way from Estonia to kind of Tajikistan. And the Russians are about roughly about 50 percent of that. The Russian population. And there has always been the issue of nationalism. You know, there's always been tensions in the Caucasus, in Central Asia, in the Baltics and so on. And Gorbachev has this idea that by basically devolving a lot of power to the republics, I mean, devolution, Tom, what could possibly go wrong? Devolving power to the republics. That will invigorate the system. You know, but at the same time, he wants to open everything up so people can debate things more freely. So that will obviously give nationalism more room to sort of to flourish. But he also combines that with an attack on what he sees as the corruption of the old elites. So the old elites. So I'll I played most of it, but it's if you if you liked it, by all means, subscribe. And if you really like it, by all means, join the club. It's I have no regrets about joining the club. And they're they're delightful to listen to. And they're always good. But I very much wanted to bring up this idea as kingdom come as security versus meaningful pursuit of opportunity. And you see that in this you see that in the story of the old Soviet Union in the 1970s. So I just wanted to do a little video on that. I don't even know how long this is. But of course, I meandered here and there through some other things. And I will I very much want to get back to American Protestant establishment and the the transformation of that into. Blue Church or the blob, so thanks for listening. Leave a comment. Let me know what you think.