https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1qFaHaJx9G4

 Hi, this is Paul. I don't know how many of you caught it, but Twitter had a piece from the Daily Mail that showed this mosaic that they found in Syria of the Trojan War. Really stunning, beautiful mosaic that was uncovered, and I'll put a link below in terms of it, just an unbelievable mosaic. What struck me about it was, again, how we live in the midst of stories and how stories work in our world to sort of calibrate us and set us. I made the video earlier this week that talked about John Stewart and Tucker Carlson and other people in the YouTube comments mentioned various people, and I was thinking about FDR using the fireside shot, Walter Cronkite being the most trusted man in America, George Washington. It seems like we do our collective and communal relevance realization through each other and images that we have of each other. I was having a conversation with, I try not to name people in my videos unless they explicitly mention it, but someone who's followed the channel quite closely, he lives in San Francisco, and every now and then now he's coming out to, he knows who he is once he hears this, comes out semi-regularly to Sacramento for work so we're able to do lunch together, and he's followed this little corner of the internet quite closely, and he's been writing a master's thesis on a lot of the work that we've been doing, and talked about how it's not only it's the characters, it's the narratives that a lot of how we pull life together is through, you'll notice some of, I don't know, nobody said anything in the comment section that I caught these screenings of light, a little neo-logism here, where these are, you know, we're beings of light but we're on a screen, so we're sort of these screens of light, and we navigate and we work on the world through that. Now when Kanye did his Tucker Carlson interview, I don't have Fox News and so I don't, I haven't been able to watch it yet, but I'm working on watching the whole interview. It's just fascinating to me the way that, again, we're using narrative, someone today talked about, you know, combinatorial explosive list, so that's not a thing. Well let's talk about the overwhelming number, the overwhelming pieces of information in this information age that very quickly just overwhelms our capacity to take in new information. That's what we're talking about in combinatorial explosiveness. I use that term just because thanks to John, many people in this little corner understand it, and I can illustrate it with how much time do you have in your life to research and come to a well-informed decision on just about any single element or aspect of your life, and then multiply that by all the possible elements and aspects of your life, and on and on and on. And what happened in modernity is we sort of outsourced this expertise to authorities, such as doctors and churches and academics and so on and so forth, but once you take that move, you're already using another individual or a narrative, and of course all these narratives are nested in other narratives, because you might be, say, your political narrative here and your religious narrative here and your personal narrative here, and of course there's all these narratives together. And what's happening now is that we have, instead of, let's say, one church with one pope or one king or one lord in the region or one professor or one teacher, now suddenly we have access to, and we're bombarded with so many authority figures, and we're all trying to sort of figure out who to believe and how to go about it, and so you've got a guy like Kanye who's, you know, who's sort of all over the map, and then of course people try to, I mean, talk about the ultimate in sort of public gaslighting, which, oh, he's crazy, don't listen to him. That trick's been tried all the way back to Jesus, and well before that. It's, in and of itself, and you know, I don't, I have no idea about, even how we stay sane is by talking to one another and finding ourselves embedded within communal narratives that we're all constantly checking each other by, and we're all having these status games that are going one way or another, and this is a massive project that we are all doing implicitly to sort of manage and keep ourselves in the world, and this is why when there's a death of someone, grief is so difficult because now if that was a significant person, now there's a big hole in your life that sort of has to be rebuilt around it, or if there's some massive betrayal, John Vervecky has this story, you can make up all kinds of little stories, your father sits you down at some point in life and says, you're adopted, or you're not my child, or I've never loved you, and suddenly there's this massive hole in the fabric of the world, and part of what we've been working on is trying to have a better handle on what this massive fabric of the world is all around us, and now that so much of our relational networks are filled with screenings of light, the Dunbar numbers just completely exploded, and all of the traditional structures and all of the traditional efforts to try to hold the world together are just very, very different, so I was going through Homer's Iliad, and I'm going through this Great Courses series, and she had a chapter on the role of the gods, which I thought was really good. Finally, the lecture will conclude with considering the topic of fate and its workings with respect to the gods. The gods, as we've already seen, are essential characters in both Homeric epics, in the Iliad and the Odyssey both, but particularly in the Iliad. Now even the fact that one of the weaknesses of the whole atheist argument is that they look around and they say, well, obviously there are no super things in the sky, and therefore there are no gods, but a much more sophisticated and subtle reading of just about anything in the ancient world says, well, what exactly are? Why on earth is Homer's wrestling with the story, this fabric of existence around us? Why on earth are there these gods? And of course, Homer didn't invent the gods, but obviously someone came up with it, and why? Why would people come up with these things, and why would they get developed, and why would this become the pervasive majority take on life? And now, again, given its endlessly complex and especially the extremely limited knowledge of people in the ancient world, we have a very limited understanding of what on earth was going through, but here they are, and here it is, and this is one of the most important stories that ancients, at least in Western civilization, use to sort of calibrate their existence, get on the same page with each other, work as a community, and again, just look at even what, say, Durkheim and many sociologists would say about the function of what religion is, and so they sort of just actively dismiss it and say, ah, that's just made up stories. Okay, why do we make up stories, and why do we live within them, and why are they so important to us, and why do we try to, why does it matter so much to us? Actions both contribute to the narrative and reiterate key themes in the Iliad. The gods take direct concrete part in the action of the Iliad. Now, some critics have occasionally tried to explain the god's involvement away as merely metaphorical description of the human character's own psychological impulses, and to therefore say that Homer is not intending to create real characters in the gods, but merely to describe in metaphorical terms the impulses of his human characters. There are many times when this kind of psychologizing explanation of the gods works quite well. The example that is most frequently cited, for instance, is in book one of the Iliad, when Achilles is considering drawing his sword from its sheath and killing Agamemnon during the opening of their quarrel. Athena suddenly appears to no one but Achilles, no one but Achilles can see her. She grabs him by his long hair and basically says to him, stop, you really don't want to do that. Many critics have said this is merely a metaphorical way of saying that Achilles thought better of his action and changed his mind. However, there are at least as many, I think probably more, instances in the Iliad in which an action of the gods cannot be explained away as merely a psychological motivation of the character to whom the gods appear. For instance, to take another very obvious example, as I've already mentioned in passing when we were discussing book three of the Iliad, there is a scene in which Aphrodite bodily picks Paris up off the battlefield, carries him back inside the city of Troy, and puts him down in his bedroom. It's very hard to see that as merely a description of Paris's own psychological state, particularly since these actions of Aphrodite are narrated to us not by Paris. It's not Paris describing what seemed to him to happen, rather it's the narrator, Homer himself, the narrative voice of the epic. And part of what would be interesting because recently because I've been reading this, I rewatched and sort of skimmed the movie Troy and you know it would be, I would love to see movie makers do a, if you can do the Marvel cinematic universe, you could do the story of the Iliad complete with gods acting like gods. There would be a more faithful rendering of the story. It's hard, it's simply hard to imagine this story without the gods. They're deeply integral to the whole story. Saying Aphrodite went, picked Paris up, and carried him off the battlefield, I think we have to assume that these gods are within the context of the epic, given an actual reality that they are actual characters who interact with one another and with the humans and not merely metaphorical ways of describing the human's own psychological conditions. The involvement of the gods in the narrative not only motivates and moves along the action of the Iliad, there are many times when it also reiterates key themes and key points that have been made elsewhere in the narrative. So for instance, often the actions of the gods enhance the audience's sense of inevitability, their sense that the storyline must go in precisely this way at precisely this moment, that things have to happen as we see them happening and can happen in no other way. There are many times in the Iliad when a scene would make perfect sense, when it is sufficiently motivated merely by human actions and human motivations, when the gods are not necessary to... And this is a point that I often find some atheists simply completely miss because they'll say of Christians, well, Christians always believe and then they just have all this god stuff and it's like, no, the Christians have all the things down below here that they recognize and understand just like heaven and the gods and all of that level too. Explain what's happening in a scene, and yet Homer gives us both motivations, the human and the divine. Let me give an example of what I mean there. In book 11, for instance, Ios the Greater, the hero who is second only to Achilles as a warrior. And by the way, I probably should have mentioned in an earlier lecture, Ios is often sometimes referred to as Ajax. His name is sometimes transliterated into English as Ajax rather than as Ios. Same character. So if you know of the great Greek hero Ajax, Ios is the same person. There's a scene in book 11 in which Ios the Greater in exhaustion drops back from fighting and pauses for a moment and the Trojans get a momentary bit of ascendancy over the Greeks. This is perfectly understandable. A warrior who has been holding off the ranks of the enemy almost single-handedly drops back from the fighting temporarily. And she notes it in case you've never read the Iliad that many of the times the sway of battle back and forth is attributed to the gods. And one of the things that I've been thinking of as I've been going through the Iliad is in fact all of the sort of ways that they attribute things to Zeus. And it's usually not directly. You don't have Zeus sort of coming down in his chariot and smiting people with thunderbolts. Sort of like what movie was that? It was one of the Wonder Woman movies where you had all the all the gods sort of on the plane and they were going to do battle as such. There is a scene where Ares is sort of on the field doing this and you will find gods coming down to the field and fighting either by sort of possessing a warrior or by sort of healing a warrior instantly or somehow motivating someone. If you've ever watched Angels in the outfield the whole premise of the story is every now and then an angel comes and sort of rubs the shoulder of a particular baseball player and the kids could see the angel and tell the coach and then the coach would have that player do something because they would hit a home run or so on and so forth. So you have all these sort of imaginative ways of trying to figure out the the participations of of gods with humans and the Iliad has sort of a whole range of ways that it talks about it and tries to express it. No more motivation for that is needed and yet Homer tells us that Zeus put fear into Ios's mind and he dropped back from the fighting momentarily. This is the kind of instance I mean in which there's a double kind of motivation going on. The actions are perfectly understandable purely on the human level but by adding a divine motivation as well by saying that the gods are in some sense controlling the human's perceptions and the human actions. Homer adds to our sense of inevitability for how the story is going at this particular point. This kind of double motivation showing actions motivated both by the human's desires actions and impulses and showing the same actions motivated at the same time by the gods. This kind of double motivation is often referred to as over determination by literary critics. An action is over determined in a work of literature when it is explained by more than one cause any one of which would be sufficient to explain why the action or the event happens as it does. There's a lot of over determination in the Iliad. In their interactions with one another in particular not just in their interactions with humans but in their interactions with one another the gods reiterate some of the most important underlying narrative themes of the Iliad. Another way of putting that is that we see some of the same themes some of the same problems some of the same difficulties occurring between the gods being worked out on the divine level as on the human level. For instance in book 15 there's an ongoing power struggle between Zeus and his brother Poseidon. Zeus at this point in the Iliad wants the Trojans to have ascendancy. As you remember he had promised to Thetis that he would let the Trojans have ascendancy over the Greeks for a certain time until Achilles is missed enough by the Greeks that they honor him again. Poseidon on the other hand is very much on the side of the Greeks at this point and he wants them to have ascendancy over the Trojans. In book 15... At this point it's supposed it's important to mention it because the gods are pretty fickle they sort of swing back and forth. Homer refers to these two sons of Cronos. Cronos is the father of Zeus and Poseidon both. He says their hearts are set against one another and this causes bitter agonies for the fighting men in the Iliad. This kind of struggle between two extremely powerful males who because of their opposition to one another impose difficulties, agonies even on the fighting men obviously recalls the quarrel between Achilles and Agamemnon in the opening of the Iliad. So you have a kind of repetition or reiteration on the divine level of how a quarrel between two powerful males, a kind of one-upmanship almost between Zeus and Poseidon, has its effect on the fighting men who die as part of Zeus and Poseidon's quarrel in which they try to work out which of them is more powerful. Another kind of reiteration of important themes occurs in book 15, book 14 sorry, in the scene in which Hera seduces Zeus to distract him from watching the battle, to distract him from presiding over the fighting. Hera seduces Zeus knowing that he will sleep after they have sex. There obviously is a theme that is very important in the Iliad in various ways. A male is distracted by sex, distracted by sexual desire from the business at hand. This again reiterates the events of book one in which although as I said in the in lecture number three the quarrel between Achilles and Agamemnon is not only about sexual jealousy, it is certainly at least in part about sexual jealousy. Achilles and Agamemnon are both to some extent blindsided by their sexual feelings for their concubines and distracted from the more important business of the war. Similarly of course this whole war has been caused by a man, a male, Paris, overvaluing sexual attraction in the person of Helen and undervaluing everything else. Troy, his society, his duty to his people, all of those things. So when the goddess Hera... And that's very much articulated in the story as well. Hector and many of the people of Troy, there's just a ton of nuance in the Iliad around this. But now again you know it's helpful to remember that the story starts from the beginning and that everyone knew the story. The story was very famous. The story was sort of the background around which one of these foundational stories of a civilization. And you might ask well why is this a foundational story of a civilization? Well you say well why are so many people... It sort of gets into Jordan Peterson land too in terms of archetypes. Why are so many people fascinated by Star Wars or Harry Potter or Lord of the Rings? And Tolkien I think in many ways wanted when he switched from The Hobbit which was a children's book towards Lord of the Rings which was an adult book to sort of try and try his hand at a foundational epic for a civilization. A story that embodies so much. And again you might say well why this story and not that story? It's not so crazy to say well these are powers above human beings that are making the selection. Now lots of human beings have well we want this story and we want that story but you know the stories our experience is that of the story chooses us and not the other way around. The story chooses us and not the other way around. Seduces the god Zeus. We have a reiteration of this same theme. Zeus is distracted from what he intends to be paying attention to at that point seeing to it that Hector continues to win glory, that the Trojans continue to have the ascendancy and he is distracted specifically by Hera seducing him. Perhaps the most important narrative role or function that the gods play however is that they reiterate by counter example the overarching theme of what it means to be human of the human condition in the Iliad. Let me explain what I mean by saying they reiterate by counter example. To understand that we need to talk a little bit about what kind of beings these gods are. The term god small g is normally used to translate the Greek word theos and it is the best translation we have for theos and yet to modern readers, modern American readers and I would assume modern European readers as well, this translation brings all sorts of misconceptions with it. I like this section. This is really the part of this class that I really wanted to bring forward because she does have a good understanding of the nuances and the difficulties. I mean again sometimes you have new atheists talk about the god of the Bible as if the god is as if it's Zeus and whereas there are certain ways in which let's say Zeus becomes Jupiter, becomes Jove and there are moments where Zeus is sort of like the all-powerful god of the Bible but those are usually only fleeting moments. I've been reading the religion of Israel again and just continue to ponder sort of reading this while I'm going through the Iliad just thinking about Kaufman's arguments about the sense of the lack of this type of mythology in the Bible and this is the part of the conversation that really gets interesting for me. I have often toyed with the idea of teaching a course on the Iliad and the Odyssey or a course on Greek mythology and literature in general in which I never use the word god or gods or goddess in which I keep the Greek word theos untranslated and only use it and let the students figure out what it means through the course of reading the works without it being translated into the word god. It's really a pretty great idea except for the reason she now gives. Obvious problem with that is I wouldn't be able to use any translations of Greek literature that have ever been published. I'd have to translate everything I wanted my students to read myself and keep theos as theos so it's not very practical and it's maybe a bit extreme but the reason I thought of doing that is precisely to avoid the misconceptions that we bring with us without even thinking about them automatically when we hear the word god. To examine these misconceptions let's start with a list of what the Homeric gods are not a rather surprising list. This is sort of like Jordan Peterson with Sam Harris he opens his laptop and says this is what I mean by god. What they are not they are not consistently good merciful or even apparently just these gods are quite capable of committing actions that in any reasonable moral evaluation are evil. Now what's funny is because her reasonable moral evaluation is of course after 2000 years of Christendom. In other words you can't help but implicitly compare these with the notion of god capital G that comes up through Christendom which always reminds me of this really fun little meme of ancient ethics which is Homer sleeping in the sleeping bag being pulled uphill by a couple of Sherpas and then modern ethics Homer wakes up way up the way up the snowy slope and then new atheists look how far I climbed it I'm not even tired. Well the all of this has been baked into her students this is an inheritance that they have received it's a package and it's deployed and they're assumed mapping they're assumed fabric of the world that now you know these the theos how does this relate to and again the problem doesn't really go away if you just change the language because of course this is the word in Greek and it's the word in Koine Greek and of course you still have some of those issues with with Elohim in the Hebrew. Are wicked are unmerciful are unjust these gods are not necessarily good merciful or just though they know a very great deal they are not omniscient when a god's back is turned literally or figuratively he or she does not necessarily know what's going on behind his back the best example of that comes in the ill sorry in the Odyssey when at the opening of the Odyssey Athena seizes the opportunity to help Odysseus to help him back home to Ithaca Odysseus is being persecuted by Poseidon who hates him but at the opening of the Odyssey Poseidon is off in Ethiopia getting sacrifices from the Ethiopians this is when Athena can move in and help Odysseus because while Poseidon is so to speak out of town he won't know what Athena is doing in his absence. Now this also sort of brings to mind Elijah and the prophets of Baal on Mount Carmel and it brings to mind again the points that are made by Ezekiel Kaufman in his book of the of the radical difference between the Hebrew conceptualization of the universe versus let's say the Greek. Obviously Poseidon is not omniscient when his attention is directed elsewhere when he is away he doesn't know what's happening behind his back equally obviously in the Iliad again the scene of the seduction of Zeus by Hera the whole point of that is that while Zeus is concentrating on Hera he's not going to notice or know what's happening on the battlefield so Greek gods know a great deal but are by no means omniscient similarly though they are extremely powerful they are not omnipotent they cannot do anything and everything that they want to do. The limitation on their power is perhaps most obvious in what seems almost to be an agreement between the gods themselves rather than an inherent limitation that they will not trespass usually on one another's spheres of influence each one of these gods has a particular sphere or spheres of influence a particular realm of power so for instance Poseidon controls the sea Zeus controls the thunder that kind of thing and they tend not to usurp one another's powers. And this is where what I just talked a few minutes ago about sort of the ambiguity when you say you hear Agamemnon or Achilles talking about Zeus and how powerful he is well it's not exactly clear how these gods exert their power and and sort of becomes a little bit more clear when you sort of see them in their domains. They tend not to take over the roles of other gods now whether they could or not is perhaps questionable so this may be a voluntary limit on their power rather than an inherent limit limit on their power but there also seems to definitely be the sense that they are not in any way absolutely omnipotent for instance it seems to be taken as a given that Zeus could not simply annul death that Zeus could not simply say we're not going to make human beings die anymore. Zeus is bound by the way the world works including the fact that humans die. And again back to Kaufman the Medi-Divine Realm there's this there's a universe with already a degree of metaphysics and built in stuff that the gods must adhere to. As humans are bound by the way the world works perhaps one of the strangest ideas for most modern readers to get hold of is that these gods are not transcendent they are not outside the universe in fact they did not create the universe rather they are part of it they are creatures of the universe in the universe bounded by the universe just as we again. Kaufman's point same point they are they are in no sense transcendent eternal entities who created the physical universe that as I said is perhaps the way in which they differ the most that and the fact that they're not necessarily good is perhaps the way in which they differ the most from our usual conception of what a god is if there is such a thing at all. See see and again she's you can just in a sense when you listen to her trying to you just see the seams there between 2,000 years of Christendom and her trying to come to terms with this Greek conceptualization. Along with not creating the universe the gods of Homer may not even have created human beings this is left ambiguous. Homer doesn't say specifically one way or the other other Greek writers some of them seem to say that Zeus or the gods in general did create humans others say that they did not but even if they did create humans that's not one of the most important aspects of these gods they are not seen as our parents as our loving protectors in any way at all. Zeus is often called the father of gods and men but that really I think refers more to his power and his authority than to any literal paternal relationship between Zeus and men. Certainly Zeus is the father of some gods but by no means of all of them and so I think it's pretty clear that that phrase is meant to refer to his power and not to his actual paternity. And as I just touched on the last main statement of what these gods are not or do not do the relationship between Homer's gods and human beings is only very rarely based on any kind of mutual love. And again I mean all of these are in contrast with basically the conquest of Christianity over the Greek world view. These gods by and large do not love humans these humans by and large do not love these gods. Now clearly there are very obvious exceptions to that most noticeably most obviously the relationships between gods and their human children. Thetis clearly loves Achilles. Aphrodite probably loves Aeneas in the Iliad although she is not as given to taking care of him as Thetis is of Achilles as I've mentioned before. Aphrodite for instance when she tries to rescue Aeneas from the battlefield in book five drops him shortly after she picks him up on the field of battle. But by and large with the exception of human children and god parents the gods do not seem to love humans at least not in the sense that those of us brought up in a Judeo-Christian tradition would expect gods to love humans. So they're not good necessarily they can be good when they want to but they're not necessarily good or merciful or omnipotent or omniscient or transcendent or loving. What are they? On the most basic level these gods clearly originally represented or came into being in some sense in order to represent personified forces of nature and they retain that aspect even in the Homeric epics and in later literature. They are much more than mere personifications of forces of nature they're much more than mere representations of the natural world or of human culture but their roles as natural forces plus additional aspects are still very obvious in the Iliad and in the Odyssey both. Now this is clear because there's other gods as you know you send the god of sleep out and everybody goes to sleep. You have other gods that are sort of merely functionaries and then you have these gods which are named and they have their sort of full-fledged personalities but yet this aspect of the gods is clearly there. For instance Aphrodite is sexual passion. She not only controls sexual passion she not only inflicts it on humans gods and animals. In some sense she is the embodiment of sexual passion. Ares son of Zeus and Hera is war. Zeus says to Ares and they have any understanding of what the relationship is between Zeus and Hera yeah war is their child. That Ares is more hated than any other god the reason for that is because Ares is battle. Ares is war. He doesn't just control it or govern it to some extent he is the embodiment of war. Now again this is not merely metaphor these gods really do control the forces of nature with which they are associated. They are not simply metaphorical ways of talking about war. When you say Aphrodite smote me and made me fall in love with someone that's not simply a fancy metaphorical way of saying I fell in love with someone at least not in the Iliad. Again think of book three when Aphrodite makes Helen go to bed with Paris that's not just a metaphorical way of saying that Helen was attracted to Paris. We're talking about Aphrodite more or less grabbing Helen by the shoulders and marching her into the bedroom. So Aphrodite is not just a metaphor. Which is really a fascinating scene. But she is deeply associated with the force that she embodies in her case the force of sexual passion. This works for many of the gods. Zeus perhaps began as a god of the sky of thunder of lightning of weather. He comes to be much much more than that but he retains some of the aspects of a sky and weather god. As I mentioned in a previous lecture these gods are conceived of as anthropomorphic that is they are conceived of as being human like in form in shape in emotions in activities. They are greater than humans large physically larger than humans definitely more beautiful than humans in all ways more glorious and powerful than we are and yet they are anthropomorphic in that they share human form human passions and human emotions. Now the role of the gods in the Iliad varies between grandeur and pettiness. There are times when these gods seem awe-inspiring magnificent numinous grand when they seem at least in that respect to be what we would expect gods to be to be worthy of worship worthy of awe and reverence even if they're not necessarily good kind or helpful. There are other times however when they seem remarkably shallow and petty and this double nature of the gods this tension between grandeur and pettiness has seemed odd to a great many readers of the Iliad. Why are there's no question as to why the gods are shown as awe-inspiring and grand but why are they sometimes shown as petty and trivial. To understand what's going on there why Homer treats the gods this way in the Iliad I think we need to realize that there are two distinct viewpoints at play here. When we the audience in effect step into the Iliad and look at the gods from the point of view of the human characters when we stand shoulder to shoulder with Agamemnon or Hector or Peres or Achilles and look at the gods from that point of view they are without question awe-inspiring magnificent numinous glorious dangerous beings whom it is very wise not to offend but when we stand side by side with Homer the narrator and look at the gods from the point of view of the narrator of the epic or putting it another way look at the gods on their own terms in the Iliad they sometimes seem shallow petty trivial almost as though they're a comic relief. This is to some extent shocking and surprising the idea of the gods as shallow petty and trivial and yet it is undeniably there in the Iliad. These gods complained loudly about minor injuries again when Aphrodite is wounded by Diomedes he scratches her hand when she's trying to carry her son Aeneas off the battlefield she drops Aeneas flies up to Mount Olympus and cries in her mother's lap because her hand hurts. The gods are easily distracted from the troubles even of their human favorites they brawl with one another they call each other names they box each other's ears they behave in many very undignified ways perhaps the most obvious example of the gods as undignified again is the scene in which Hera seduces Zeus in book 14 of the Iliad. Hera does this in order to help Poseidon help the Greeks if she can turn Zeus's attention away from the battlefield the Trojans can be temporarily overcome by the Greeks Zeus won't help them so Hera decks herself out she borrows seductiveness from Aphrodite she makes herself as beautiful as possible she gets the gods sleep to promise to put Zeus to sleep after they have had sex and then she shows herself to Zeus and Zeus looking at her says that he really really wants to go to bed with her right now and he says to her apparently thinking that he will gain her approval by so saying the following lines never before has love for any goddess or woman so melted about the heart inside me broken into submission as now not that time when I loved the wife of Ixion who bore me perithoos equal of the gods in council nor when I loved Acreus's daughter sweet stepping Danae who bore Perseus to me preeminent among all men nor when I loved the daughter of far renowned phoenix Europa who bore Minos to me and Radamathus the godlike nor when I loved Simile or Alcmene in Thebes you get the idea he goes on and on and on this is not dignified and again Zeus is pretty randy Zeus is spreading his seed all over the place behavior this is particularly not what you would consider appropriate to the father of gods and men the ruler of the gods when you consider that Hera is the archetypal jealous wife she hates other females that Zeus has been involved with she particularly hates the sons that they have borne him for him to think that he will soften her heart gain her favor make her feel kindly disposed towards him by listing this laundry list of other females that he's had affairs with and the sons they've borne him this it's hard to see this as anything other than comic as anything other than undignified on Zeus's part and comic on the part of the poet so the obvious question is why does the Iliad prevent this double present this double view of the gods what does the epic gain from this apparent pettiness of its divinities it wasn't by any means necessary for epic to portray the gods this way the gods in the Odyssey are much less shallow much less petty much less trivial than the gods in the Iliad I think the key point for understanding what's going on here with these gods in the Iliad is once again to look at them as a means of comparison for humans the gods lack human vulnerability they cannot be seriously wounded they cannot be killed and this is I think a really good subtle nuanced point and along with lacking human vulnerability or the possibility of death they lack human seriousness and any capacity for nobility if you think about that for a minute I think you'll see what I mean a being that cannot risk anything serious an entity that cannot be seriously harmed let alone killed is incapable is almost by definition incapable of showing courage altruism nobility self-sacrifice any of those virtues that we admire most in humans any of those virtues that perhaps come into fullest detail in a war courage self-sacrifice and so forth an immortal being that cannot even be seriously wounded cannot exhibit any of those traits and so in a very real sense Homer's gods are more trivial than Homer's humans Homer's humans can display courage nobility and self-sacrifice his gods can't and I think the treatment of the gods as trivial highlights that difference this contrast between the humans in the Iliad who are faced with the absolutely serious issues of life and death and gods who can risk nothing once again underlines what it means to be human and how serious a matter that is finally I can't leave a discussion of the role of the gods in the Iliad without looking again at the concept of fate or in Greek Moira Moira is a word that originally meant lot or portion and continues to mean lot or portion if you divide a haunch of meat among various different people you give each of them a Moira each of them a portion but Moira perhaps Moira with capital m comes to mean a human's share of life portion of life and therefore by a very easy transition in meaning the time of a human's death the instant at which your share of life is over as we've already talked about a bit each person's Moira is inevitable but generally not known ahead of time and Moira has been defined I really like this definition as what in retrospect was bound to happen you cannot ahead of time see what someone's Moira is but you can look at the events afterwards and say it must have always been ordained so this particular warrior must have been fated to die at this particular time that was his Moira so Moira can be defined as what in retrospect was bound to happen now the gods generally seem to know each human being's Moira Thetis knows that Achilles has this choice that we've already talked about this very odd choice between two different fates between two different types of Moira she can tell him about it because she knows about it Zeus knows that Achilles will kill Hector that Hector will kill Patroclus Zeus pretty much knows everything that is going to happen in the whole course of the Iliad so the gods know what human's Moira is the question of whether or not the gods can change it or can interfere with it is left ambiguous by the Iliad usually the answer to that question seems to be no for example Thetis can tell Achilles about his choice of Moira but she very clearly cannot change it for him she can tell him the terms of his choice she can't affect what those terms are there is one very famous and very important scene in the Iliad where Zeus seems to entertain the idea of changing someone's Moira this is when Zeus's son Sarpedon is killed by Patroclus a scene that we'll talk about in more detail in the next lecture and Zeus considers saving his son Sarpedon Hera says to Zeus in effect go ahead and do that if you like but if you do you must realize that every god and goddess who has a human child fighting this war will want to change their child's Moira and and so here you see this interesting determinism and I've also been reading C.S. Lewis's the introduction to to Lewis English literature in the 16th century here's a hard copy of it I don't think this is a first edition let's say completion of the Clark Lecture's Trinity College Cambridge 1944 Oxford at Clareton Press this might be a first printing this very well might be a first printing picked it up used of course but Lewis interestingly enough goes through a bunch of concepts including you know he makes he makes the point that astrology is basically determinism and and magic the relationship of magic but here it's very interesting the relationship of these gods with the fates and again with with all of these things it's it's it's fairly murky it's not terribly consistent there isn't as such sort of a systematic theology that is pulled together rather it's again more of a poetic tradition that is that is what is brought out and and what sort of creates the again the fabric of the world working two images that I really have to figure out how to reconcile but there's the fabric of the world but there's also this mapping of the world that's that's inside of us Zeus after Hera has said this allows Sarpedon to be killed he weeps for his son he sends the gods of sleep and death to pick Sarpedon's body up off the battlefield and carry it off to his own home country but he does not intervene he does not change Sarpedon's body he does not change his but he does not intervene he does not change Sarpedon's Moira the picture that seems to be given by this is that while theoretically the gods could interfere and could change Moira they agree almost by what used to be called a gentleman's agreement they agree not to for if they did they would be undercutting the entire way the universe works they would be undercutting the entire right order of things the way the universe is set out the way the universe functions so there is an ambiguity at times it seems that the gods cannot change Moira at times it seems that they could but do not and so the whole picture of Moira reiterates that these gods are not transcendent deities outside the universe but are part of the universe again this is this is the difference Ezekiel Kaufman you can find Christine what's her name has the Yale lectures on the Old Testament you can find on YouTube it's it's lecture two that she really goes through Kaufman this is sort of the main difference between the gods of the one of the main differences between the gods of the Greeks and the this revolutionary conceptualization of God that comes from the Hebrews and the lack of what Kaufman calls mythology in the Hebrew Bible as compared to this while they're not bound by Moira in the same way that humans are they're nevertheless part of the system in which it operates and they must and do respect it in our next lecture we'll examine in detail the way Homer interweaves divine and human action in one specific section of the Iliad books 11 through 15 so again my point in this is is the the the sort of this implicit layer of the world that we live in which is constructed by the stories in which we dwell and I think this this continues in us this is part of the reason that we have seen via technology in our lifetimes I mean because even in my lifetime or you know you had books and then you had motion pictures and I was I was pointing out to my men's Bible study this this book more than conquers which was a sort of a favorite book in the Christian Reformed Church for sort of getting a window on the book of revelation it was written in the late 30s early 40s and he he introduces and says well the the book of revelation is is sort of like a a sound movie and of course in the late 30s you saw a sound movie as opposed to a silent movie he didn't he didn't even say a color movie because um you know color is just coming on the scene so the the way in which we are and then our use of individuals um I'm gonna I'm gonna navigate my way through the world using the relevance realization of a John Stewart or a Tucker Carlson or uh someone on YouTube that I see we it's a collective relevance realization that we do together and we use stories between each other to sort of within within each of us construct a picture of the world this obviously down from the much more monolithic existences in let's say the medieval period where perhaps you had a medieval village but that isn't to say that we don't understand that you know the the context of let's say the New Testament I'm preaching through Corinthians right now where you have an extremely cosmopolitan city where you have people coming in and out of Corinth over that little isthmus traversing the way from Asia Minor all the way over to Rome and Italy um you know it's it's extremely cosmopolitan and then of course after 1492 you have the advent of globalization where bit by bit by bit by bit more and more people from all over the world are coming together and once people are together one way or another their stories will have to impact each other and this will get played out in in ways that you know sort of the imagine less atheists can't really find the registers for which is why you have stories doing what they do so but but I thought that was a particularly good chapter in that um in this great courses and uh yeah I thought I'd just share it with you so leave a comment let me know what you think