https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=0CWxUkfcl70

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to jump into the first part of the deeper yet into the weeds video with Jordan and Jonathan and John and draw attention to attention. Now the attention conversation has been happening on and off since Jordan's early conversation with Jonathan Pujo. And while attention might seem like one of these secular ordinary things out there, I think central to part of my project here is exploring, let's say, the loss of church in the public sphere. And I think a great deal of this has to do with attention and the relationship between attention and worship. In many ways to worship something is to attend to it. I was going to have been reading James Holland's treatment of the war in the West. And this part of the book is talking about Germans under the regime of Hitler. All you have to do today, Erna had told her, is to kneel down and worship Hitler. You don't want any other qualifications for your job of work at all. Now it's not an unusual word of use of the word. It's how we normally use the word. The other use of worship in this book, we only seek the right of man to be free. We seek his right to worship his God, to lead his life in his own way, secure from persecution. So again, that's one use seems just sort of normal worship. Everyone has to worship Hitler. Well, what do we mean by that? Everyone has to pay attention to Hitler. Everyone has to do what Hitler says. Everyone has to attend to Hitler, whether that's Hitler directly or on down through the mediating bodies and layers of society. You find this in the worship of the Japanese emperor. The worship is someone that's at the top of the hierarchy and you have to attend to it. Now why don't people go to church? This is California. A lot of people don't go to church. A lot of people don't go to church in Europe. I think if you would ask a lot, most people who don't go to church, they probably don't go because it's not because church is offensive, although some people might find that it's not because church somehow it feels wrong to go to church. It's just not getting them towards their goal. It's not worth paying attention to. What do we pay attention to? If you ever pay attention to your what your eyes are drawn to, it might be an attractive person. It might be clothing that you're paying attention to or thinking about. It might be a car. It might be all of these things are present to your visual field and something draws your attention. Now a lot of this attention drawing is unconscious and happens automatically. Again I've noted many times that walk into your office if there's a Bengal tiger or a coiled up snake or the Queen of England, they would immediately draw your attention. There's combinatorial explosiveness in any room that you walk into, but something is narrowing your attention to a particular thing. What disciplined religious worship does is train the attention. Worship is really in many ways training. Now in my conversation with Jonathan Pageot, I talked about the fact that a lot of people have poor interpersonal skills. Interpersonal skills are something that you learn, you develop, you're certainly taught them by your parents. If your parents had good skills, you probably have pretty good skills because you learned them by your parent. Some people seem better at it than others and we all know this and we all like spending time with people who are generous listeners, who are gracious in many ways, who are very skilled at interpersonal communication. We like that. They grab our attention. So I think attention is part of why this conversation in this little corner of the internet I find very interesting is that what we see being crafted in many ways is a, you can look at where why did everyone pay attention to, let's say, religious liturgy? Well because they believe their life depended upon it. I was just reading Ben Witherington, a New Testament scholar, has a book, A Week in the Life of Corinth, and because I'm preaching through 1 Corinthians, I usually do some background reading. Now Tom Holland has so impacted me that when Ben Witherington puts in the mouth of a first century Greek character, this is a slave of someone who is attending the Corinthian church, this slave keeps talking about the religion of his master. It struck me when I listened to that that that wouldn't be, that's again a secular conceptualization because part of what we have in the secular world is the conceptualization that there's regular life where we're directing our attention and our thoughts, where we're directing our attention. And again, part of what we're discovering through cognitive science, through psychology, through a bunch of the conversations that we're having is that this little me inside isn't directing that at all. Well, I can to a certain degree. And Peterson, of course, early on had this great video about the people bouncing the ball and you have to count the number of times that the ball bounces and then a gorilla comes in the middle and does a little dance and walks out. And that whole exercise is an exercise about attention. You're paying attention to the bouncing ball and you don't see the gorilla. Now why should the gorilla be noteworthy? Again, because what you actually have, what you actually are perceiving is an entire field that is filled in many ways with expectations and a gorilla would be anomalous. And so the because a gorilla is anomalous, the gorilla should draw your attention because our attention tends to be drawn to anomalies. And so this attention conversation is really quite important. And this is not gibberish at all because a big part of understanding what's going on in our culture is we have developed these technologies over the last hundred years and this technological change has only increased to the degree that we are not just paying attention to screens and the things on them or podcasts and the things on them. But the machinery in the attention economy is grabbing us more and more and more and more. And of course, this has a direct impact in the church. In some ways, churches have gotten into this because churches have gone to the world of screens and are competing with Netflix and YouTube and all the all the different things that are out there. But what's important about this attention conversation is it draws our attention to the fact that whatever is directing our attention is certainly formed. And this formation has been going on our whole lives long. And in fact, this formation has been going on for thousands of years. Your culture is full of formations that direct your attention. And that's true all over the place. And in almost any once you go on to the internet, you're going to see a lot of different things. And that's true all over the place. And in almost any once you go on to the internet, you're going to see a lot of different things. And that's true all over the place. And in almost any once you go on to the internet, you're going to see a lot of different things. And in almost any once you go on to the opposite side of a transformation, especially the opposite side of an apocalyptic transformation, the world you look at is different. And it's hard to demonstrate this to people. But once, in a sense, you've passed through the looking glass, you can't see it. And now we have this no longer naive awareness of just how some of these things work. So this is the this is the first segment of conversation in this video. To see the world, we must must prioritize our perceptions. So, John, I'll ask you about that first. Now, again, part of what we're dealing with in this meaning crisis is what exactly am I? We now see mechanisms outside. And then when we look in the mirror, we begin to wonder, are there are we just simply the sum total of the mechanisms? Am I simply a product of the whole show, as C.S. Lewis calls it? Am I simply determined? And the experience of personhood and agency is purely illusory because I am locked into my mental processes and the words that have been moving through time. And because of the myriad complexity and particularity of me, this is I'm just going through the motions as Sam Harris imagines. Because that's a particular I believe a particular focus of yours. I don't think that's an exaggeration. No, it's not. That's that's that's the core of my work. And so the main way I would respond to this is I would say, I think the work that's coming out from artificial intelligence and the work that's coming out from attention lines up with this very well. And he notes that because we want the machines to pay attention. So I bought I bought a new car in 2020 and the car has many of the current safety features. And one of the things that I noted with my car, it has the automatic collision avoidance, so it will break automatically. If you're going around a particular curve, sometimes, whereas I or or if a car in front of you is, let's say, slowing down to turn off, the car will slow down too much. Now, I see the context of the car starting to turn and I expect that there's another thinking driver in the car and it will continue to turn. And so I will, in fact, just continue to maintain speed because my expectation is the car will turn. I don't anticipate the car breaking, which would cause a collision. But the little seeing eye in the front of my car is just seeing this much and it's just measuring the distance between me and that car and measuring my speed. And suddenly I'm driving and the car is slowing down. And then my wife looks at me like, why are why are you breaking? I'm not breaking. The car is breaking. Well, it's yeah, I know it's turning off. And you can have that if you say you're going around a corner and that that little artificial intelligence sensor that is looking ahead and sees the wall, even though I'm turning and every now and then it'll just get it wrong and boom, the car will break. And I was I was looking at Tesla videos the other day and people were talking about this in terms of Tesla that that this happens sometimes in their automatic driving Tesla. So this business of attention, we naturally and in fact, we unconsciously and unselfconsciously manage many of these things. But that doesn't mean for many of us, the unselfconsciousness is unimportant. So I today I watched a good bit of Jordan's back off his video about climate change. And what I paid attention to in this video was the introduction where he quite clearly received a message from various people, myself included, that just sort of these angry readings might not be the best way to communicate. And so. News pieces, let's say, commentaries. Recently, and people have objected some people have objected to my tone. I'm often dealing with things that I would say frighten me to take on to some degree, there are big issues and they're contentious and so a handy source of impetus and power. Power. I mean, motive power in such situations is to harness a certain degree of outrage and anger that also fuels my spirit. Now this is this is a video that I'm sort of waiting to make because I'm really glad that he's talking about this because this in terms of our current culture war is a big deal. Because part of what we do when we signal anger is we signal to other people, even though it's sort of passing through our attention detectors. We're signaling other things to other people and you know it's you can see it when we now that the gates up and the fences up we've got these ground squirrels all over the parking lot and they're sort of running running amidst but when I walk into the parking lot, they shoe and they all go down together so they're watching each other and they're they once sees me and they're watching each other. And so there's a lot going on here. I suppose in some sense when I'm writing these articles, it would be easier in many ways just to sit on the couch and and read a Stephen King novel, but I have to get up the energy. And maybe I do that by relying to an untenable degree on wrath, which is a cardinal sin by the way. Now it's not like there's not things that are worth being irritable about, but I thought what I would do today as an experiment is to attempt to read this in the most calm and understanding manner that I can, despite its rather pointed and message. And so I'm trying to get the tone right, you know, and I'm paying attention to the feedback I'm getting from friend and foe alike, let's say, and modifying my approach as a consequence. And so this is an attempt to modify it yet again in the hopes of attaining something better. And here we go. I'm just telling you. Come on, come on, come on. But yes, so he's attending to his critics friend and foe alike he's attending to the response of the message he's he's attending to all of this and of course he's attending to the conversation around climate change and shutting down farms and, and this, he's done a series of This is clearly a when he looks around all of the all of the things in the world for him. This area feels salient. Now of course there's going to be a lot of debate as to, I mean, people always say things that well he shouldn't talk about this and it's like Because he's not an expert. It's like, you're not an expert either. So why are you judging what he's saying? I mean, you just people make decisions, but he's got a big platform and that should be responsibility and so fair. But anyway, my point is again, attention when I watched this video I've I've heard his position on climate change I'm interested in what's going on in farming I'm going up to Friesland, where my ancestors at least the ones that I can, as far as I can go back where they all lived and the And the Friesian farmers are upset and given the fact that the Christian from church in North America is mostly made of the descendants of Friesian farmers that caught my attention and learned a few things about the, you know, some of the, some of the ways that the Dutch farmers had addressed some of the issues. I'd paid attention to the nitrogen cycle back when I read the Alchemy of Air, yada, yada, yada. And you can see that attention is constructed from books that I've read in the past experiences that I've had in the past. All of these things goes into govern my attention in a vastly more complex and nuanced and sophisticated way than the little eye on the front of my car tries to keep me from barreling into something ahead of it. I don't have any significant disagreement with that proposition. And the must part of it as well. So the must, I took, well, let me tell you how I took the must. And I took it as what's called constituent. And you can see that paying attention, we not only pay attention to what we hear, then when we're asked, we pay attention to our own selves and this self-transcendence where we sort of step away from ourselves. We look at ourselves. We explain ourselves. I mean, we're very sophisticated creatures. I took it to be if you're going to be a cognitive agent, then you must do this. I didn't take it to be a metaphysical necessity. I took it to be that kind of constituent necessity. I think it's useful to start with what you describe as constituent necessities before you move into the realm of metaphysical necessity. I think that's a good way to argue. You should. Right. So I think and I'm not going to recapitulate all these arguments, but a lot of work, I think, zeroes in on the idea that the core of what makes us intelligent and the thing that we're finding difficult to give to machines to make them artificially general intelligence is a process I call relevance realization, which is exactly I think lines up with this very well. And again, I mean, we've been living with relevance realization for a while now. It goes sort of both ways. It's it's both relevant. The realization is always sort of a two sided word. And so intelligence, if the so so actually we bought a we just wound up buying two cars at the same time, basically because the beginning of the pandemic, kids were coming home from college. What I always did with my kids was I always sell my kids my old cars because I know the history of those cars and they don't get taken and I give them a good deal on their car and they have they have to pay me over time. And, you know, so I so I sold I sold cars. One car was basically had repairs that didn't make it worth repairing and another car I sold to my daughter. So we wind up wound up in a third car also had repairs that didn't make it worth. So I wound up we wound up my wife and I bought two cars. We bought a Hyundai and we bought a Mazda and both have this adaptive cruise control where you're on the highway and it's what's the relevance realization. It's the car in front of you and you can set well how many car lengths, yada, yada, yada. Some of you are familiar with this this kind of technology. Now, one of the things we noted right away was that the Hyundai was quite a bit more sophisticated. The Hyundai accelerated more slowly and braked more slowly. It was clear that the Hyundai was a lot smarter than the Mazda. The Mazda would drive, drive, drive, brake and then zoom. And, you know, the Hyundai was a lot smoother back and forth. And so we would we would call this intelligent because it is it is in a sense paying attention to the correct things and responding in a way that doesn't disturb these soft creatures that are paying all this money to buy these very smart cars. The amount of information available to you in the world is astronomically vast. All the things you could pay attention to the amount of information in your long term memory, especially if you think of all the ways it could be combined, is also astronomically that the number of. So in other words, even the formation, even in terms of how we are formed over time, not only have commentarial explosiveness out there, but all of the experiences, what we're doing as we go through life is we are sifting all of these experiences. Often, you know, my wife and I have been married now 34 years. We will often talk about something in the past. And it's quite amazing what I can easily recall and what she can easily recall. We it's almost as if, well, we've lived two different lives, even though we have lived two different lives, but we've been together. And so we were together for many of the same experiences. And I will I will not easily recall certain things. She will easily recall certain things. And this, of course, goes into the attention that we have for each other and then our perceptions and our models for each other that we walk around with options of potential lines of behavior. I could move this finger, this finger. I could move them. I could live like you. The ways I can move around. That's commentatorial explosion. All of it. All of it. And then right. And then you can also consider, you know, all of the options of different potential worlds you might want to consider trying to produce or moving into. Now, again, this isn't this isn't irrelevant to the question of church. What do you do on Sunday morning? I sleep in. I putz around the house, watch the news. I go golfing. I, you know, all of these things. What do I do Sunday morning? I go to church. What I do every Sunday morning. I go to church. Why do you go to church every Sunday morning? Why do you go to Bible study on Wednesdays? And what do you do in that church? Well, all of the things that you're doing are one way or another, not only the product of your formation, but are contributing to your formation going forward. Let's say, well, the doctor says you really have to get in better shape or, you know, bad things are going to happen to you and you don't want those bad things to happen. So maybe you get a gym membership and then you go to the gym. You go to the gym five or three or five or six or seven days a week and you go into the gym isn't much fun, but you're there for an hour or an hour and a half. And you're you're doing your cardio and you're doing your weights, etc, etc. I mean, all of this goes into well, it's relevant. It's relevant to what it's relevant to trying to stay alive or it's relevant to having a kind of presentation that's going to be a part of your life. Presentation that I want for various reasons that gets into my identity. Again, this goes on and on and on and on and on and on. Right. And so the point is in many different dimensions, we face combinatorial explosion. And what's what you can't do. And this is where it lines up with the mess because we're finite beings. Yes, finite resources and finite time. You can't check all of that information, so you can't go and say, no, that's not relevant. That's not relevant. That memory is not relevant. That will take like the rest of the history of the universe. Right. Right. So we don't know how we do it, in fact, because of that in part. Well, I mean, I think I think there's getting some clues towards it. But we can talk about that later. Right. So the must and the prioritization on the perception side, you're fine with. It has to be. It has to be. But here's the tricky thing, which is the fact that we can't check it means and this sounds almost like a Zen Cohen is the prioritization is odd when you say it sort of like prima facie. Yeah. Because it means we intelligently ignore most of the information. Right. And that's huge. We intelligently ignore when I walk into my office. I don't look at the mess that is my office. Now, some people when they walk into my office, the one they don't look at any particular aspect of the mess, they just see the mess. And they're like, wow, yeah, it's kind of a mess. Well, after after all the travel, going to clean out the office and take everything out of this room, take out the carpet and redesign this whole office. I've attempted to put it in another building, but we've had a bunch of break in. So now I'm not thinking about putting it. You notice just just all of this going on all at the same time. That's just how we live our life. The one I want to put. Yeah, that's a good code of silly. So you're saying that you don't want to misinterpret the necessity for prioritization as are something like the necessity or are now. Here's a funny thing about perception and attention. I can't look at this anymore. At some point a little later, I drew attention to it in a previous video. There's someone sitting right over Peugeot's shoulder right here. Let's see, there's the little cursor. It's showing up there right there. That person is going to move their arm. And what that was for me was kind of a there's a person back there. Why is there a person back there? Now, you know, you got camera people there. You got sound people there. It's you know, a lot of people have asked, well, will all of the things that I'm doing in Europe be recorded? I say, yeah, but I got to warn you, it's really hard to do sound well. OK. And, you know, don't want to say anything bad against my lovely host from the Chicago estuary. But they struggled with sound, as a good number of you have pointed out. And so even though we sort of have this image that it's just Jordan and John and Jonathan talking in the room, there are other people in the room. And they're trying to stay hidden. And there's probably a sofa or a chair. In fact, you see a sofa back there on the other side of I don't know if that's a staircase. I've never been in that room, so I have no idea. But I think that's the top level of Jordan's house that he refitted with a bunch of these artifacts from his friend. But there's a person sitting back there and they're going to move their arm and that bang, it's going to catch my attention and it's going to catch my attention. It's going to now. Now here. Watch this word distract me. Well, what is a distraction? A distraction is sort of like a weed. It's it's something that I don't desire. So now we have another element of detention of attention. It's well, it's it's playing somehow with my desires. Sometimes I'm distracted by things that I want to be able to focus to attend to something. And again, there's a lot of talk about this in the Ian McGillchrist video. I want to attend to something and there's a distraction and I can't pay attention to it when Jordan was at I think at that one place at at Oxford. And there's the the woman who was sitting right next to him, maybe the security guard. She's doing this and doing that and doing that. Just campaign attention distraction. Our ability to make a numbered list of exactly number of possibilities that lay out in front of us, because that's actually impossible. Right. So so that isn't how we do it. However we do it, isn't that exactly. So when you when if if if you're OK with that reading and it sounds like you are prioritization doesn't mean what we normally mean by prioritization, where we set things out explicit and focal and then choose. Right. And conscious. We prioritize unconsciously something is prioritizing our attention and that something isn't a thing. And now it doesn't mean that we don't have organs or portions of the brain or no, in fact. But but that thing is in fact connected to many, many different things. If you again look at, let's say Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs and Steel, he talks about the fact that when he would walk through the jungle with someone from Papa New Guinea who lived in the jungle, the jungle is a very different place for that person from Papa New Guinea. They see very different things than the person who grew up in a city. Now flip that around. Bring the person from Papa New Guinea into the city and have them walk with Jared Diamond. They're both going to be seeing different things and their attention and the priority of their attention will be drawn to different things. Right. It's implicit. It's implicit and it's self organizing and our ability to think and it's unconscious. Yes, emerges out of it. We we can influence it top down. But because it is an absolute requirement for our cognition, I would argue that our ability to do anything that we do consciously is ultimately dependent on it and right. Okay, fine. So that's good. Now, how this connects to attention and self directed attention. Well, let's say you just have been living your life eating whatever looked good or what you like to eat so on and so forth year after year after year. And the doctor comes along and says, hmm, things are not looking good. Well, what do you mean? You're probably going to die before we would expect you to die. Well, what do you mean? Well, what are you eating? Well, I eat this, this and this. Well, don't eat that. Now, suddenly the doctor has connected life and death with what you're eating and not eating. And you're going to have all different ideas about what you should and shouldn't eat. And things are going to look very different for you. Jonathan, what do you think? The only thing that I would add is you have to phrase it in a certain way. There's no you have to have a sense, but there's a sense in with perception. When we say we must prioritize our perceptions, I think the best way to understand is that perception is already prioritization is to in order to perceive that. And that's a really big point. Perception is already prioritization. There's already selection going on. In itself, perception is in and of itself an act of implicit prioritization. And to use the word implicit would be a good idea. So to avoid the idea that we are consciously doing it, that in order to even perceive the world, there already has to be a given hierarchy that is that is making you able to focus on anything. Because otherwise we would be lost in a wave, a sea of infinite. And I don't know a lot about autism or other disabilities, but it would seem that other disabilities, people have don't have the capacity to let's think about it this way, to focus in community with each other. The ground squirrels around the church focus in community with each other. The dogs in your home focus in community with each other. They are not only have perception and attention in the world, they do that collectively. There's in a sense a collective cognition that is going on between the ground squirrels or the prairie dogs or the dogs in your home. They're participating in a network. Now, it's truly amazing because there's very little load, as it were. But to bring in the body language that Peugeot is, they already the community of prairie dogs or the community of ground squirrels or the community of dogs, call them a pack, let's say. They already sort of form a body. And that body doesn't have two eyes, that body might have eight or ten or twelve eyes. You say a body with twelve eyes? Yeah, a body with twelve eyes. Then they can go all different directions, but they can also collectively achieve a united sphere of attention. Now, in many ways, this is what happens in the body of the church. We achieve a collective, a collective cognition, collective attention. And now in order to do this, well, dogs and prairie dogs and ground squirrels, they just go and do this. And if you sit and you watch them quite carefully, you'll learn some of the ways in which they do this. They don't do this consciously to the best of our degree. They certainly reinforce each other and discipline each other and have all sorts of layers in this. But this is what they do. And this is what we do. Details. OK, so I think that's a good code of sale. And so we could also make a little technical case here quickly. So part of the problem that John referred to is that in some sense, it's the problem of the finite confronting the infinite. And so we could make a neurological argument for that. So, for example, when you move your eyes around or when they move around as a consequence of being directed by unconscious structures of prioritization. And don't forget, we've talked about before the fact that your eyes are, in fact, always moving around and the vision. I talked about my friend with low vision when I'd sneak up on him and poof, I just poof in like I dream of Jeannie. Your eyes, in fact, are always sort of darting around because your eyes are creating this image that's in front of you. And you think that this image is always available. And now at this moment, I can direct my attention to that old air conditioning unit that hasn't worked for 15 years on my wall, but never bothered to take it down. The outside unit was taken away. And so there it sits on my wall. That'll probably come down when if I if I completely redo my office. But almost anything in the office is like, pay attention to. It's all sort of available to me. But why that and why not those papers on the wall or that plaque or that painting or that poster or these books or or or Count Dracula, Count Chocula or or Kermit? No, that's not Count Chocula. It's just the Count from Sesame Street. So on and on and on and on because that happens all the time. You move your eyes around because you want to direct the high resolution part of your visual system to whatever you're attending to. That's the fovea. And the fovea is a very small part of your retina. And it's a very high resolution part. So each cell in the fovea is connected at the level of the primary visual cortex to 10,000 cells. And then each of those have 10,000 connections. And so if your whole vision was foveal in its in its resolution, you'd have to have a skull like an alien to contain that much brain. But now think about the collective consciousness of the prairie dogs or the or the ground squirrels or the the pack of dogs. They they in fact have multiple brains and in some ways the their collective attention lives in the network. Just like in many ways in a church or even in a committee or a business or a family, the collective attention of the body lives in this in the network between the people. So so and that's a real indication of that finitude. Right. Is that you do have limited cognitive resources and limited means practically and physically limited. But it also means metabolically limited. The cost of running your brain is already extremely high. And and so you're going to shepherd your available attentional resources because they are finite and and they're finite in no small part because they are technically metabolically costly. Now this week I'm working on First Corinthians, the part just after. The Thanksgiving. Now I exhort you brothers by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that you say that you all say the same thing and there not be divisions schismata among you and that you may be made complete in the same mind and with the same purpose. And again, one of my one of my favorite exegetes, Kenneth Bailey, has a nice little commentary on First Corinthians. And he talks about the that you may at all agree that now that word has a particular meaning for us in English. But cut our kids so that's the that's that you may fit together. Now you do like a Greek Greek lexical search of the New Testament and you discover that this is the mending of the nets that the disciples are doing that this word isn't just that that you I agree I agree I agree I agree. I agree it's you have an image that the whole body comes together in some way like the collective the collective attention of the tribe or of the pack or of the ground squirrels or of the prairie dogs. But at a far higher level that in fact it all becomes one body again we might think of a team. And if let's say it's a basketball team and the and two of the players don't want to play with the other three players and they won't pass them the ball. You're not going to win games and and so Paul is basically saying you need to end the divisions and you need to be knit together into this collective attention consciousness. This is what you ought to be. And all seems okay. Okay. So I would add one thing to that, which is I would say, even the process of these three, having this conversation is an attempt to get at that kind of unity. Now it's of attention we're going to talk about attention and Jordan is using this list of things to say, this is where we're going to draw our attention and we're sitting in a room, and we're paying attention to each other and reclode in a certain way, Jordan in his classroom lectures would make the point that there's all sorts of things built into the classroom when the students come in there and they know where to sit and they know how to behave and they know what to do. There's there's just so much that's built into that. And often you don't recognize that unless you let's say travel across culturally and and you know basically even the act of listening to a lecture requires attention. Even the act of decoding language acquires attention. You learn this, let's say if you're let's say if you're going to learn Koine Greek and you very quickly discover that while word order varies quite dramatically from language to language. You don't think a thing of word order. You pay no attention to word order. But in your in the language that you grew up with, word order is an element of the language that you pay absolutely no attention to. But you can manage well. And now suddenly if you draw attention to it, you can't do things. There's a nice section in the I just don't have time to just jump between all of these clips right now because I've got to end at a certain time. But in fact, attention can get in the way. I've used the example of free throw shooting or shooting a basketball in general. You have to sort of let the formation take over of doing what you're doing, whether it's shooting a basketball or scoring a goal. You have to let other elements in your own network manage the and that's why you practice shooting a basketball. It's like, well, it isn't a matter of paying attention. Now you might pay attention to your stance. You might pay attention to where your feet are. And that's why you get a basketball. Let's say a shooting coach will say, well, why don't you move your hands here? Why don't you move your hands here? Why do you do that funny thing with your arm? In other words, you can sort of deconstruct it with attention. But rhythm replaces strength. And at some point, you're going to get all that muscle memory in. But put an emphasis on how this process has to be self organizing because we want to avoid a problem which you and I both know shows up in psychology, which is to posit the internal homunculus. Yeah, that actually doesn't explain the problem, but just shifts it essentially. And now the internal homunculus, if you watch John's awakening from the meeting crisis, sort of the little man and sort of this little this homunculus, the man inside the man or the man inside the machine that's sort of moving the arms and doing all this. You get this problem of infinite regress. There's always another little man inside the little man. And the idea of this is that, well, all of our language presupposes in some ways the little homunculus. And in that way, the language preserves sort of this sacred agent within us. We'll say it that way. Or the sacred agent between us. I've often noted that in the New Testament Church, if you read carefully, it's almost as if the Holy Spirit, Christians have done the Holy Spirit within me. Yes, but that's a spirit within your community and within your members. The Holy Spirit is is between the people of the church, helping the people of the church become one body. And again, that's the New Testament language. Yeah, it is an example of this, etc. So we don't we we don't want to say that there's someone that's doing the prioritization because that someone is just as mysterious. Right. And it's facing the very problem that we're trying to explain. So the process has to be dynamic. Well, one of the ways I've realized now at some point, we're going to have to deal with the self organizing because whereas on one hand, a lot of our language sort of trips into the homunculus issue, the self organizing sort of trips into another issue, which is the there might in fact be a tiny little seed of the meaning crisis in that language itself. Because it's self organizing. OK, it does it by itself. OK, what does that mean? You've in some ways shifted the homunculus to another self. Is that self a person? No. Then when you have to answer that question, you're going to have to say, is that is that self itself? Just again, say a microcosm of the whole show. Simply a mechanism. Then that has implications. So and that's very much going to come up on later in the conversation when they really get into narrative. How that problem works is in an attempt to solve the mind body problem, because you can't solve the mind body problem. But you can say, let's say you're you want to explore an idea and you decide to do that by writing an essay. So then you sit down in front of the computer. Now, back to the self problem, because I didn't have to pay a lot of attention to what Jordan was saying right there, because I pretty much knew what he's what he was going to say. You think it's self organizing tornado. OK. And maybe the better word is spirit. The spirit of the tornado, because the spirit is the. Is that which moves? The tornado. Now, obviously, a tornado in terms of complexity is nowhere near as complex as the. Formation of. The filtering of combinatorial explosiveness, not only within my 59 years. But in the generation after generation after generation after generation, both individual and within bodies throughout history. Right away, the math just gets so complex it cannot be done. Which is not an idea. It's actually that you're sitting and then you move your fingers on the keyboard. And so there's a hierarchy of transformation from mind, which might be the abstract intent to body. And so and so that the spirit hits the body in the finger movements and then you just use spirit spirit disappears in some sense under the finger movements, because you can move your fingers voluntarily. But you have no idea what muscles you're moving to do that and you can't control the cells or anything like that. Oh, I did that with my students in the lecture this morning. I was talking about this very fact that I said. And in fact, if you sometimes if you're trying to stop typing a word incorrectly. You will you have to pay attention to your fingers. Sometimes if you pay attention to your fingers in the wrong way, you you lose the capacity to let's say type quickly. If you take a typing test, you're not thinking about every each individual keystroke. You go into this little mini flow state basically. And you're not even let's say reading the words consciously in your head. You're just you're just going and it's sort of like a spirit is being created for you know. And the spirit is accomplishing this this act up your finger. OK, bend your finger. What do you do to bend your finger? Right. Exactly. Exactly. So interesting. You spent the first year of your life doing this work. You did. It's so interesting that you have that level of consciousness at that level of detail, which is pretty detailed, but no more than that. Yes. Yes. Yeah. So that's a mystery, man. That that that that localization of consciousness between the body and part of the spirit. There's like a there's like a what would you call it? There's a bandwidth. There's a bandwidth of resolution for consciousness. And why that band? See, the social psychologists who studied language are caught on to this because one of the things they realized was that short words, first of all, short words tend to be old words. So because as language develops, words that are used a lot get more efficient. But the short words also map extraordinarily well on to the self evident level of perception. And so, for example, a short word is cat because. A cat presents itself for some reason to our perception, the species cat doesn't and the the fur of the cat in some sense doesn't. It's the cat. Yes. And you can see that primary object level recognition. I can't remember what I was reading two days ago about this, where maybe it might have been in a comment because you guys leave such good comments. You know, a child can recognize a cat. You know, it's that gestalt. It's the man who who who mistook his wife for a hat. It's what it's what that man has lost and what the what the what the small child has. But in fact, even the simple can manage basic level. That's right. Yes, yes, yes. And so you see that with babies because they get doggy pretty damn fast. And that's because that's because the language maps on to the primary domain of perception, that basic level perception quite nicely. And that is associated with something like the natural bandwidth of consciousness. Yeah, I would I would say that that lines up with if you rushes explanation is, you know, you're getting the best trade off between differences between category and similarities within cat. Right. And then the question is what does best trade off mean? Exactly. And that's and for me, that's that's what that would that be a little bit of I guess a nuance I'd want to put on to the prioritization because the prioritization sounds very but sort of like an imposition. Whereas I think what we're talking about is something more like what Marlowe Ponte talked about when he talked about optimal gripping. Right. So what's the correct, you know, distance to look at this? Well, it depends because if I zoom in, I lose the gestalt. If I zoom out, I lose the detail. It depends on what you want to do. Exactly. Well, that's it. That's why I'm kind of attracted to pragmatism. It's like, well, to some degree, our theories of truth need to be embedded in the practicalities of action. And so is that a grippable object that I can drink from while I want my perception to match that problem? Yeah, but it doesn't. I think that if you understand that the prioritization, the thing that you have heaven and earth, I'm going to use sorry, I'm going to use mythical categories. But so you have that's why you have heaven and earth and that it's the way in which heaven meets earth is a mutual relationship. Right. We always see it as a relationship of lovers, you could say. But it's not the prioritization is in just about any position from above, but it's about the manner in which that which is above, let's say the hierarchy is able to encounter the potential in which it's. We were talking about that last night. So Jonathan made this funny joke last night. We were talking about Sam Harris and Sam Harris has this line of argumentation where and he used this on me where I interpreted a biblical story and then he interpreted a recipe. Yes. And he said, well, look at all the interpretations. And that is a problem of of semiotic drift. Yes. Well, it's also a problem of this horizon of infinite possibility. There are multiple interpretive schemes. So Jonathan said he'd like to do a video where he shows that a recipe is actually necessarily embedded inside a mythological framework. And we started to talk about that because imagine, well, the recipe implies that you need to make an edible meal that you want to make an edible meal that you're going to serve it to family and friends. That that's part of a kind of communion that you think that's a good thing that's worth spending time on that serves your family and friends. That's maybe nested in something like an ethic of service to the community. Like there's a whole there's a whole network of purpose. You can see the kids for religious very quickly. I would add more to that. There's all kinds of implicit assumptions that I can capture in a sequence of propositions, procedural skills that are not completely capturable in words. And that those procedures and skills can also map on to the particular virtues and skill that people are bringing to it. Like it's like most things can't be solved by a recipe. Right. Right. And yet. So a recipe is a significant cognitive cultural achievement and we don't recognize like and we we we tend to overgeneralize the things we think for which we can provide recipes. This is one of the right. That's an algorithm issue. Yes, exactly. Exactly. And so there's lots. Yeah. Even in the recipe itself, you will notice that the way in which we name things and the way in which we order things will be related to a normal prioritization hierarchy prioritization. But if you're making chicken, which is which is exactly right. If you've ever read a recipe or followed a recipe, look at what's at the beginning of the recipe and look what comes towards the end. Part of it might be procedural, but usually again, you have a list of ingredients and look at the order of the list of ingredients. They don't list the the tiny amounts of spice first, usually unless, let's say, the book in which the recipe is found is how to cook with, let's say, cinnamon. You'll have the chicken and then you'll have the spices. You'll understand that these elements that I'm adding are spices and that they're there. Let's say something like a marginality that I'm adding to the central meal. It's actually the very like it's the pattern of a church actually, you know, where you have a movement towards the central identity that we understand. And then we have the way in which it's complemented to other things. And so even the actual recipe itself is like a little micro problem. And also the judge. And then you have, in a sense, the community, the body that's created of people who make, let's say, cinnamon chicken. That doesn't sound good at all. That you make chicken dishes. OK, and and now it's a very it's a very strange body and it only pops up now and then and probably in fairly specialized places. But. Judgment you use is like, well, how much spice? Well, the answer is, well, what function is the spice going to serve? And you say, well, I want to add a little zest and interest to my cooking. And so then you have a philosophy of zest and interest that's associated with that, because just predictable chicken isn't good enough. And maybe you want to put a little more spice on because you want to what would you say you want to challenge your guests a little bit in an interesting way. And you're thinking this all through. And for the same reason you'd wear funny socks or a tie that has just a little bit too much on it. You know, it's that's actually a feature of general problem solving. Like you when people are solving a problem, especially if they might get the wrong frame, moderately distracting you from the central concern is an optimal way. Yeah, exactly. You need to do that. So what I hear in both of you say is the prioritization is really a multidimensional optimal gripping. That's right. Again, and John's nicely drawing a sort of back to the thesis and the article we're talking about attention and what emerges in a community. And again, the community isn't even terribly self aware of what's happening. And you might say that there are spirits at work in that community is that the community is seeking an optimal grip. All right. This community is seeking to to optimize now, optimize according to what now they'll be varying competing values at play. But even all of those values at play are also nested and sitting within an economy and a context and an arena that is shaping those. We want to maximize chicken use. No chicken go unpot it. Something like that. We're trading up. OK, well, then we can also expand on that to some degree, because multidimensional and optimal brings a lot of other concerns into it. So imagine that one of the principles and can't move towards this with his theory of universal ethic in some sense. Although I think it, you know, I hesitate to criticize can't. But I think that there's a deeper explanation for what he observed is, well, how should I treat you? Well, that's a complex question. But one of the constraints is, well, what if we meet a hundred times? So we're going to establish an actual relationship. So however I conduct myself in the present moment has to be in accordance with the value hierarchy that takes into account the desirability of our mutual interrelationship into the future. And that produces a very serious series of, I would say, and this gets into the formation of bodies, often intrinsic constraints. So I can't be too insulting. I can't be too unwelcoming. I have to offer you something approximating a true reciprocity for the thing not to degenerate. And so and all of that. And I would say that also governs how you cook for someone if you actually want to make friends. So it's like treat other people as you would like them to treat you. And Freddie, Freddie, Freddie's golden rule. Almost after the Freddie and Paul show, Nancy, Nancy's on the show. Nancy will give a little sermon summary. And it's always fascinating for me to hear what she pulls out of the sermon. It can be humbling as a preacher because I think, well, here are the main points that I want people to walk away from. When she is regurgitating the sermon or giving a summary of the sermon, a report on the sermon with her own little sermonic twist that Nancy usually likes to bring in. That's you know, it's it's amazing to hear what comes out, the relevance realization that's gone on in Nancy's head. Now, what Jordan just said is almost after every sermon. What was the sermon? What was today's sermon about? Treat people the way you want to be treated. Boom. Just lays it down every time. Is every one of my sermons about that? Well, that's probably somewhere in it someplace. But it's pretty funny that that's the intrinsic ethic and a recipe. And so that's a good that's such a funny argument. You see now I'm watching who's ever back there. Something's moving. Something's moving. And again, my eye gets caught. My eye gets drawn to it. We'll get right back to John. No, no, no. Commercial. It's kind of a corollary presupposition to act in the world. So it's kind of a corollary the first or something equivalent to act in the world. We must prioritize our actions. I don't think we probably have to cover that. Right. So perception is an action already. You have to move your eyes and orient your head. And so gripping is an action. Yes, exactly. So I think that goes with it. Yeah. OK. So we'll leave that. Well, OK. Now, this is the next. This is a nice switch. I think any system of priorities. Is a structure of values. And then I sneak something in an ethic. So I'm kind of defining ethic as a something approximating perhaps an internally. All right. I'm going to stop here because I have to go. But. Yeah, I'm running out of week. Today's Tuesday. I don't know how much of this I'm going to get through before I go to Europe. And obviously, I'm not going to do commentary videos when I'm in Europe. I'm going to be my attention is going to be drawn to. Oh, all the new things that I'll see all the new people I'll meet all the new experiences I'll have never been to Europe before. So this is exciting. And yeah, we'll see. So anyway, that's that's enough for now.