https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HM7DkZrihDY

 Hi, this is Paul. Some of you might remember Ron Brown. I posted some of his baptism service in Tucson, Arizona not too long ago. That was February 2022. And he recently sent me a video about, he's been doing some thinking about materialism, dualism, idealism, and the mind-body problem. Ron was a student of Jordan Peterson and John Vervecky at University of Toronto, and he lives in Tucson, and he was baptized in the Tucson village, the village church in Tucson, which is pastored by my friend, was pastored by my friend Rod Hugin. And I have quite a few connections with that church. It's a part of the Christianity Forum Church or related to the Christianity Forum Church. Got an interesting relationship with the Christianity Forum Church. And so he had sent me an email and said, I'd like you to watch this video. And it was an interesting video. It's sort of a fourth way on thinking about the mind-body problem. But the video that really captured my interest was this video. I no longer trust Tim Poole and Dave Rubin. Why it's important to have friends who disagree with you. The thing that caught my attention was no longer trusting Tim Poole and Dave Rubin, partly because of the video I released yesterday on David Fuller. And someone in the comments section had mentioned, yeah, there's a lot of hate in the comments section for Dave Fuller. Some of that hate is because of his, some of his takes on COVID. Some of that hate is because of his association with mass media and establishment media, et cetera, et cetera. So there's that. And then one of you, and you know who you are, he's from the Chicago area, sent me a really delicious article. It's from the New Atlantis, how Stuart made Tucker. And it's a very interesting piece in a lot of different ways. Sort of goes through the last 30 years of history of journalism. And really made me think about collective relevance realization. To summarize a lot of the article, the thing is well worth reading. It's a, it's a fairly long article. What the article asserts is that what John Stuart basically did was show the way to unintentionally remake journalism. And journalism is in many respects collective relevance realization, or at least it purports to be, because what journalism does is direct our attention from here to there. It starts out with some late 90s, some late 90s issues. O.J. Simpson, Monica Lewinsky, Lacey Peterson, on and on and on. And John Stuart sort of rises to battle this. And what John Stuart was looking for was some objective news, probably John Stuart is about my age and also from New Jersey. Objective news that would, basically he was looking for the old news days during the Cold War. In which he grew up, which would sort of, well here are the facts. Well what is, what is this news about? Now my channel got started in many ways because in October, November of 2017 I was re-reading Neil Postman's Amusing Ourselves to Death, which was about the news. And part of the quest of that book was in his, in his mind the, to resummarize it with some fancy vervekey words, the decline of collective relevance realization as expressed in journalism and the news. Now what happened, and this sort of nicely goes through what happened, how the Daily Show sort of in its time because of sort of the emerging technology that was happening. The Daily Show in some ways became sort of a meta news broadcast. Because they were comedy, they could always sort of shove everything off. We're on Comedy Central, this is a comedy program. But there was a very serious mission that John Stuart was on. 1999 was sort of peak news, okay, and it talks about that. I'll pick up reading here towards about two-thirds of the way through the article. The O.J. Simpson trial, the Monica Lewinsky scandal, the Lacey Peterson case, Crossfire, none of them made sense as events of public importance for great people. But they made perfect sense as great television. If you watched American Beauty, Fight Club, and The Matrix, and you know it's amazing when you think about, well maybe it's just my age, I remember all three movies were talked about significantly at that point. And all three movies have really endured in the collective consciousness, I think, to a high degree. American Beauty, not as much, but American Beauty, I believe, won the Academy Award. But Fight Club and The Matrix still sort of reverberate through our culture. If you watched American Beauty and Fight Club and The Matrix in the year of peak news, you probably felt that getting beyond this empty culture meant burning it down, replacing it with something brave, real, and true. But implicitly, this meant that it would have the same unified audience, the same mass audience, freed at last from slavery to soulless garbage. This was very much the mission of The Daily Show. The catch is that the mass and the garbage were one. The reason TV culture was so shallow is that it was imposed over everything that Trow called the grid of 200 million. That is the number of Americans when he was writing in 1980. The business imperative was to grab as much of a television audience singular as possible. All content decisions flowed over this imperative. John Stewart did not get this. He dreamed of a broad, hardworking, undeserved, middle of the country hunger for entertaining veracity he would produce. The idealized audience he often involved was the silent majority of fundamentally decent Americans who were turned off by political extremism and partisanship for the sake of partisanship. In a 2002 interview, he called this the disenfranchised center for fairness, common sense, and moderation. This might be a fair description of the 1999 broadcast TV audience, but it was not a description of Stewart's own viewers. Pew Research found that The Daily Show had one of the most liberal audiences of any show on TV, beaten only by Rachel Maddow's and No Show's viewers skewed more high income and high education. Roger Ailes did get this. Fox News' business model was not actually aimed at conservatives, but at newly deregulated cable. Adfunded TV broadcasts had rewarded achieving the biggest audience possible, but the cable rewarded having loyal, consistent audiences that would clamor for access to their favorite channels, giving owners leverage to negotiate the highest subscriber fees from cable providers. In 2021, Fox Cable division generated $3.9 billion in revenues from fees and only $1.3 billion in revenues from advertising. This business model meant cultivating ties with a particular niche, providing them content that they would find enthralling. Here's the relevance realization. And it's relevance realization in competition, collaboration, opponent processing with that which pleases us. When Fox News launched, American conservatives were the biggest distinctly underserved niche. But MSNBC and CNN would eventually follow in their footsteps for the same reasons. As so many other things, Stewart, because of course, why were the conservatives such an underserved niche? Because underserved, just marketing terms. Because of course, you had the cathedral and the academy and this was, this was of course, what the main, the big three, ABC, NBC, CBS, all of their news. That was the mass culture that was, that was predominated in the society up until, up until the 70s. And of course, in the 80s, cable news comes in. In so many other things, Stewart was a master innovator of what he claimed not to want, building a devoted niche audience, narrow casting. When the mass audience produced by advertising melted away, the innovations in style and production that Stewart had pioneered were a ready-made answer for this crisis. They provided a template for how to be successful, not with a mass audience, but with a loyal fragment by replacing the culture of mass media with meta commentary on it. And the costly production of original news reporting with efficient repurposing of others reporting with efficient repurposing of others' work, which is of course, exactly what the daily news did. And they always did it sort of with tongue in cheek and a wink in their eye when they're in front of the green screen, et cetera, et cetera. I'm old enough to have watched quite a bit of the Daily Show. Probably a lot of you didn't because of course, it sort of went away as Trump came into view. And I don't know that that is necessarily just a coincidence. Because in many ways, Trump sort of is the Daily Show made flesh in some ways. But even this description undersells what made the Daily Show unique. Why it seemed to wax even as all other TV news waned. The real audience that sustained him assembled where all the audience assembled today online. Stuart understood that converting a loyal audience into a media business success was not just about getting eyeballs in front of the set, the Friends model, or even getting people to pay every month, Patreon or Substack. It's about getting people to be personally loyal to you and to identify with your brand. You could tell Stuart understood this because the way he used clips of his own show. In legacy television, you could never give a brand a brand name. In legacy television, you could never give away your content in a way that couldn't be directly monetized from which you weren't getting a licensing buck or a bump in the Nielsen ratings. But the Daily Show just gave their stuff away. They knew that the internet would help build loyalty and eventually an audience that would make Stuart powerful. And I remember in the early days of Jordan Peterson, it was of course the clips that made Peterson powerful. He was a guy with one or two hour videos on the internet, but it was all the little clipsters on YouTube that really gave Jordan Peterson the propulsion. In some ways you think about if you ever taken a paper cup and filled it with gasoline and lit it, it doesn't explode. You just get the top layer burning off. You want to explode gasoline, aerosolize it, and whoosh, that's where you get the big explosion. And in a sense, that's what the clips did. The clips sort of aerosolize and there's where you get the combustion that'll actually give the persona, the personality, the image through which we are doing and projecting our relevance realization out onto the world. The Daily Show was the first TV show whose clips regularly went viral via forwarding emails, discussion forums, and shared BitTorrent links. Even as the Daily Show often had to send its interns to archiving services to pick up physical tapes of other shows, it was one of the first to host specifically shareable clips on its website alongside full episodes. It was the first whose producers grasped how free clips online could drive rather than cannibalize viewership numbers. Stewart's appearance on Crossfire may have been the first piece of national political journalism to go viral online. It's Paul Bagaglia, Tucker Carlson, and John Stewart. That's who was on that show. You can find it on YouTube on a channel with 2.7k subs. In one of these channels, it's just serving up content. You put it on the Let's Little Throwaway channel. It's got 16 million views. Just a tiny little channel because everybody understands you don't subscribe to this channel. If YouTube decides it wants to take this away or some copyright owner like CNN says not can't be shown, it goes away. All of this got underway before YouTube, whose first video was uploaded six months after the Crossfire showdown. The audience of the Daily Show and eventually its offshoot, the Colbert Report, was significantly larger than what the TV ratings alone revealed. It was more personally loyal to Stewart and Colbert. It was an audience that shared clips, talked about them on Twitter and Reddit and bought books. It was an audience that crowdsourced rights. Now remember, this audience is abnormally liberal and abnormally well-educated. They are the audience of the cathedral. They are the ones that have the better internet access. They have the smartphones, the early smartphones, the palms and the blackberries. This is, of course, the iPhone comes out in 2007, which eventually by 2009, 2010 popularizes the smartphone, especially when the Android comes out with the Motorola. I had that phone. That first Motorola phone that really made Android sing. I had that phone. It was an audience that crowdsourced rides and crowdsurfed spots to show up on the hundreds of thousands further satirical Rally to Restore Sanity and or fear 2010. It was an audience that donated over a million dollars to Stewart and Colbert organized super pack as a bit. And again, this is all sort of proto normal when it comes to Tim Pool or Dave Rubin or this video a little bit later, he'll talk about some other guy that I had to look up because I didn't know who he was. This is all now normal and it's it's basically what John Stewart pioneered. Contrast this with David Letterman show. Initially a rival to the Daily Show, Letterman had a cult following and you could buy his merchandise and books. But the point of all that was to get you to watch the show and to buy from advertising. Everyone who bought Letterman's top 10 books, watch the show. But the Daily Show, you could just watch clips when someone shared them and not bother with the show. And I did a lot of that too. The books in the rallies weren't marketing gimmicks. They were the whole new ecosystem of which the show was just one format. It's hard to think of an earlier TV show that had such loyal following people who did not actually watch it on TV. Oprah had an empire, but her fans mostly watched her. Every show before Stewart's you could understand as a TV show, but the Daily Show was an audience first and TV show second. And in many ways, you know, I often I often talk about the difference between John the Baptist and Jesus. This is part of the success of Jesus. John the Baptist started a cult around him, a franchise that lasted, you know, two, three centuries. But you could clip Jesus and the Gnostics did it and the Bible bookstores did it and everyone did it. And you could have plenty of you could have plenty of heresies. You could have plenty of this. You could have plenty of that. It just goes whoosh. You didn't just watch the Daily Show. You subscribed to its worldview and you subscribed to its worldview through students. Through Stewart himself, he was the medium. And Alexander from Bulgaria sent me a nice email where he talked a little bit about what Peugeot was talking about in terms of sort of the human and the idealized human sort of becoming the identity construct through which we see the world. It's really personified communal relevance realization. And that's why you get all of these little NPCs in the world and sets up the struggle to be a real boy and not a non-player character, to be authentic, to be truthful, to be this then becomes the Jesus thing. Bern sent me this on Twitter. This is from Laura Chen, just quoting somebody on Twitter. I have to believe that God delights in seeing us becoming our most authentic real selves, the actualization of the secret sacred self, sexually orientations, gender identity and all. I believe too in fact scripture supports this since we are created good and good is what we are. That whole Genesis three thing, let's just move that away. The more I expose myself to this theology, the more I believe it. It's been a long journey here. So I believe this deeply. No God of love in an evolutionary dynamic and ever changing universe could possibly be otherwise. Yep. This is where my thought process is with it. How could we as humans love more than a God who made us to love? Our standards are higher than God's, than he isn't a God of love, but he is. So his love is much more than we can fathom. You see again, we do our relevance realization through these, might be through Jesus, might be through Buddha, might be through John Stewart. We do our relevance realization through these idealized people. And a lot of this isn't terribly conscious. It sort of emerges from within us, let's say. At first plus the idea of audience sponsored journalism sound neither new nor worrying. Newspapers before the mid 19th century were partisan outfits run on subscription revenues, not advertising. In other words, they were, it was audience capture by design. And surely news consumers have purer motives than faceless corporations do, especially if their support isn't even commercial but philanthropic, like supporting a Patreon, public radio or the Atlantic. This intuition is wrong on two counts. First, having to sell content to audiences rather than selling eyeballs to advertisers transforms the incentives reporters face. Advertisers like positive stories that put you in the mood to buy stuff, while readers and viewers respond to more fear or anger inducing stories. Other than on stories explicitly affecting their businesses, advertisers don't really care what the news says. But readers like news that confirms what they already believe. Just like viewers like people, internet avatars that are in some ways aligned with them that they can identify with and in some ways they can sort of participate in this idealized being of light here manifesting to you maybe who you want to become. How to grow a beard. Subscribers are more likely to keep paying if they feel emotionally engaged with the individual journalists they sponsor and so on. Second, there is a critical difference between the 19th century model and the audience sponsored media today. You still, you did still buy the newspaper in order to get the news. And while the paper might have offered a skewed interpretation of the facts at hand, it's still needed to cover everything its rivals might, or else you might think you are not getting all the news that's fit to print. Today, few people are paying mainly to get news. On the internet, facts about what's going on in the world are available in copious print and print. But the fact is that the news is still being used to cover everything its rivals might. And that's why it's so important to keep the news in the hands of the people who are reporting. And while the paper might have offered a skewed interpretation of the facts at hand, some of the news about what's going on in the world are available in copious amounts and with enough variety to suit any taste. Yes, serious journalists still report valuable stories and discover important facts. But where before this kind of public interest journalism work was subsidized by profitable fluff news, today it is heavily funded by grants. Consider how little political energy has come from the astounding investigative journalism on the opioid crisis. So if you can no longer sell the news nor advertising, what is it that subscription-based journalism sells today? Worldviews, interpretations, and the facts that support them. Today, journalists sell compelling narratives that mold the chaotic torrent of events. This is exactly in many ways what Ron Brown is complaining about when he's talking about his new dissatisfaction for Tim Poole and Dave Rubin. And spoiler alert, he said some kind things towards Sam Harris. Today, journalists sell compelling narratives that mold the chaotic torrent of events, internet chatter, and information into readily understandable plotlines, characters, and scenes. And this is the way in which in many ways Donald Trump succeeds John Stewart. Because if there's something that Trump did effectively, it was that. I mean, he renamed all the characters that were on the Republican stage in the primary with him. He renamed Hillary Clinton. I remember when Trump came in and made immigration this massive issue. And of course, most of the cathedral mass media looked at that and said, immigration isn't an issue. Oh, it is now because it's the person that we're following. So John Stewart didn't just bring about Chuck Carlson. He brought about Donald Trump. They do this by directing scarce newsroom resources to a handful of overarching stories, which are built through standard newspaper reporting, essayist long form installments, videos, podcasts, op-eds, and yes, reporters' tweets. Like Shaharajad, if they can keep subscribers coming back for more of the story, they will stay alive. The problem is not only that serious journalism cannot survive in the contemporary media business model, it is that in an era of subscription-based narrative production and super abundant facts, okay, here's combinatorial explosiveness at work. You've now got combinatorial explosiveness with respect to the news. And this is what Vervecky and Peugeot are often talking about with respect to science, too. You have to select. You have to do relevance realization. And in fact, what we're doing collectively is collective relevance realization. And that's what the journalists are doing. And that's what I'm doing right here. Me, too. What journalism gets produced and shared comes down to which stories are needed for different narratives. The trouble is not that misinformation is destroying facts, but that even if all of the fact-checking procedures are followed by a letter, facts only matter now as far as they are useful to monetizing a worldview. Now, that's a little bit cynical. And what it tends to cover is the reality that this is, in fact, how we filter. Again, going back to Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris, in the first Vancouver conversation, it's this a priori filter that we are filtering things through in order to, because you need, in order to reinforce the narrative, because you need a narrative to do that filtering for you, and you need the facts to support the narrative. And so you're constantly doing that unless, of course, you have a transformation or a red pill or a black pill or a red pill or some pill in which suddenly the narrative changes. And this is, again, in fact, what Ron is talking about in his video. But in terms of how it works in the market, well, it's the person who is embodying the narrative that is helping to lend the facts. Stuart's theory of what made Fox News so effective that it was a narrative infotainment for a loyal niche audience took explicit form in the spin-off show he produced, The Colbert Report, launching in 2005. It featured former Daily Show correspondent Stephen Colbert in character as bombastic conservative pundit on the model of Fox News personality Bill O'Reilly. The premiere episode, Colbert's character proclaimed himself the emperor of truthiness. We are divided between those who think with their heads and those who know with their hearts, he explained. Competition between head and heart? No contest. The point was offered the gentle viewer's smug assurance that they still lived in the world of facts while the sheep over at Fox believed whatever felt right. To illustrate, Colbert used a clip of George W. Bush defending the nomination of White House counsel Harriet Myers to the Supreme Court. I know her heart. But the quote was actually taken outrageously out of context. The punchline hit big, not because of anything brilliant Colbert had said, but because he understood exactly what his liberal audience already believed about the nomination. In calling out the scourge of truthiness, Colbert was being truthy. Then again, wasn't that what Stuart had been doing all along? Wasn't it even what he promised? What Stuart insisted on night after night was imposing his own context on the news, a narrative and a meaning he decided. He could do this all from a comedy posture. He argued that good journalism needed to do this too, that there is no such thing as objective journalism, post-modernity already on its way, except there are no faithful narratives, but my own. Because the powerful decision a journalist could make was to decide what was important. There it is, collective relevance realization. Wrapped in layers of irony and humor, Stuart had already been relying on truthiness for years, reflecting the incredulity and ire his audience felt about politics and media back to them. He was a man of a culture, a man of a culture, and the dark secret of Stuart and Colbert's pastiche of conservative infotainment was that it only worked because their liberal audience wanted the same thing, adjusted for taste. Anyone can read the news to you, I promise to feel the news at you, for you, and with you. I added the last two. What Stuart and Colbert didn't realize was that they were profits at the advent of what Audre Myr calls post-journalism. The business model of mass media advertising was dying and subscription-based journalism was rising at its pace. The switch in business model would also mean the death of journalism's old neutrality norms and the need of new ones. Stuart and Colbert would pioneer them. While The Daily Show was helping to kill spin in the aughts, online political journalism was also forging the new coin of the realm, a consistent voice, a clear brand, authenticity, telling your audience where you were coming from, and a certain ironic detachment from a particular take. You could make fun of a journalist who posed as objective by exposing him as a partisan hack. It was a lot harder to generate comedy from a pundit doing exactly what you expected a pundit to do. Out of the advertising cataclysm, there are two newspapers that pivoted in time and they thrived. The New York Times and the Washington Post managed to substantially grow their revenue by pivoting to a subscription-based model in everything that entails. In 2020, digital revenue overtook print revenue at the Times, completing its transformation to a self-described digital-first subscription-first company. Since the new business model does not especially depend on daily newspapers, the Times and the Post are free to branch out and develop diverse ways at delivering content, including podcasts, documentaries, and magazines. The primary service provided its interpretation, laying out the puzzles, narratives, and the clues to the real story. In 2017, internal report of the Times operations concluded that it spent too many resources on editing and not enough on story sharpening. In 2020 job postings of a new Moscow correspondent, the paper did not require candidates to speak Russian, but it did lay out a paragraph length their official storyline about Vladimir Putin's Russia. In other words, you have a confessional basis for which to apply. Even for the hard reporting that remains, what is especially essential under the subscription model is narrative development. Because Stuart and Colbert were right, in the digital age you didn't need anyone to read the news to you. What you need is to understand how you should feel about it and what the story and what the story and what story it tells. For most readers, including many in journalism, the details will simply make no difference in their day-to-day lives. It's relevance realization, what they're doing. They're participating in what? The fight against the corrupting Libs or progressives or the obstinate conservatives that are keeping the eschaton from coming. It's our daily meditation. It's our daily quiet time in front of our smartphone. It's the religion of our age fulfilling the narrative and our participation in it. Well, if I read it, if I believe it, I can participate in it, and soon the glorious eschaton will emerge. For most readers, including many in journalism, the details will simply make no difference for their day-to-day lives. This is what Postman said. Presented with a massive overload of isolated facts, they will simply want to make sense to them. Sense-making. Helping them to do so is the most valuable, most revenue-generating function of journalism today. Find the most powerful story to build out a carefully collected facts, building a compelling lattice of clips, reports, interviews, and takes that confirm your sense of everything of what's wrong in the world. More than anyone else, the journalism world today is aping John Stewart, the man who figured out how to spin boring, ubiquitous, super-abundant media straw into engaging, titillating, pervasive, narrative gold. In his dream, John Stewart flees the set of the show cast on his image of journalism, Tucker Carlson, tonight. Bursting off stage, he finds himself in a hallway of doors, each leading to a different set where authentic, post-spin, digitally engaged news analysis can be found. As he runs, he passes by the Rachel Maddow show, the Joe Rogan Experience, Full Frontal with Samantha Bee, the Lead with Jake Tapper, the Mehdi Hassan show, Infowars, the Read Out with Joy Ann Reed, Common Sense with Barry Weiss, and countless others. Paul VanderKlay channel, here it is. And he says, far, far down at the forgotten end of the hall, he stops before a door that reads The Problem with John Stewart and pushes through. Then they go on to talk about Stewart's new show, The Problem with John Stewart. The irony was that in blowtorching TV journalism for having become just about TV, Stewart produced a decade of great TV journalism about TV. The show allowed its audience to stand above the fray, to dodge substantive politics and already identify with the conviction that they were the ones staying true to the spirit of America while the soulless media political hack sold out and the fanatics went off the rails. Does that sound familiar? As Ross Douthat put it in 2010, he proved that he can conjure the thrill of a culture war without the cost of combat and the solidarity of identity politics without any actual politics. But Douthat was actually describing a different event, Glenn Beck's restoring honor rally, the one that Stewart and Colbert's rally had aimed to spoof. Many of the ingredients of these dueling rallies. Now again, how did Trump get elected? What was his main campaign engine? The rally. Stewart rolled out the carpet for Donald Trump. It's astounding. Through this, through this, I haven't gotten the language yet, but it's personalized, idealized relevance realization through an avatar, through a personality that's sort of the prism by which we can do this. I'll have to find that clip from Peugeot. Many of the ingredients of these dueling rallies, the stick it to the powers that be ethos, the insistence that there is a broad middle of the country who were on the side of the rallies and against the establishment. Even the furious disputes about crowd size would be echoed a few years later and the rallies to make American great again. And that's the reason why the you can flatter your audience over and over every day by showing them proof of how insane the people they despise are becoming. You can tell them that they want to hear about how everyone else is just hearing what they want to hear. You can even build an entire new media business model on this. But how long can you tell your audience they're the only ones still living in reality before the idea just becomes an alternative reality of its own? The tragedy of all of it all is that it isn't just a nightmare version of the world John Stuart dreamed of. It's a world he built in his quest to turn real news from the exception into the norm. He pioneered a business model that made it nearly impossible. It's a model of content production and audience catering perfectly suited to monetize alternate realities delivered to fragmented audience. It tells us what we want to hear and leaves us with the sense that they have departed from fantasy worlds while I've departed for fantasy worlds while we have our heads on straight. Americans finally have what they didn't before. The phony theatrics have been destroyed and replaced not by an earnest new above the phrase centrism. The monarchical vision is gone folks. This is all part of the recession of modernity. But a more authentic fanaticism and authenticity of course is the name of the God. John Stuart pioneered fake news in the hope that it would deliver us from the absurdities of the old media world. He succeeded beyond his wildest dreams.