https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=zyUT6_aThks

 Andrew Gao. Alright, thank you Job. Another announcement from Andrew Gao and he wrote this and I thought it was excellent. That's what we're going to do in Salisbury, right? That's what we're going to do in Salisbury. In Salisbury, okay. So the Dawkins Harris New Atheist message has dramatically declined in credibility over the last few years. This leaves plenty of people with an openness to religious answers to some big life and death and the universe questions to which they thought they had answers. There are also many within the church who are wrestling with questions bigger than the average church is prepared to answer. An estuary is where the church river mingles with the secular sea to create an interesting ecosystem. It's a little dry here right now but this is in fact an estuary. No, there's water. There's water over there and there and there. There's all kinds of water here. It's a high risk while we're here talking about the flood. There could be a flood, yeah. It's a high risk but potentially high reward strategy for engaging both of these groups by providing a space for them to explore questions together in good faith. With the opportunity to listen to two Christian Reformed pastors from America. I just got upgraded. Who have worked this model online and in person for several years and we are keen to share their experience in the UK. So if you're interested in that, you can meet with Andrew in the Salisbury meetup that we're going to have at the pheasant down in Salisbury and that'll be almost at the end of our time in the UK. Tuesday. So join us there. Thanks Job. Thanks Job.