https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lyS8jiSKao8

 Okay, I guess we're live now. This thing isn't showing me the chat, which is a problem because I was pretty much counting on that. Oh boy. See I get myself in hot water here doing this without Rick. I do most of the stuff myself. I'm going to have to open up another window. Let's see, let's do it this way. No, not that way. I wanted to, I said this is kind of like a thief in the night because it's sort of comments on comments. I was looking through the comments and a couple of things were pretty cool. So I thought I'd just get on and then let you guys respond live, but now I can't see my live chat, which OBS nicely. Maybe view, we'll have a docs, docs chat. Really? Oh, there we go. There we go. Good. Okay, good. Good. Figuring it out. A bunch of you are here. How's your Tuesday? Well, you know, I was going to make the comment that all the homeless folks are under the shelter and all the ladies are in the coffee break room and I had to do a little saying, he's okay, he's okay, he's okay. So the ladies didn't worry about the homeless guys. One of the ladies is so funny, she says to me, she says, I just wanted to know if he was single. And so I said to her, does that look like an upgrade to you? She's hilarious. I'll tell you, a lot of pastors, pastor churches with a lot of senior citizens and quite frankly, it's an absolutely wonderful thing to do. I just absolutely adore the people at my church and people get more so. It was always my mother's phrase when they get older. One of the things that I noted, I thought Anselman had some really good comments as he usually does. I don't always agree with him, but James, I don't know how to say your last name, James Kurtides uploaded a video entitled On God about 30 seconds before it disappeared. Did anybody catch that? Luke, of course, responded. And so that's very interesting. Another interesting thing that came out of this is, I didn't even finish the original video. Well, don't worry, this this live stream will be set here and you can come back and watch it. You just can't interact in live time there, Nate. See, I can't look at the chat. I get distracted. Anyway, so there's the question of this Jordan Peterson video on God, which is obviously in the works. And if you're a YouTuber, often you like I've got five or six mostly conversations sort of stacked up on the channel and I release them. I try not to release too much because more than one video a day just overloads a bunch of you. So I say that as I break my own rule right now. So yeah, it's we'll we'll see what Peterson does. But you know what I what I said in this video and I wrote a sub stack today, which which was very much along the same lines. So what I often do in the morning is I that's not the sub stack, that's Twitter. What I often do in the morning is I I sit down on Twitter and I think, OK, what's what what what's in the video that I just released today? And then I sit down and I try and make a Twitter summary of it because there are a lot of people out there who just don't have time to watch a lot of video or listen to a lot of video. And so then they get frustrated with the channel because they put out so much content. So then that's part of the reason that I started the sub stack, because I sit down on Twitter and I try to get a sense of, OK, what did I say in the video? But I never remember it completely. And in fact, I don't try because the sub stack is sort of then the the talk to the tick of the video. So I think through the video, but then I write the sub stack and the sub stack is fairly short. So if someone doesn't have time to watch my videos, they can just go right to the sub stack and check out the sub stack. So that's I wrote one. Jordan Peterson remains the unauthorized exorcist. Peterson reliably confuses watchers as he tries to overhaul science beyond modernity and save the sovereign individual. And yes, Nate, I did read your comment on the sovereign individual. So yeah, Jordan Peterson, you know, just when I was reading through the comments this morning, I was thinking about the strangeness of his life and the increasing the strangeness of a number of people's lives. So so Brett Weinstein and Heather Highing and Jordan Peterson and now Peter Boghossian are all sort of in the same boat in that they were tenured professors. I don't know if Peter Boghossian was tendered or tenured or not, but their academic career has been derailed by their political thought, let's say. And so now they're in this strange new space, which for all the talking that Peterson did about the university. Well, now you might as well start one because you're already in exile. So go for it. But also the fact that he continues to work on this question of God. And so then part of the question I have on the substack that I wrote yesterday, I don't usually I don't put out anywhere near as many substacks as I put videos. I'm not a prophet. I'm a clinical psychologist. It's increasingly interesting to me how he's using YouTube. What is he using YouTube for? Now, it seems that he's getting in better and better health. So he's doing more stuff. There was a picture on Twitter of him on a helicopter, which it's like, we get to watch your elite status if you're taking helicopter rides. You know, so but he is he's a very wealthy man now, obviously. So how is he going to use YouTube? What is what is his plan going forward? He's never seemed to be someone with much of a plan. If only Jesus would have started a university. Luke, Luke, Luke, Luke, you're so Luke. So I'm really curious about, you know, is this is this the beginning of wave three wave two was sort of the recuperation and finding his bearings again. And wave three, perhaps, will be him saying, OK, this is a plan that I'm going to try. He's always seemed to be a guy who who plays with things and try something and discovers. And, you know, he usually he usually talks that way. So let me just scan the scan the chat here. When do you sleep? I sleep at night. Yes, Luke, you made it. We would have we certainly we certainly would have missed you. I think Jordan Peterson is obviously a prophet. No, he's a he's an exorcist. If you think about everything that I've talked about in terms of spirits, I think exorcist is sort of the best way to describe what Peterson has done through his videos. Jordan Peterson videos have been exorcisms that could become the title of this. Maybe I should retitle it. I don't know. But I think that's true. I think Jordan Peterson videos have become exorcisms. I think the founders of the IDW embarking on an online university project, I think, and I don't know. I don't know. That's right. They have they do have some relationship with that. Maybe they will. They're certainly backing into it. How much university can social media? Let me slow myself down. How much will social media disrupt the university? That's that's sort of a big thing. All right. But I said I was going to talk about questions here. So the on God question, that video, that was that was an interesting thing. What were some of the interesting comments that I saw? I'm not going to get into some of the meteor comments just because I I can't think that focused in a live stream, at least not yet. Yeah, Grim Grizz, you know, everybody subscribe to his channel. Oh, yeah, Philip, Phil Nickerson. Now, Phil caught my attention when he started going through all of the archives. Now it's if you don't have your own YouTube channel, you go to YouTube studio. And then when you go to studio. So this is the second most popular of my last 10 videos. The most popular of my last 10 videos was Big Eva. That was really interesting to me. A little bit more popular than Jordan Peterson for a lot of for a long time. Jordan Peterson was just. You know, the most popular thing I could put out now. He isn't so much. And I don't know if that means the composition of people who are currently watching my videos has changed or the composition of or sort of the zeitgeist has changed and Peterson has receded. I think a lot about these questions because, again, the analytics are sort of addictive. And then when here you go to comments, Phil Nickerson caught my attention because, you know, most of the time I just go through comments serially. YouTube excludes the things I haven't responded to because YouTube is trying to get me to get me to stay on YouTube and keep you all here. So Phil Nickerson was going through the all of the old a bunch of the old Convo videos, which I thought was really cool and I really appreciated it. And then just recently he sent me to let's see what the algorithm has in store for me now. Oh, comments on comments. Look, it's telling me I'm live. I guess I guess YouTube is for amnesiacs. Let's see. You know, it's really crazy to click on all this stuff on a live Internet feed. You know, I really do check out the video recommendations you guys give me. Jesus and Kashmir thing. But this this video with Will Willimon and Stanley Howe Ross on Karl Barth, Phil Nickerson sent me to that video. And I like I like I responded to both to Job, who asked me if I had read ever read Karl Barth's epistle commentary on Romans and Philip, who asked me if I'm you know, if I'm a bar devotee and I answered in the question and answer that no, because of my seminary, they said don't go over to Karl Barth because of those questions. I started reading a book this weekend. Tomorrow's video is about a 40 minute video. It's a little shorter and it's asking questions about what does it mean to save the world? So that's tomorrow's video. I started listening to reading Karl Barth together. And this was very interesting. Now, Will Willimon and Stanley Howe Ross are both big names in in my corners of the world. You know, comments are turned off. What kind of weenie YouTube YouTubers are out there? Ooh, Duke Divinity School with 5000 subscribers. We don't want any comments. Comments. Oh, people will say snarky things in the comments. People are so fragile. Anyway, this was this was really a terrific thing. And one of the things that I discovered was I knew I had some rough guesses about Bart basically because I knew some things about neo orthodoxy. I knew some things about Bart. I hadn't really read any of his books. But so then I picked up that Karl Bart, you know, armchair theologian Karl Bart, which I mentioned either on the video today or it'll be on the video tomorrow because I recorded both of those videos yesterday. But I'm yeah, I'm I'm quite interested in Bart and and there was a lot of engagement between Bart and Tillich. Now, I don't like making videos that are way too theological like this because for the for the majority of you, Karl Bart and Paul Tillich shrug. But then there's all the nerds of you like the randos and the grail country peeps. I mean, y'all are serious philosophical theological nerds. I mean, in a serious, serious way. You know, as a pastor, it's like I can get nerdy to a certain degree with you, but I got a group of ladies in the other room and I got homeless people outside here. So I got to I got to hold my worlds together. And you know, if Chad the alcoholic is going to be pope, well, we you know, we got to we got to keep him in mind, too. Oh, that's right. That's from my I did a conversation also yesterday with with Chris Pacow. So that was that was that was part of my conversation with Chris. So they're both into Bart. Who's both into Bart? See, I did so digital Knows his gnosis. He's in here, too. So there's there's a lot going on here. So, you know, and I guess I'm still trying to figure out how to use live streams because I sat down and I didn't want to do the administrative work that's piling up on my desk. And so it's like, what can I do to distract myself and completely avoid the work that I have to do, like sign a bunch of documents? I hate administrative work. If if I think if someone gave a pile of money to my church, the first thing I would do would be hire an administrator. And if you see my office, you know, I need one anyway. So, yeah, Bart Tillich. I also picked up some Tillich sermon books. I got that from Jason, the conversation that I released yesterday. So I think I'll be doing some more Bart and Tillich reading lately. And I'm also reading this really fascinating book on theologians under Hitler. It's a book on again, this was recommended in the comments to three theologians that were pro Hitler. Yeah. How could that be? And even just beginning the book, you can very easily see how, you know, especially having been through this whole Trump business and just watching, watching this complete split and freak out that I see on both sides of the Trump thing. I mean, if Trump is able to do one thing, it's to promote craziest and craziness and the people who love him and the people who hate him. It's it's just insanity. So I thought, yeah, probably can learn some stuff about theologians who were pro Adolf Hitler. Well, part of the problem is this text is too small. Can I make this text bigger in this little window? Because, you know, my eyes aren't what they're used to. I am getting older. No, that doesn't work. Hang on. This is I know it's really bad for him to get up out of the chair during a live stream because it's sort of like dead radio. But here goes. Oh, I should get my water bottle, too. So I am 58 years old and I have managed to live so far without getting glasses. But when the text gets really small. All right. OK, let's look into. Oh, the other thing I wanted to talk about the YouTube algorithm. So. Well, yesterday I got a whole bunch of clean like a pro videos and I thought it was some wash over from my sister's channel, my sister and Clay, the primitive home has a YouTube channel and she, unlike me, is trying to grow her following that doing crazy stuff like thief in the night live stream videos. But out of the blue, I get this kitty owl video and. You know, I thought it was hilarious. I loved it. So then I went on a half hour binge of kitty owl video, owl kitty video of this guy who puts his cat in these famous movie scenes. And then I start getting messages from a bunch of you that you're getting them, too. I mean, the algorithm, I mean, people are people are a little freaked out about the thought of God watching them. We're all going to be increasingly freaked out about Google watching us. I have an Android TV and I was having a Zoom call with my mother and my sister and my brother in law last night and my wife was sitting on the couch next to me and my mother was sitting on the couch next to me and my mother was sitting on the couch next to me. And my mother said something on the Zoom call and the TV turns itself on and Google searches what my mother just said. And it's like. I have to unplug this TV. So I'm curious, too. I mean, how many of you got owl kitty videos and what's that about? Is it because is it because we're all sharing the same profile? And so the algorithm is always throwing things at us to figure out, you know, well, if we can get Vanderkley to kick on it or Christian Goldin or or, you know, if we can get Luke, Luke is a very selective eater. You know, if it doesn't have personalism in it, if it doesn't have panentheism in it, Luke's like, no, I don't want any. So. All right. There were there. Those are random thoughts. OK, now I'm going to. I did not, Chad. I did not. OK, let's go all the way back to the beginning and look at this nonsense. When do you sleep at night? What are your thoughts on woke left, woke right? I don't know. I don't know. I haven't thought about it. I'll have to wait for it there on on your channel, Mr. Fragmented Dude Person. Isn't Brett in the IDW embarking on an online university project, University of Austin? That'll be very interesting to see. Neil Ferguson thinks online learning is largely a meme, and I happen to agree. I'm certainly learning online. He can't undergo the transformation he's avoiding without pulling away from the public eye. That from Nate. Because I'm low status, almost everything I can say to you, but every now and then someone, some insider somewhere will send me a message and. And then I have to sort of put on my pastoral hat. Let's wear this. I have to put on my pastoral hat and not say things. So I really love your comment, Nate. To what degree is Peterson's transfer? To what degree must Peterson be online for his transformation to happen? I don't know. I don't know. Meaningful positive changes that have happened to me in this little corner have been personal and intimate. I I'm such a troll. I've got a I've got a wicked troll in my consciousness. Congress Luke, you just got to be careful with your comments. Jordan Peterson maybe started it, but he was a spiritual catalyst because it has all been real change. And that's my point about the unox, the unauthorized exorcist. Jordan Peterson as exorcist, I think is the best word for him. He via videos exercised a whole generation of young men. I think that's he he broke. He broke a spiritual hold on these young men. And he didn't even know he was doing it. Well, maybe he did. I don't know. Da da da da fills here. Click your own live stream. Yeah, there we go. For Grizz. Yep. Yep. Yep. Check out. Check out Peter Rollins yet. You know, between you and Jess, it's like Peter Rollins, this Peter Rollins that. And so every time I try to listen to Peter Rollins, I just, it just not just. It just hasn't just hasn't gotten to me. Here's the thing about colonizing someone colonizing people takes time. And you learn this with respect to evangelism. Oh, one of the things about Carl Bart, very big Calvinist, listening to to Willimon and how Ross talk about Bart very, you know, he's a reformed pastor. Very big Calvinist, big Calvinist, big Calvinist. Anyway, so colonizing, you know, this is the spirit's work. And if I ever in the words of Grim Grizz get a crush on Peter Rollins, it'll happen in its time. In its time. He colonizes all things in its time. So you've got to be a really big evangelical to appreciate the destruction of that song. Check out Esoterica. It sounds like my wife wouldn't like it. Um, Bart meets Bulgakov in Geneva. Hint. Yeah. I know, Nate, you guys have this, have this real thing. You guys, you guys move so fast and so deep. It's hard for me to keep up with y'all. But yeah, Nate, you and I, you and I got to, you and I got to talk. I, we got to set up a time. Um, I know artists who turn off comments because their videos to encourage the audience to actually listen to their music. Yeah. But this is a seminary being a weenie. That's my opinion. I may be wrong. I'm teaching Sunday school to middle schoolers and have no idea what I'm doing, send help, tell lots of stories. Tell lots of stories. You can almost never go wrong with a good story. Now, one of the videos I was listening to this morning to dumb, dumb, dumb, Paul's YouTube video history. This conversation, I'm not done with it yet, but you know, I'm starting to make my clips channel again. And if I stopped fooling around with live streaming and get some of my own work done and, you know, maybe do a little work on the clip channel, you know, one of the things that, that Peugeot said, it's fun watching Peugeot develop because he's getting better and better and clearer and clearer and his thought is refining. Well, that's what happens. And Jonathan Peugeot is in many ways, you know, he's, he's at least, I don't know how old Jonathan is, but he's, he's at least a decade younger than I am. So he's just now getting into the sweet spot of his career. And so it's exciting to think about where, what he can become and where he can go. If he doesn't get derailed and he's been tested, you know, those of you who listen to Tim Keller know what I'm talking about. He's been tested, but, um, you know, there are still challenges ahead for him that will have to be taken care of. Oh, that's the family. Okay. Uh, where was I? Yeah. About storytelling this, this, the part in this video where Peugeot talks about attention and story that was genius. Um, um, perhaps you could, um, Jordan Peters is something like a demonologist specializing in one portion of the exorcism process, naming the demons. Yeah. Um, John Depew and Sam Watkins on to talk about Bart. I don't like, I like doing randos conversations because I think they're actually better conversations because the randos that actually work to get a slot have devoted time and attention to have some understanding of what I'm doing. And that just makes the conversation better. Having conversations with high status people on the internet, not my bag, unless there's a reason I want to have this high status person on it's a very select list of high status people that I want to talk to, um, dum, dum, dum. Um, yeah, yeah. Digital, digital gnosis, not banned from the YouTube chat. There you go. Um, so that, that, that, that, uh, Rudy, thank you again, Rudy, for always putting the timestamps in the question and answer videos. In fact, I look for that and I really appreciate your efforts on that. And I know it's kind of a thankless job, but you're, you've been very faithful in that and I just want to let you know, I really appreciate it. Your lips are saying Trump, but I'm hearing blessed angels savior of unborn children paid manifest on earth to bring heaven to America. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, shoot. I lost it. That was genius. Golden. That was genius. Oh shucks. Did I lose it? Did I lose it? Crap. That was genius. I'll have to find it later when the thing comes up. I always get those tick tock girl shorts. I don't know if I want to, Nate, I don't know if I want to see you in tick tock girl shorts. Eh, not a good look. Way, way to 1970s. Um, university of Austin is a mean university. Ooh. Have you ever had a chat with a Catholic worker? No. Would I? Sure. I mean, as long as they're low status and they have some awareness of what I'm doing. I get emails from for a while. I was getting emails from the Philippines, this organization that you could, if you had a little podcast and you wanted to get on a bigger podcast, you hire these Filipinos to go around sending emails to probably podcasts larger than yours and finding, figuring out if you could get on the chat. And so then I, I always send them the link to my randos thing and say, okay, you want to talk with me, get in the lottery. Uh, James Frazi, you got to teach, but I wish I could be learning instead. James Frazi. He's I love James. I, I, I feel so bad about my local meetup. I gotta, I gotta sit down and put the stuff on a calendar because if I don't calendar it, it doesn't happen. And if you're really guilty about that. So seeds can be planted online, but growth, not online. I think there's a lot of truth to that. Luke. I think there's a lot of truth to that. Luke. Hey Petri, the hat. Yeah. I like the hat. Um, I was really just thinking about this before signing on here, colonizing. Is that a flaming poop emoji? Luke? I don't know. Um, but, but, but, but, but, but, but a new hat. Uh, this is my rain hat. I wear this in the rain because my Calvinist God and his infinite wisdom has seen to take away my hair. Now you can fight about that if that's God, number one or God, number two, but, um, the hats good for now. Randall's going to converse influence on PVK paintball for Jesus. That's right. Um, Peter likes the hat. Luke doesn't like the hat. Uh, one of the other two Nates here. Good. Good. Shell Drake is awesome. Luke. Shell Drake's an interesting cat. I really like Shell Drake, but there's only so many hours in a day and only so many videos that you can watch. So, um, maybe this is good enough for now. Um, I've gotten to the bottom of the chat unless you have a question you're dying to ask me and this is your chance. Cause I've got my glasses on. Is he wearing the hat to channel fishermen? Fishers of man. Oh, you know, Freddie, we're here. He'd sing the song. It's that kind of random word association that, um, makes life complete. So yeah, this was another experimental live stream. Let me know if, um, if you're getting any more owl kitty videos, cause I want to know, uh, let me know if you have any more thoughts about the, the God video that was and wasn't, you know, I should probably have James on the channel too. There's a bunch of you guys. So I had the, the third lobe quartet. I did that video. I had Chris Pacow, um, did a conversation with him yesterday. He's at work right now. Um, and that was a good conversation. That'll be coming out on the channel. Uh, the guy with the fallen earth creationism, he, uh, gave me the, gave me the green light and he put together a website for his fallen earth creationism. That's coming out at some point. Um, I'm not, I don't have any rando slots this week, partly because some of the people that have already committed to, uh, could only do it during when I usually do the rando slot. So for that reason, maybe I'm having a little bit of extra live stream and some extra Q and a, um, okay. Okay. I think, uh, I think, I think we're done here unless there's something someone absolutely must drop in the chat. Um, any question you must, I must answer anyway, loving the comments on this Jordan Peterson video. Um, it's, uh, yeah, it's interesting. We're, we're the world is fun. Praise God. It's an interesting place. How do we get Rick Randolph? I keep telling Rick, you know, Rick, Rick is Rick. Rick will not, Rick does not want to do a conversation. That's not Rick style. Rick, Rick likes being behind the scenes. Rick, Rick likes making it work. Rick likes getting things done, but, uh, Rick likes to try to get me to be a better YouTuber, but Rick does not want to come on and he is in one of the videos. You can go back through the archives and find Rick in a video. So, um, he is back there. Um, I get most warm or 40 K since I listened to that one about, okay. Chicken or bacon. So yesterday I walked into the kitchen and my daughter was cooking bacon. Bacon colonized me hard. So this morning, after I posted my sub stack and my Twitter stream, I went into the kitchen and I cooked me some bacon and it was delicious. I realized I often have been just having a protein shake for breakfast. Cause otherwise I get too old and too fat. So then I, that's all I, I've always been a big breakfast eater, but then. Bacon baby. And also when we have the coffee break ladies here on Tuesday mornings, now things are coming to life now after COVID more and more. And we have the coffee break ladies. These ladies feed me like sugar and sugary stuff. And so I've decided it's okay on Tuesday mornings to have a, have myself a good breakfast because those ladies are going to put some sugar in me and it's better to have the protein and the fat in there first. Um, it would give the channel a boost Rick. Um, hook up with some delicious tacos. Are you going to stream for a fortnight or mine? Or Minecraft at some point? Um, I would stream civilization because that's the only computer game I play with any reliability, but I'm not particularly good at it because. I, I, I enjoy playing it. And when I play with my son, Jared, it's when I play with my son, Jared, it's always Russia versus America because he has a, or Germany versus America. Cause he has a crazy land army. That's just going to clean my clock, but then I'm over on another continent and I, he can't get at me because of my ships and my air force. So that's the way it goes. All right. Um, I think that's enough for this. Now I have to figure out how to turn this off. Thanks for joining me. Um, yeah, thanks for watching the videos and, oh, I have to figure out how to turn this thing off.