https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZhxzE0Bw88E

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do a little commentary on some part of another part of the Sam Harris Ben Shapiro conversation from Sunday and also apart from Jordan Peterson and Dave Rubin that was on the Rubin report with two other individuals I weren't familiar with I wasn't familiar with these two other individuals one One's into Ayn Rand and the other is a materialist of some sort. I think an economist But there was I thought Peterson was very clear in that video Now we still haven't had the opportunity to publicly view the Sam Harris Jordan Peterson conversations from Vancouver. I Think those were good conversations at least the audio versions that I've heard but both of these talks came quite closely on the heels and So I think we can get a sense both from Harris and from Peterson of themselves and in both cases They're talking to different individuals that are bringing out some different things obviously But I thought both of these clips that I'm about to show you are quite Quite clear now. I'm not in the past. Sometimes I've run through the clips then I've gone back and then commentary I think I'm just gonna run through the clips. It's Friday and I have to do my rough draft for Sunday video and Fridays are the end of the week for me and they're always impacted because Sunday's coming in Saturday's Normally my day off. So that's that'll give you some reason why videos are usually front-loaded at the beginning of the week I might post this video on Saturday and my rough draft for Friday video on Friday I still continue to tinker with you know, when do you when do you post the video? Although sometimes I just want to post them to get them out of there and often I'll post them ahead of time on the audio Channel only just because it's easier and they go up fast on the audio channel So if you're if you're listening to the audio only podcast version, sometimes you'll get something a little bit early than earlier than the YouTube version Sometimes it's the other way around. So let's let's take a look at this because I thought on the whole this was a this was a rather interesting conversation between Sam Harris and Ben Shapiro and And Here at the end Harris gets into a question Harris gets into ought and is and Harris is trying to defend his His view of how you can get an ought from an is and that's very much the topic of the other Jordan Peterson Conversation that we'll see and so we're basically to run gonna run this or do commentary through the end of this talk here But it's this is a this is an interesting section For me is given all the minds as they are what where where Should we want to go both individually and collectively and there are multiple there maybe and even right there Where should we want to go? Okay, so so we're in the we're in the world of should and and this what he's about to say here gets quite interesting Multiple right answers to this. It's not that there's just one sort of life. That is the best possible life There's a range of different lives that Given a million years to talk about it We might not be able to just think which is better or worse like you now if you look back in the short little Group of three videos where I talked about eschatology and Sam Harris this is very much where it comes into play often when I listen to them talk about reason I get the sense of Eschatology now that if I would only employ reason then Somehow within my lifetime I can What the kingdom can be fully realized in myself now? This is where the eschatological Conversation and the materialist gets very interesting because I'm now in my mid-50s. I'm gonna have a birthday this month and Well, it's too late for me, baby, I mean what do I got maybe Tops, you know, who knows what's gonna happen with medical science, maybe 50 more years. That's tops Well, is that gonna be enough to fully realize rationality can I listen to Sam Harris or Matt Dillahunty and have my rationalist conversion and and become this rationalist person and therefore no because we have to wait for science to evolve and we have to wait for everyone to get rational and All of that kingdom coming is dependent upon us getting rational and here Sam Harris is like Millions of years and I'm thinking but dude you're up You're one-off and done. You've only got one life to live by the time you shuffle off this mortal coil, baby You go into no land. So You know is is Chinese food better than Thai food, right? Like like there's a range of differences there which are which don't matter for better or worse. It's just different, right and and Yet at the end of the day if you really preferred one and I really preferred the other We could find some reason why that's the case I mean, well, you might be a super taster of certain tastes on your you know, so so now this is part of the difficulty of When I last week Sunday school class I mentioned again that there are at least four words in Greek that get translated as love in the English language Reason If you listen carefully to this and and again a lot of this exercise is slowing down Listen carefully if you look at the beginning of biblical series 5a my commentary on it I played that will Schroeder video and so much of learning is slowing down thinking about it as it goes through Listening carefully listening to it multiple times I've probably listened to this clip now five six times and every time I listen to it I hear more things or things are clearer or actually this clip as more or less at least for the moment been exhausted for me in terms of What I think I can get out of it But if you slow Harris down and we have the opportunity to do this with YouTube we can pause them We can think we can listen. This is one of the amazing things about YouTube You can pause a conversation and just ponder it and this is in a sense what this entire video learning Experience for me has been about in terms of I get to butt in on these Conversations and I get to listen to them and I get to think through them and I get to talk about them out loud And even sometimes talking about them out loud Engages more senses than just thinking about them in my head because when I talk about them out loud that actually Activates more systems within me and my ears get to hear what I say and then sometimes I almost never go back and watch my videos But if I if later on I think oh, yeah I said something about that that Harris Shapiro interview go back and listen and and Sometimes I go back and listen to myself I often more often have this with what I've written on my blog or go back and read something on my blog that I've written Two three five eight years ago, and I think oh and this gets into the conversation Was I a different person I experienced myself as a different person when I look back on myself in time, but here I'm rambling Keep going but but but then it's still coherent to ask should we like if I if we could really intrude in the brain and Change our intuitions about better and worse, right? That is such an interesting phrase we could really intrude in the brain and just the way he phrases it you get a mental picture of the relationship between him the brain and the mind And if I could change your sense of the rightness of certain actions or the wrongness we could make this additional We got to ask this additional question of whether that would be good Because that would be a new way of navigating in the space and this brings you to your brave new world question so like if it's possible to let's say we had a Cure for sadness, right? This is an example of views before where I like this illustration this is interesting, especially on the on the You know within the brave new world conversation because for soma and if you haven't read read brave new world or listen to the audiobook by all means do so because you know even even a Even a Philosopher converted from reformed Christianity to Roman Catholicism Peter Kreeft calls it a revelation You we have a pill that perfectly Cancels the feeling of grief say so you so at what point in the after the death of a loved one Would you want to take this pill right and the answer might be never and you would have a reason why you know that? was the case Now again pay attention to all the different ways he uses this word reason now now we can navigate this but Looking at and Looking at the relationships between these two these various definitions and uses of the word reason is important It's also intramodal. It's keeping but you could imagine someone who's just so Destroyed by the experience of grief that they just can't get their life back on track Everyone in their life is worried about them there You know on the virtue of suicide at a certain point you say well Let's just give you this pill and just see if we can bring a little daylight in there even if you were against that you use it for yourself, right and I really enjoy this illustration Because it illuminates so much about you've got a hierarchy of values. So And I really appreciate that this is Sam Harris talking in this way because he's the one that has this Conception of our moral basis being a sense of conscious well-being. Well Is he denying his argument? Is he nuancing his argument? I'm not sure he's making the argument and obviously within his own mind This is this is coherent and self-consistent with the rest of his argument But the question of whether a loved one who is who has seen a horrific accident and lost someone that they love Decides whether or not to take the pill Well, why wouldn't you even though you're causing all of this mental anguish this anguish in your consciousness? Well, you wouldn't because this is putting you in touch with the real world Well, what is the real world? Well, the real world is that your beloved has died Okay. Well, they've gone to not we've gone to not All right, if you've seen the the article that someone posted on You know Kind Sam Harris isn't really plus 10 to minus 10 and death is zero death is null value You're you're outside of it. So at least in Sam Harris's universe The the dead person is not suffering the living person is grieving the loss of their beloved Now in a sense what this pill does is doesn't take the pill Now in a sense what this pill does is doesn't take them to know or does it? Brings them to zero so they don't experience it in Sam Harris. I think rightly says well this this would be wrong well, why would it be wrong because in a sense love demands that the the beloved be grieved and To not grieve to not feel this pain Betrays the love now now what of this is material? This is this is all relational and it's highly relational. So let's imagine you're a neighbor who doesn't have much Connection to this whole situation and it's probably the neighbor that looks at the person who's beset by grief and Says you can't live this way. Take the pill take the pill Well, why I I'm I'm I'm Mourning the death of my beloved take the pill. Well, why does the neighbor want them to take the pill? Well, the the grief in the eyes of the neighbor Even if they don't have a strong relationship is firing the motor neurons of the neighbor and now they are experiencing Anguish and their anguish is separated and there's no love in there. So should the neighbor take the pill or Because this is exactly how human relationships work Or should the neighbor try to coerce the person Please don't suffer in front of me because your suffering is making me suffer because of the biology and the Psychology of my mirror neurons firing seeing you in pain puts me in pain and I don't want to pee in pain. So Have no love do not mourn the beloved take the pill and then Sam Harris's illustration here where he says Well, but if their life is really falling apart, well Isn't that the point of mourning isn't that that isn't that the point isn't that the expression and And so what we have here is Sam Harris has somewhere in his mind a calibration of grief and this I would assert is a culturally constructed calibration of grief When for example, I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic when we do the Death of a pastor remember a funeral for a pastor the Haitian Especially the Haitian women. Sometimes the men were very expressive in their grief. I Remember a situation where I was at an ordination service of an elder in the Korean Church and the wife of the elder looked like someone had just Taken the life of a beloved person in her life and she was all over the place and I This was all happening in Korean and I had a Korean friend sitting next to me. I said, you know, what's the deal with this woman? Because in my mind in my culturally constructed way her act was inappropriate She said he said oh no this all of this emotion is because she is so Happy that her husband will now be installed as an elder in a Korean Church and to be an elder in a Korean Church Is a very big deal. So So Sam Harris's well life falling apart Well, what do you mean is it do we give them the pill when it gets life-threatening? Well Here again, you have this hierarchy of values and all of this is Is any of this rational? according to his standard of Rationality even within this own illustration while we are going to allow this person to grieve for a certain number of days until But we're not gonna allow it to get life-threatening so that they're suicidal and so yeah, definitely I don't want them to commit suicide. I Remember I did a funeral for someone who? This person's son Promised to show it see being a pastor you get all these stories this person's son promised that his family was trying to keep him from the funeral partly because this Child was born out of wedlock and the family situation was very complicated and this son He was he was in his 20s at this point basically promised to Go to the funeral drape himself on his father's casket and take his own life Didn't happen I'm not sure. I don't think I ever believed the threat I think a lot of the family didn't believe the threat but given the the dramatic situation of This man's death and the family all at their extremes emotionally this rather dramatic This rather dramatic How should we say it this rather dramatic Promise to to do this rather horrible thing was to do this rather dramatic This rather horrible thing was certainly not welcome but again What is? Required in some cultures, of course in the world if if if a certain family member dies another family member takes their life Or is buried with them the the servants of Pharaohs were buried in the pyramids with their Pharaoh Now Sam Harris would say well, this is you know, this is just wrong. This is irrational You know, they don't need those servants to go into the afterlife in Egypt We should be getting rid of all of this one very quickly when you start deconstructing it It's you begin to see the cultural layers. Whereas let's say a squad of soldiers. I Just watched Gran Torino again last night. What a what a fun movie Gran Torino is But often you'll have soldiers who come back from the battlefield and all their buddies die very much have the sense of I should have Died too and that then we'll get into their behavior now Sam Harris might say well, that's irrational Well, it's not based on any religious. Well, what's it based on? Well, it's based on psychology. Well, is it irrational? How are we to evaluate any of this scenario that you have just set up in terms of should and And again, I love the illustration because the illustration illuminates so much But I don't think it helps his cause and for that reason I don't quite understand Just about everything I'm about to play I don't quite understand Quite frankly how this works for him or how this fits into his get fix into his schema, right? But presumably you wouldn't want to take it 30 seconds after your kid was run over by a bus You know You just see this this this the worst thing that's ever happened in your life happened and then you just pop this pill and you're Don't feel anything, you know one way or the other about it, right? You're ready to go to Starbucks, right? That would be that would be a complete Fragmentation of who you are with respect to the love you feel or felt for your child, right? Like what does loving your child mean if? Upon immediately upon his or her death you want to cancel your grief and you feel great, right? So what does loving your child mean? That's the question can reason answer this Any reasoning we're doing is going to be based on the presuppositions of what love is and what? Relationships are and what a human being is now Obviously he believes he can construct this all with reason and that this construction can somehow be outside of time and permanent for for You know basically just like the laws of physics simply don't buy it so So that we don't know what it'd be hard to find the right answer But and you know this kind of thing is very likely coming by the way, right? It's very likely we will one day have a cure for grief, right? And we'll have to figure out how to use it and there will be wrong ways to use it But I think what we want I think the intuition that it causes you to ask this question about Aldous Huxley and the brave new world is that we we have a We're right to want to be anchored to reality in some sense and if we and if we were ever faced with even the way that is phrased and This I think is is is really illustrative of why CS Lewis frames his arguments in his book miracles the way he does How Sam Harris just said that places us outside of both reality and nature because I think when Sam Harris says reality he means nature and This goes to Brett Weinstein saying we are assassin robots and we have to transcend our programming this goes to the argument that we are that somehow Global warming by us pumping so much co2 into the atmosphere is unnatural Well, if we are purely natural running through our programs determined without will Free of me, you know completely part of nature part of the whole show Then what we are doing to cook the world is natural we're just It's no less natural than the dinosaurs dying then the tiger eating the goat then Anything else in the world and when the tiger eats the goat we don't say to the tiger you ought not to eat the goat but when The serial killer I've been watching mind hunter on Netflix. What a good what a good series so provocative When we're watching when we're watching it when we think about a serial killer we say The serial killer doing that is different from the tiger eating the goat Why do we say that? Oh, that's all part of our program. I Think you just simply give up the game With a an opportunity of uploading ourselves into a simulation where just the world is a video game and nothing nothing is real Right. So like that are states of happiness and again when he says nothing is real here He means nothing is here in meat space being worked out. It's not me Now Taylor if you're watching the video Let me know if this is your water cup because it's been sitting in my office now since the last time you came to a meetup And I'm not just trying to be a pastor saying, you know I should probably look up your email address and email you and take a pic and take a picture of it, but Here in meat space where this this was left at a meetup and I think Taylor left it and I think Well this again, this is this is not natural But yet Sam Harris would say well, this is real and okay, so real and natural you're distinguishing that but this is real but Now we're into the phenomenology question is if I am in a simulation, how would I know? Let's imagine now when we again when we talk about computer simulations We have specific ideas in mind I have these little boxes that I call computers and when I play a computer game the one computer game I enjoy playing is civilization when I play civilization I'm not actually thinking about my little armies are dying. These are these are just zeros and ones but You don't have to imagine this to be a simulation Without meat space. That's that's kind of an interesting Lack of imagination by the person telling the story what the what the illustration is trying to say is that This morning, for example, I I woke up in the I woke up in the early morning hours I'd gone to bed on time and this often this happened sometimes I wake up in the night and then I I work on my sermon in my head and I have some time of prayer and I get some ideas for videos and my wife is my wife is sleeping. I don't want to bother her so I I maybe listen to some podcasts with with some headphones or something like that and Then I finished my sermon early and then it was still quite early I thought well, I'll just take a little nap. So I take a little nap and boom I'm in dream state right away But I'm in that that that little that little space where I kind of know I'm in dream state And and then you can kind of play around with your dreams a little bit Okay, well Is that real is that what you're talking about when you're talking about a computer simulation Is that what you're talking when you're talking about us and again, we've talked about this in terms of philosophy and such but Sam Harris wants to say well real It's so frustrated with that word because we're all sneaking things underneath it and and we We really have to come to terms with it. It's the reason real Ah rest Latin oops wrong way are totally divorced from the reality of our lives, right and our actual relationships And the conscious experience of other people that would be a bad thing, right? And yet we could imagine a circumstance of maximizing pleasure In a way that's divorced from reality and that's an interesting argument to have ethically because I think that there's I think our intuitions about that could change to some degree and I think There are ways in which we're already in something very much like a simulation That's not like that to talk about what what is real in this context is interesting But I share I share your bias here I share the sense that their versions of brave, you know, pure pleasure Brave new world futures where everyone's a heroin addict perfectly medicated. That's not good, right? Don't get it I don't get it I just don't get what you're doing here Sam I don't get it. I don't get your telos. I don't get your end goal You tell me that? good is defined by conscious well-being and Then Shapiro says what about brave new world? No, that's not good Why I don't get it and and I think but I think you can you can adjudicate that based on Other possible experiences in the landscape of all possible experiences that are clearly better and you would make an argument based on Evaluating those experiences. Okay, so this is one of those episodes where it's just I'm gonna be devastated that we don't have a second hour It actually come on Ben What's two hours gonna cost you really really? Get a get a computer and a camera and do it on the cheap and give us more hours Go into all these issues We basically scratched the surface Yeah on all of this but sort of final parting question because we didn't even get into it Now you're free will exactly a couple places where I'm sure we have more disagreements, but I have a very short answer to that piece Sam not a good move to give the short answer because the short answer I Listen to it five times and I don't think you're helping yourself with this Go for it. So rationality, I think I might have said this to you on stage at our event Rationality is not a successful moments of reasoning are not examples where freedom of will is even tempting To ascribe and so it's it's if I give you an argument you have if you strongly believe one thing And I give you an argument that persuades you that just knocks down the row of dominoes in your mind It leads you to think Okay, okay Listen, let's let's hear it again because When I first time I heard this I just I Act before I speak, you know, I run around the room. I I pull my hair out and there's see see I've done that a lot Lately, there's nothing left. So let's listen to this again If you tempt six this to you on stage at our event, right? Rationality is not a successful moments of reasoning are not examples where freedom of will is even tempting to ascribe and so it's Where freedom of will is even tempting to ascribe now. I want to give the guy some slack here. He's talking Extemporaneously on camera. He's not reading from a script. I I say plenty of incoherent things on my videos and if you want to go back and find them you'll have an easy time But I'm trying to make sense of what he's about to say It's if I give you an argument you have if you strongly believe one thing and I give you an argument that Persuades you that just knocks down the row of dominoes in your mind. It leads you to think I understand your idea first of all, that doesn't happen towards the end which I'm probably not gonna show the the guy Second from the second from right left. Gosh dyslexia. What a mess Not the guy with the gray hair not Jordan Peterson not Dave Rubin the other guy He makes an argument that you know arguments do persuade but usually not in the moment something to that effect Which I think is exactly right Sam Harris's this is this is the this is the rationalists This is the rationalists great dream Say that great instead of another word This is a rationalist great dream that I'm gonna make an argument There's a rationalist great dream that I'm gonna make an argument to Christian apologetics have this green dream and we all have this dream because well, what's this dream of this dream is of Colonizing another human being that I can give you an argument and just Destroy the other argument and then someone can make a little tiny little YouTube video and just propagate it all all over the place Sam Harris destroys Paul van der klei. Whoo That What this argument is gonna do is knock down the dominoes and and I think that's what CS Lewis talks about in terms of colonizing that Rationality will be so powerful that will Willingly submit this is something what CS Lewis talks about the specific pleasure of the inferior Where where the dog happily submits to its master and the child happy happily submits to its parent and the the the servant happy, you know the servant happily submits to the master or Let's say you're a fan of Jordan Peterson or Sam Harris or someone else and and they make they make an argument That is just clear as day to you and you happily follow what they say. That's what we're talking about here. Okay Will is not involved now Shapiro is gonna jump on him for this beacon and rightly so That's a naturalistic response to a reasonable argument that that any control over that But you don't have any control over over any moment where you finally see the light. Sorry, I get You don't have any control over any moment where you finally see the light. Okay So Why are you admonishing people to do this Be a chain of reasoning and and it works you would that that's a moment where you are changed by something extrinsic to your own volition, right? My basic response to that is Yes, and no because you see people who clearly resist the impact of a reasonable argument on themselves Yeah, so the resistance is what it is to be unreasonable or to First let's listen to this again under the event is He's in water that I'm gonna have any control over that but you don't have any control over Over any moment where you finally see the light so I give you a chain of reasoning and it works You would that that's a moment where you are changed by something extrinsic to your own volition, right? So you're changed I can listen to you. I mean this isn't any different from getting drugged or No degree to which hypnotism and volition gets involved but but somehow Someone is rewiring your brain and you are doing something and it's not you and no court will ever find you responsible for that act So we're talking about my basic response to that is Yes, and no because you see people who clearly resist the impact of a reasonable argument on themselves Yeah, so the resistance is what it is to be unreasonable or to Be under the sway of wishful thinking or Bottom line is that from my perspective that is somebody if the idea is that reason is basically just eliciting a particular response then people Have the capacity to override their ability to listen to reason, but I'm by So if you're a person who's been through a lot of things and you're a person who's been through a lot of things You're a person who's been through a lot of things and you're a person who's been through a lot of things Have the capacity to override their ability to listen to reason but I'm by Which I would say is what we usually call free will I could listen to reason and happily submit to it or I Could resist it now whatever the cause of my resistance whether I'm I'm I'm hoodwinked by ancient stories of miracles and men in the sky and angels and things or or if I'm just a jerk and And I just want to say no just to tick you off or or whatever reason I have that's my choice He just finished saying There is no choice involved. It's just Dominoes falling it's just piano keys playing and then he says yeah, but that's what we call unreasonable. I Would love someone to be able to explain this to me because hearing this it just simply sounds Absolutely incoherent and I think CS Lewis's take on it, which is colonization Which is that's that's in a sense what I think that's the best picture we have for this very Very interesting interpersonal Dynamic If you're gonna ascribe that to free will that's that's a different thing to ascribe but that again I would I wouldn't you don't need free will to explain that but that's that I This this ending just continues to baffle me It is take the reasoning piece if I give you a Point essential moment of it I give you a column of numbers to add up right you have zero degrees of freedom if you're gonna actually be doing arithmetic Does he ever taught math to children I See the children having a lot of freedom now they get it wrong and Maybe they choose to get it wrong often. They don't get it wrong. I Don't know what kind of universe he's imagining So then it's another question is to the final question here because we because and for we're gonna have to have you in flight Come on, Ben Give the man more time. We want more time the four-hour session here in just smooths But it's it but is the argument in favor of reason a moral reason is good argument Or is the argument a utilitarian reason is useful argument or is it both because I think it's a good question But I don't know if there can be good in Sam Harris's universe as Yeah, I can imagine a lot of ways to convince people of things That don't involve me making arguments to them and the historically have been used to great success with horrible horrific human carnage Obviously, well, you're not necessarily convincing them that case you're just forcing them. Yeah, that's right Okay, then what then is the difference between convincing and forcing because you just told us that what reason is is giving a drag down That the best argument that just knocks down the dominoes in the other person's mind that was completely convinced Well, that's not reason that's forcing I Don't understand the universe he is trying to construct for us here Although I would say that you can indoctrinate fully millions of people into particular you would think this do right? I mean that it's possible to indoctrinate people not using reason into fully formed belief systems Yeah So is so when you make the argument for reason are you saying that reason is morally better? And if so, why is reason morally better than for example the appeal of passion which has obviously motivated millions of billions of people over time Right. Well, I don't think they're as separable as many people think I think you can't reason and there's neurological evidence to back this up The Antonio de Mazio did this work decades ago where if you have certain neurological Injuries in the right orbital medial prefrontal cortex You can't you can't be moved by the products of your quote reasoning because I've been reason has to be anchored to Emotion in a very direct way and you can actually feel this in yourself So if I say something that starts to sound like bull to you, right that feeling of doubt In the feeling that you have detected errors in my chain of reasoning that feels like something that is an emotion Right and if you couldn't feel that, you know, it was all just cool I've been getting very emotional during this listening to this and sorry for my audio listeners. I'm up in the corner I'm just saying yes. Yes. Yes holding calculating and just associate paths, you know can't reason their way to virtually anything Well, they can well or we can't reverse can reason their way to everything They can they can they can reason fine, unfortunately, they just don't care about other people's experience so they're very They're they're very manipulative in ways that you and I would the reason itself doesn't arrive at a moral answer in any case well, so so for me reason is The only thing that again as we talked about at the top of this it's the only thing that takes us out of who we are and scales to some universal point of view it's it's Read miracles CS Lewis's miracles because this reason pulls us out of who we are it scales Listen to listen to what you're saying You can't be part of nature and say these things Because any attempt to do this would would simply be an Illusory thing and then in a sense where we're looking at Hinduistic or buddhistic worldviews where this experience Of being an individual of being and of having an ego of choosing this is this is all illusory It's not it's it's you're not reasoning if you're actually reasoning What you're arriving at is not just true for you is true for anyone who could be in It's true from essentially above on any given topic, you know Bingo the monarchical vision. It's true from above we see the world It's true from above we see the world apart from persons. We see a space for objects We see it clearly we see it thoroughly Here, of course is the problem. No human being can do this this is No human being can do this Because we are we are subjective. We have biases we We are irrational. We are unreasonable Reasonable Again, this is this is the first this is the first eight chapters the first ten chapters of CS Lewis's book he walks through all of this and And in a sense he's saying well, this is the monarchical vision This is we are seeing from above and we are seeing everything and we're seeing it purely and we are seeing it in a sense in an eternal frame, there is no time in this moment and and and My friend sending me more and more Heidegger, which is really helpful by the way But it does offer the view from above or the view from any possible perspective a View from outside every perspective or at least it takes in the into account The effect of perspective, you know, so it's like if if really You know again reason is and scientific rationality generally is the thing that explains why You know if you're colorblind, you don't see colors the way I do, right? And that's it but it's not that we can't get at what's actually real We can because we can explain divergences of opinion and and otherwise you just have those divergences Well, we are definitely gonna have to have you back So wow, I just There's a there's a great Saturday Night Live skit of of Donald Trump and Lester Holt after the firing of Comey and And where the Saturday Night Live guy is like, you know, did I get him? Did I get him? Oh It doesn't matter. I'm not gonna play that. I'm not gonna play that for you I'll link it in the notes because obviously if I play it for you my video get taken down because NBC I NBC anyway, you know why but I feel that when I watch this video because it's like I Just don't know what to think of this now. Let's let's move along and And let's take a look at another video the second video. I want to watch Piano keys or a form for action and this is Dave Rubin Jordan Peterson Greg Sal Me airy and Yaron Brook. I don't know Sally airy Salmon Sal Me airy or yarn, I didn't know either of these two gentlemen, but This is a very very interesting conversation. It's on Dave Rubin's channel and it's it's well worth watching and So what happens is that Peterson's ongoing conversation with Peterson's ongoing conversation with Sam Harris is very much in his head and So these other guys are kind of proxies. They're all dealing with the same the same questions and the same issues and And so again a friend said, you know, you really got to watch this video again because this Peterson is very very clear in this video and I think He is really sharp in here and he gets his argument down and narrow and focused about Okay, what is? Well, let's just let's just jump into it because it's I think it's really quite good From that Well, what I've observed is for example in my clinical practice when when I'm talking about Life and death moral issues and these are in situations where extreme things are happening in families and in individuals lives Talking about events that might have produced post-traumatic stress disorder or that set people up for murder at times or suicide like Or terrible suffering some of which is induced voluntarily The probability that I can have a discussion with my clients about that at a level that will be salutary without using met religious slash metaphorical language is zero I can't if I can't If the discussion can't take place in the domain of good versus evil something like that and this is especially true I would say for post-traumatic stress disorder. You just don't get anywhere with it and and I again one of things I appreciate about Peterson is his His wisdom in these things comes out of the practical. He's not simply a pundit Well, he's I mean this is status rocket has taken launched him out of the ability to see normal people anymore as Practitioner maybe if his status rocket lands someplace he can do that again. I don't know but again his experience is similar to mine now as a pastor instead of a therapist or a clinician a psychological clinician I People come to me. I obviously and I always talk about the religious but I have to have some sense of some capacity to distinguish the two but what he just said here in terms of when you get down to life-and-death things the religious language is that which is at hand and and that which we default to and I will regularly find atheist people employing religious language because it's just the best way to try to talk about it So that makes sense keep going and I've been thinking about the narrative issue a lot constantly and I think that I know we we need to use this is this is one of the weaknesses of the Rationalist argument I think is that we have to use heuristics to operate in the world So heuristics are simply are simplifying maneuvers and we there's no option you have to use heuristics and the reason for that is because there is a lot more world than there is of you and So you take this incredibly complex reality and you simplify it and now the simplifications have to have merit and and what makes them have merit is is Grounds for a is a topic for a very long lengthy discussion, but to produce those simplifications you have to use heuristics you have to use cognitive shortcuts and it looks to me like narrative is a heuristic and that The reason that we need to tell stories and that we probably need to have our ethic grounded in stories is because you can't Make a list of rules that will tell you how to live Rules don't suffice, but you can tell stories that are that lay out broad principles and those are heuristic principles now now story as heuristic I think is really helpful, but it's an interesting type of heuristic because I I Don't know if story necessarily simplifies or whether it converts it to a Use computer language again. I'm gonna it's gonna it's gonna convert it to a type of code that we can access and again this gets back into my emerging ontology in terms of My schema in terms of what a human being is if we are a story well we are We are built to run stories. Well, that's what our brains are set to do We are it we are built to interpret the world as a story and this is where you get into Again the weekly standard article that I refer to often entitled to heretic about Thomas Nagel and this meeting of celebrity atheists and the Berkshires We Interpret the world as story that is a Three and a half million years as Peterson says that that's how we've arrived at this capacity to interpret story We this is how we function in the world Now can you know you listen to let's say Don Hoffman? Is the world story in that sense? The world is stranger than we can imagine. Okay But story is clearly a powerful means It is probably our best means at interacting with the world. So in a sense a List of rules or a list of descriptions and I've done this in my other videos you let's stop it stop Whatever you're doing and sit down and list everything that is around you And you can go on for near forever. I can't say forever but near forever Reality we cannot process that way But we can't we have this tremendous capacity to process reality a story and to take this incredibly broad world and distill it into a story and if you think about the difference between a novel and let's say a Movie or a television program? What does the director do the director on TV or movie? They direct the eye and They direct the story and so Stories are particularly powerful heuristic that That we are our brains are optimized This is this is the water in which we swim. This is the environment We are made for and so Peterson is dead on right you and he's gonna go here with this The rationalist almost asserts we're living in this world of bricks and these bricks are facts and we are Amazon warehouse workers manipulating objects and and Peter says that's that's We're bad at that computers are far better at that than we are and so in fact we program computers to do this But the computers cannot process story the way we can process story story is our native code. Okay, and And it's a heuristic and by means of this story we can take this incredibly rich world and we can take this Really rich world and we can manipulate it and process it and communicate it and transfer it do all these amazing things back and forth and live within it and and what's amazing about story and again, he goes off into the postmoderns with respect to this and And and also in terms of the Bible what's amazing about story is is when you read a story The author packs more into the story than even the human author knows they are packing into the story That is phenomenal because others can come to the story and pull more out of it Story is like that. It's a it's a it's an amazingly powerful heuristic It does simplify and so that in that sense. It's a heuristic, but it's a very special kind that Does things the likes of which we cannot even imagine and and that we continue to work on and this is why the Bible You know again with my last videos there's a baseline story that is canon that doesn't change But these levels above it and how we interact with it. This is this is just how we go and this is why Those who imagine the world to be a group of Amazon boxes They will simply never win because that's just not how we're built now this these are secondary programming languages that Some highly intelligent people can manipulate and access and and talk with but even when you listen to Sam Harris talk about that kind of world He keeps defaulting into story because this is just how we are and just how we live No, but the thing is is that the most fundamental stories seem to have a religious core now I'm not exactly sure why that is although I think it probably has to do with something I referred to earlier, which is the idea that you know you are as a soul You're the thing that transforms potential into He used the word soul there that's very interesting There are a number of other words he could have used as an agent as a person but he used the word soul now again He's on stage. He's this is coming out of his brain and it's coming out of his mouth as a live stream, baby And so I'm not anybody that's that's doing these events. We should give them maximal mercy for Correction after the fact because to speak Live on camera like this is no easy thing and everyone who's doing this Sam Harris included Matt de la hunty included I have esteem for all of them because this is tremendously difficult stuff and it's far easier to sit behind your little computer screen and be a pundit like I'm doing but It's still interesting to hear the word soul in this context in concept in some sense. So that's the grounding concept There's something divine about that out of that arises a sequence of something divine about that. See again religious language and as a someone who Works in theology now, but I'm not technically a theologian. I'm a pastor pastors are practitioners. We're not really Theoreticians of stories that are shaped across perhaps evolutionary history and inside that are more Articulated ethic exists and I don't see a way out of that because you cannot make an exhaustive list of rules that enable Ethical movement forward and you need to do that if you had a purely rational View of the way that human cognition functions. It's okay, right at rational in terms of I Think Peterson is right and listening to the rationalists that See, we can't even process this without a story What how we process this and examine this is via our words we tell a little story again with a little word picture and and Peterson is right that the world is the world is made up of facts and these facts are like little Amazon boxes or little bricks and and again in in the theological tradition There is a time and in the 19th century this got very popular and it lingers into the 20th and into the 21st century that we can break down the Bible into a set of propositional truths and I can pull Louie Burke off off the shelf or blue book about This wide and a very tiny group of you will know exactly what book I'm talking about and in a sense you can you can Distill the Christian life into a line of facts. You can put it into an algorithm and in a sense so much Evangelism and Missy ah so much evangelism has become this processing of facts and even in fact the evangelistic methods of that time period are Embedded within this culture because okay I'm gonna get if we can if so you take this little verse out of Paul and you say okay if we can if we believe With our hearts and profess with our lips. Well, there it is. Boom. Boom Christian Okay but is I've is does that really does that really get it? Does that really? Exhaust it no and and Peterson is right that you know here again Look at how I have simply tried to process all of these little fact bricks I have told them into a story and that's the only that's the best way I can imagine it I can process I can communicate it now someone might say but But it's far more powerful to get rid of the story you've all Harari when he sits and meditates He tries to get rid of all story. That's what he says in his video Hears to get rid of all story You're not gonna be talking to people because when he writes his book he puts it back into story, okay, well Where are you getting the filler to put it back in your story? You've apparently gone into your little clean room your little mental meditation clean room And you've been able to get all the story out of it. Now. You're gonna fill story back in What was that pink meat stuff that was in the chicken nuggets that that everyone was complaining about? What's the filler coming you're gonna have to do story it's just how people work So let's let's pause right there can either one of you figure out a way out of that I mean that right that would be the the answer that an objectivist would want to wanna have right here We are we got a whole bunch of right in front of you So I don't know what this Ocon I don't know what that is I'm sure someone in the comment section will tell me what it is or maybe I'll have to google it Is it a is it an atheist group? Is it a rationalist group? I have no idea. I Don't think you could have a list of rules I don't think you could have a list of rules if the rule you're meaning something like an algorithm that you use your life Exactly. I think that's just not something we can do That's not the way the human mind works and the world is complicated and you're not gonna get a bunch of if-then statements that take you Take you to Yay Yes, he gets it. I mean you can't even do that for a lot of physical systems to it right? But I think we can understand them rationally It's no this might be similar to what we were talking about in the green room about Sam through of reason and yours in mind we might figure out where they all lie What is this reason we're talking about? But I don't think reason is just about coming up with algorithms I think we come up with concepts concepts enable us to assimilate vast quantities of similar things to one another and Learn from future about future instances from past ones. We can get quite subtle Principles, but I think moral principles are not things that take the form of simple rules. Don't lie. They're To take Rand's version of the virtue of honesty, which isn't don't lie. It's It's your recognition of the fact that what's unreal is unreal and it can't be of value So faking things won't work. It won't make them real somehow the thing you fake is gonna come back to haunt you that's not a simple rule of what to do in each situation, it's a kind of Broad fact that you can use to steer your life by and In order to use it to see your life by and to fully understand it You need to think about how it plays out in a lot of different contexts, right? You need to think about what it really means in practice and art Stories, but you know literature, but also other forms of art I think are an indispensable means to doing this both with ethical truths like this and also with other Metaphysical truths views about what kind of world we're in So if you have part of the discussion and as it progresses will I don't necessarily mean this discussion in particular? But you know, obviously I'm not an enemy of reason by any stretch of the imagination But I do see that it's hard for people who promote reason as the fundamental mechanism to distinguish between Reason and the generation of algorithms like and you can say well my concept of reason Extends beyond the generation of algorithms and fine, but then my question would be well exactly What are the mechanisms by which reason functions when what it's doing isn't generating algorithms? Because algorithms aren't enough and we know that right which is why we don't have it And again when you heard Sam Harris before he's talking about a math problem. That is how Sam Harris sees reason It's like doing a math problem. It's like this argument that knocks over your dominoes This is an algorithm for Sam Harris and these two guys are saying it's That can't be it. And so Peterson saying okay, then what is it? expert diagnostic systems for example So then the the reason starts to look something like metaphor it starts to look something like narrative And then I start thinking yeah, but that's not exactly the Enlightenment concept of reason So we're starting to move into a different domain and so more than just Algorithms and metaphor and narrative I think first of all one thing reason can do is come up with metaphors and narratives But there's more than just those three things that One thing reason can do is come up with metaphors and narratives and I agree with that But that's a very different thing than Sam Harris was talking about now again, I I don't think Sam is clear on reason He certainly hasn't articulated it that I understand But what are we talking about and again, I I'd love to bring CS Lewis in the room he died in 1963 but Because for for Lewis again reason is this This this taste of the supernatural because of how it functions between us how we can Employ it reason is not God. Okay But but it is it is something that we can employ in a sense to transcend to colonize nature and which is exactly what all of us are doing here is It's also think there's the formation of abstract principles I don't think what Newton did in writing the principia was coming up with algorithms There are algorithms in it but or things you can algorithmatize about how to prove certain things But the act of forming the concept inertia, that's not exactly, you know, that's something else And I think it's inertia might be an algorithm Yeah, but the act of coming up with it is something yes And I think there's a whole and underexplored area of philosophy and maybe cognitive psychology Thinking about what are these acts of reason? How does reason function? How is it that we can go from the kind of information we have in perception to a more and more sophisticated? understanding of the world and I mean I've written some on this other people have I don't I don't know how much I should try to explain here But I can plug I have a chapter called conceptualization and justification In a book called concepts and their role in knowledge that gives my sense of what reason does here See because the other thing that's come up among the cognitive scientists in particular and also the robotics types is As as people and this is Rodney Brooks in particular who invented the Roomba by the way But who's who's an absolute well, it's a major accomplishment because the Roomba doesn't have a brain But it operates intelligently like it's a major accomplishment that thing and it took Brooks Brooks actually reconstructed how? artificial intelligence robotics engineers were conceptualizing Intelligence and he thought of it as something much more embodied rather than conceptual So it was the Roomba is actually the consequence of very very high level thinking about the relationship between Reason and and action in the world one of the things that caught on the more sophisticated cognitive psychologists have been wrestling with is the fact that a lot of what we thought of as abstract reason is actually something that's more dependent on embodiment than we've ever had ever Possibly conceived right and so the idea of disembodied reason which is also I would say an enlightenment concept seems to be lacking It's lacking in functionality You have to be embodied and the thing to me is that an embodied reason looks to me a lot more like the hero of a Story that it looks like Disembodied reason I think I think that's a better metaphor and so partly why I like the idea of the logos for example rather than the idea of reason is because and This is partly reflected in its in its Conceptual Christian origins because the logos in Christianity is something that's actually embodied right? It's the word made flesh There's a there's a there's a link between the rational logos logic and the thing that's embodied And it's the interaction between those two that produces. I think produces that phenomenon that you described as what drove Newton for example when he was producing his algorithms. That's not an algorithm. It's something else But it's not this it's certainly not disembodied reason But even that metaphor of the word made flesh right it sounds as though something that could have been disembodied was disembodied once And now it got embodied Now we're getting fun now we're now we're now we're playing in now we're playing in my playpen because When you think about let's think about the virgin birth If you're materialist to say well, how could How could God make Mary pregnant? I can't believe the virgin birth CS Lewis read CS Lewis on the virgin birth and Again people say to me. I can't believe in the virgin birth You believe Jesus could stand on a mountain say all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me And they'd say yeah, you could say it, but it doesn't make it true The question is is it true? So in the Old Testament let's go back to the story of Abraham and the three Beings that show up and this this angel of the Lord Being that gets pulled up and when when when the Lord talks to Abraham about the destruction of Sodom Think about the power to colonize now What do we say when we say God is a spirit? In a materialist conception we say God is less real than matter That's just wrong again this this them working on Maybe it's an on I don't know quite what the words to use, but what is reality this question? What is reality? And and that which is that which is real is real at more layers and more aspects than Than other if it's if something is more real at more layers and aspects it is more real than Than other things that are at less layers or aspects for example my thought that I have right now and the thought I'll have three moments from now That that thought isn't terribly real because it doesn't transcend the fourth dimension very well thought In a book Thoughts in a book are a little bit more real and this is an older book so and to the degree that the book continues to be Useful and used and real well now. It's going up in reality which book will will outlast the other book well And then of course there's the there's there's this book which has outlasted a lot of other books And so now we're trying to have a schema about real And so I don't think it's the case that Gosh how to talk about this stuff. This is this is why theology is so hard What what what I think it was named his name is Greg his name's up there Greg yeah, Greg When the word is made flesh what does that mean well, this is a this is a deep mystery But it obviously the power to colonize is there because Can you can you add Can God Can God make it so that it's not just a mystery Because Can you can you add Can God What is a miracle? multiplying loaves and fishes What's what's that involved? you know if you were to if you were to do a DNA analysis on the derivative fishes from from from Jesus I don't think God would necessarily be limited to that. Could he do that? Sure See that with twins and then you get into later and CS Lewis's book miracles CS Lewis CS Lewis goes into ideas of the miracles of the old creation miracles of the new creation, but the point here is that When God acts It doesn't take you to the point where you're not able to see the miracle of the new creation When God acts it doesn't take anything away from him And When the logos comes in and the word being made flesh now again if you do just even if you look up I Don't know how good the Wikipedia article is on that But if you look it up in a good Theology book and you look at the past History of logos in terms of its usage in Greek philosophy, it's It's usage in the Hebrew scriptures. This is a very very big deal here and so You know the fact that we're appropriating religious language and we're talking about these things on this stage with these people Someone made a comment to me You know You know It was that it was that guy in Texas with his ball cap on and and him shooting at the intellectual dark web there isn't a Christian in the room and Jordan Peterson is the closest we have to it and he's doing a pretty darn good job for a guy who doesn't go to church and his um His his let's say his profession of Christian faith is complex and nuanced Is doing a pretty darn good job on these stages bringing Christianity into these conversations And I think that's part of the reason we're seeing the Jordan Peterson phenomenon as we're seeing it But but look at the conversation these people are having so it still sounds to me a little bit too much like this disembodied conception of you want to call it reason or mind Whereas I think we want a conception of what reason is and what it does That involves the fact from the start that it's a feat of a feature of certain living organisms These organisms have perceptual systems. Those are bodily if anything is and it's A a faculty of integrating the data that's coming in through those those organs helping us direct ourselves through the world And then on a grander and grander scale So I do think in the enlightenment what we're getting is a lot of reflection for the first time There's a lot of reflection for the first time or for one of the first times a renewed reflection on reason what it is how it works And there are several different views right some more materialistic views like in the Holbach and so forth and then these more um Cartesian type views and I think most of the views that came out of that are wrong and I think it's It's sad because it's a period when people were really valuing the mind. Well, they're productive trying they were productively wrong Well, you know because they got us somewhere else but it certainly does seem the case that And uh and yar and way in the corner. He's just at the edge of his chair. He wants to get in here so bad He's gonna get in and this is again I think the problem with the idea of reason per se is that it's it's not a sufficiently differentiated idea to account for how it is that we actually operate in the world and so and and and And the ai types and the psychologists are really trying to sort that out but See one of the things that happened to me when I was arguing with sam harris about this because sam believes that you can derive values from facts and more or less in an unmediated way, although he he he He has some differences of opinion with himself about how unmediated that is. It's like it's well Yes, he has differences of opinions with himself on a lot of this It's very difficult to be entirely coherent when you think to something through something that's complicated That's exactly right. You know, let's let's understand that this is hard this is hard for all of us and we should we should respect and appreciate and um And and encourage each other. I encourage sam harris to perfect his arguments and refine them and You know want to deal with the best arguments? Likely to be inconsistencies in your argument because it's so complicated but It it looks to me like it's actually formally impossible to derive values from facts In an unmediated sense, you need something to mediate between the facts and the values And and then I would also say it looks like it's impossible for you to derive that structure merely over the course of your life You don't you don't have enough time. You're not smart enough and you don't have enough time. And so and and this again if you It's not released yet but there are bootleg versions of the audio version and you can make out and if you look at the The axioms that I put in my axiomatic god versus anti-masturbation god video from a little from a couple weeks ago In port jordan peterson's axioms and how he laid them out. I mean a critical piece of his axiom is No single one of us human beings Let's say you could make a human being in a lab and raise that person in a clean room without any Contact with human beings or civilization it would would it be a human being? Oh boy, this is going to get complicated in the world But that's the question and because peterson's basically say no we are all we are all heirs of this long long process of Human her heredity and civilization and religion and we are all heirs of this And we cannot conceive of ourselves without it and we cannot act with values And in the world without it, that's that's his big point You have an embodied biological platform or you are that embodied biological platform and it's actually the consequence of Let's say at least in part evolutionary pressure pressure is operating over about a 3.5 billion year period And so it's possible that you can derive facts from values, but it takes you three and a half billion years to do it It takes you three and a half billion years to do it prophecy. Okay. What is you? What is you well you is us of course, it's it's us but I'm not three and a half billion years old or am I well, what am I? And now suddenly again theologically This goes all kinds of interesting places because the bible talks like this and theology Works with ideas like these, you know federal headship In adam all became sinners well something happened at the beginning and we all went down this route together this idea of original sin Again if you read if you read theology and not just new stuff that New theology has not yet been tested Probably a lot of the new and this is in a sense People have this bias this as c.s. Lewis has chronological snobbery Well, I don't want to read old theology. I want to read the up-to-date stuff Well, the up-to-date stuff has not been tested you read agustin that stuff has been battle tested for hundreds of years and People are still actively translating agustin's work and doing new scholarship on agustin Why because there's so much in it that has been so applicable to how many different cultures? And again when you get well Okay. Okay. Well find me a book that's been more translated more applicable that's been Used by more cultures at more times and places Yeah, it's this book it's this book so you want to read the book that Forms the world well, this is it. I I don't want to read that book. It's got Miracles and stories and stuff in it Yeah, and it's a really hard book to read and you can just keep reading it and studying it But what's interesting again is I talked to the jordan peterson fandom Out there, what's everybody looking forward to? The biblical series. Well, maybe that's the tiny selection of people That are interested in the same things. I'm interested. It could be a a selection bias. Sure, but This is this is what we're doing Properly and and and and what you have that allows you to do that in your life To look at a set of facts and to decide how to proceed is the intermediation the unconsciousness Intermediation of that unbelievably deep structure when i've said to sam something that really annoys him I said well, you think you're an atheist but you're actually not what i'm actually saying is Your conscious apprehension of yourself is a very thin layer that's laid on top of what you are Because you don't know who you are and most of what you do is unconscious and that's actually an There isn't a serious cognitive psychologist in the world who doesn't think that most of what you do is unconscious Who doesn't think that most of what you do is unconscious by the way That's worth hearing again, okay because As a pastor someone who watches people watches people behave within a fairly Within a fairly rigorous moral ethical system We are unaware of what we do and why we do it and and I see this of myself and Peterson and and peterson has taught me a ton about this listening to his stories and listening to his lectures and forcing me to ponder myself and And if you're a christian and you're trying to deal with sin, well, what is a christian trying to deal with sin? Well, there's this there's this objective standard. There's this ethical standard out there that you cannot comply with And when they're christians like well, I haven't sinned in years. It's like Yeah, you're probably not really paying a lot of attention Because the ncs loose brings us out the the crazy thing about The moral law is that we generate a law and we say we should all keep it and it's a law we can't keep Well, what's up with that? Well, we are mysteries to ourselves and this is where Yaron is going to get in and and in my opinion It's not going to be good so let's listen to what peterson just said again because this is This is deeply true and I would work do that Station the unconscious intermediation of that unbelievably deep structure It allows you to do that in your life to look at a set of facts and to decide how to proceed Is the intermediation the unconscious intermediation of that unbelievably deep structure when i've said to sam something that really annoys him I said well you think you're an atheist, but you're actually not what i'm actually saying is Your conscious apprehension of yourself is a very thin layer that's laid on top of what you are Because you don't know who you are and most of what you do is unconscious and that's actually an There isn't a serious cognitive psychologist in the world who doesn't think that most of what you do is unconscious, by the way The apostle paul fought it that's long before psychology augustin knew it That Deep Thinkers about the human condition have known this and recognized it and and this then becomes the topic of The topic of dramas. This is the story behind the sopranos and why? Why tony soprano wants to find dr. Melfi to have him fix his anxiety disorder and dr. Melfi well? What should tony soprano do what should she do should he be having anxiety given the way he's living his life? And I would say that unconscious has a structure and that's a narrative structure and that narrative structure is deep and so that even if you describe yourself as atheistic because in the In the explicit content of your thinking you see no room for the grounding of your conceptions in divinity I would say well that isn't how your unconscious is structured at all And now and you you might object but then then the object Well, how is it structured? Yeah, all right. I think it's 99 percent of you I think i've got a guy over there with a slight objection He almost jumped out of his chair How is your own conscious structure? Which by the way, I think this is particularly interesting because I think you have a lot of agreements with jordan on plenty of stuff And I think you have a lot of agreements with sam on plenty of stuff But this is where this argument has gotten down to it's a really really rich place. I think well, I mean It's this is this is the the the big issue, right? So I have agreements with sam on stuff for different but we have different reasons for having that agreement Uh, and so for example, I agree with him in his art But his conception of his art is very different than our conception of his art and he has no free will in that conception So that blows my mind how you can even talk about an is art and values without having now he's saying is Art this is the fact value distinction and he's talking about sam harrison. This is yarron brooke I'm going to back it up a little bit so you can hear it again because this is important what he's going through It's very famous with sam on stuff for different but we have different reasons for having that agreement Uh, and so for example, I agree with him in his art But his conception of his art is very different than our conception of his art and he has no free will in that conception So that blows my mind how you can even talk about an is art and values without having free will Yes Your jaron is dead. How can you talk about is art and values without having free will or why you would even talk about them? and and and he talks about choices without free will which which Which is challenging Challenging yes, and he's got a smile on his face for you auditory you audio listeners Choices without free will Um, well we said that and then maybe we'll do that on the choices without free will which which uh, which is challenging Um, well we said that We might come to some certain agreement about about I don't know rights or something Uh with jordan although I think even our even our conception of rights is going to be a little different because I don't see how you can get to rights without understanding the role of reason and and how reason functions and what the enemy of reason Ultimately is which is which is what what I mentioned earlier, which is which is force so The enemy of reason is force Now go back and listen to what sam harris said in the other video So Now rights and reason that gets interesting too here so It's a good conversation So I think to go back to your original question way back Um, I think there's no way for us to have different foundations and not come up with different conclusions Right because this is how reason works. It's it's kind of like a tower And you build it or if you want to consider think about reason like a math algorithm That's how sam harris was imagining it If you have bad data or different data at the beginning of your algorithm You'll have different data at the end of your algorithm and this is where again you're getting into the fact value distinction reason might help guide you if you say Say well This would be reasonable to do but then suddenly you're you're you're you're asking questions about the starting point And you also have questions of telos or end or goal How will I get from a to b? Well, that depends what a is and it depends how want and Where b is It depends on your goal. Well, I want to have a goal where Everyone in the world listens to me and I get everything I want Oh, okay um You're gonna you got a real problem with a because you're a little human being in the midst of a whole bunch of human beings Who kind of want something like it? And so you're there's probably going to be a lot of blood on your hands and that's usually the way History goes we're going to have to come up with different conclusions now We might agree on certain issues in politics, but for example, I think we're going to disagree quite profoundly on ethics, right? I think you know just watching some of jordan's things and on sacrifice and so on on the role of jesus Or our view of jesus is going to be very very profoundly different and that affects human behavior that affects individual human behavior So they're going to be you can't start with different premises And develop them and come up with with exactly the same way and say, okay, we agree on this stuff But no these these things have profound consequences the disagreements have profound profound consequences now When I think of my subconscious, I don't think of it as this And again, i'm not not a philosopher not a psychologist So this is the way a layman in these terms would think I think of my Of my psychologist of my subconscious not as a 99 darkness out down there, right? I think of it as as as something that accumulated information conclusions values Decisions that i've made over since childhood since before I was completely conscious of them that they I Notice where he draws the boundaries for himself Because what he's about to say I think is best described as naive have access to some of them You know, hopefully cognitive psychology and psychology can help me get access to more of them, but they're accessible to me They're not some mystery that they're accessible to me And that when I am making a decision in life I try to make it based on what I know Not based on what I don't know that's back there, right? So I try to accumulate facts. This is the finance guy in me right or the reality guy in me I try to accumulate facts and and and integrate them and and try to distinguish between what if which facts are legitimate and which facts are illegitimate and try to Integrate them and and try to make a decision based on logic based on based on reality And you know, sometimes my emotion will say and this is my subconscious maybe speaking Don't do that or that's a bad thing But so what right if if reality and the facts are with me, then I'll ignore that subconscious So I don't see us as we've got some choice over here, but we're really driven by the subconscious And subconscious is there for me to explore and I become a better person as I know my subconscious better I understand where my emotions are coming from and I understand that better But at the end of the day when I make a choice out there it's based on reality and fact and See that And when I hear that I think I don't know if I I don't know how to Maybe I could pose an argument that might elicit a little deeper understanding of the mystery of human beings But but I wonder you know to get back to let's say roman 7 the good that I would do I don't do And this is this is paul's formulation of i'm a mystery. I'm a mystery to myself The the sin the sin I say I don't want to do I do and This is what it means to to be a human being. This is what it means that we That we live in the midst of this enormously complex world So much of which we are not aware of and can't articulate now now maybe You know and and and just across the spectrum someone who's been Doing any psychological work been in therapy to to discover the mystery of themselves or someone who's been doing meditation To discover the mystery of themselves or someone who reads history to discover the mystery of themselves or someone who has been Reading literature or philosophy or We are mysteries to ourselves and we do we we act out of programs that we have not written And and especially for materialists that assert Such a constructed view of the universe and and again, this is jordan peterson's This is his wheelhouse. This is what this is the heart of what I think is the most interesting stuff about jordan peterson That not just the Now again, we're in the metaphors here and let's use a clockwork metaphor not just the machinery within me The the hardware of the computer that is programmable by the software But you know, you might say okay, so a person who is adopted as a child identical twin separated at birth Well, that's kind of the point of those those Interesting things that identical twins separated by birth have some peculiar commonalities and so then we say It's not the software. It's the hardware. Well, how how far culturally do they have to be separated? for their expressions and their persons to to To change and what about the the dutch starvation? Experiments that get into epigenetics how how certain Characteristics and behaviors pass on from one generation to another And what peterson says far earlier is you know, there's not a there's not a cognitive psychologist in the world Who doesn't recognize what jordan peterson is saying and the other person's like well, i'm not a psychologist But I think you know, I've had experiences from birth and I can accept that and I try to apply reason to it And I listen to that and I think Has such a naive conception of a human being and he's old enough To have screwed up enough in his life to know better Because it's usually in your screw-ups that the the mystery of yourself Is confronted and it's or it's sitting down with with a drug addict or an alcoholic or someone who has Not not necessarily the victim Of someone else but the perpetrator when they sit down and they say I simply need to do this and I don't know why and I can't stop Where does this come from? so that's That's these two videos and I didn't do a lot of powerpoint with it But I thought that they're really helpful to play side by side To get a sense of what's going on in the world Side by side To get a sense of Jordan Peterson Sam Harris and then bring these other conversation partners into the room because in many ways I think these two things lay out a lot of the arguments about that are surrounding the agenda of Jordan Peterson and I think the Perhaps the reason there isn't a christian involved and maybe that's why I I stick my beak in Not a not an insignificant beak I may add um, I stick my beak in is because These conversations are god-haunted and and yeah, you don't have You don't have a major christian academic on stage like alvin plantiga or neil plantiga's younger brother who's a tremendously sharp theologian Or or bishop baron or you know what you can't find any smart christians who aren't interested in these conversations There's lots of smart christians that aren't interested in these conversations. Are you afraid of having the christians involved in these these conversations? Maybe you should be anyway I've still got to do a rough draft for friday today. I'm I don't know if i'll post this today or saturday