https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sl7CJT0GH6U

 Okay, we paused after two half hour commentaries. That's for A and for B. And now we're going to start for C. And Peterson is 20 minutes in. And we really still haven't talked about the Bible yet, but I've been having fun. And I suppose if you're still watching, you're having fun. So let's keep going. Now, you may remember that the Bible is a series of books. Okay, let's talk about this a little bit. And I mentioned this in past videos, so I'm not going to go into too much depth about it, but he's talking about the documentary hypothesis. And I think there's a lot of validity to it because there clearly were lots of documents behind the documents that now make up the Bible. How far you can push it and its utility for biblical inspiration, especially in the world like we're in narrative right now, someone like Robert Alter is highly debatable. And so this, I think for Peterson is, I think he'd be helped by, can you imagine if you were going to see a psychologist and the foundation of their work was a college textbook from 1950. Peterson is using mostly quick internet-based tools for biblical interpretation like Bible Hub, maybe Blue Bible and some of these things that are on the web. Now there's some good tools on the web for studying the Bible, but there's been a tremendous amount of biblical scholarship that is really good and helpful that has been done in the last 50 or 100 years. And if you're really depending on a lot of these sources, now this is a very hard thing because there are worlds of different sources in terms of biblical interpretation and it's just as hard to find your way through those, through that maze as I'm sure it is to find your way through the maze of scholastic psychology. But if you, the difficult thing is that if some of the basic stuff you're dealing with comes from sources like this, with someone, it's just problematic. So that's maybe more than I should have said about the documentary hypothesis. I'm not saying it isn't true, I'm just saying as a pastor, it's never much to deal with. Again, I talked about Brevard Childs and the Bible as canon and some of those kind of issues. The Bible actually means something akin to library and these books were written by all sorts of different people and groups of people and groups of editors and groups of people who edited over and over across very, very large periods of time. So they're authored by no one and many at the same time. That is true. We really don't know who put together the book of Genesis. But they were literary geniuses. Again, maybe take a look at the Bible Project on YouTube. They do terrific little videos about the Bible. There was a tradition for a long time that the earliest books were written by Moses, but that's probably not technically correct even though it might be dramatically correct. And again, a little window into some of Peterson's categories here. ...correct in the way that a fairy tale is correct. And I'm not trying to put down fairy tales by saying that. There's a number of authors and the way the authors have been identified tentatively is by certain stylistic commonalities across the different stories, different uses of words like the words for God. And, you know, Peterson, the dude's busy right now. He does more interviews than I have time to talk. But read Robert Alter's book on the art of biblical narrative. I think for Peterson would open up a ton for him, especially in the way that he's using the Bible in terms of understanding how the Bible, even just as literature, works. ...poetic styles, different topics and so forth. People have been working for probably 200 years, roughly that, to try to sort out who wrote what and how that was all cobbled together. But it doesn't really matter for our purposes. What matters is that it's an aggregation of collected narrative traditions. And maybe you could say it's an aggregation of collected narrative wisdom. We don't have to go that far, but we can at least say it's aggregated narrative traditions. And that there was some reason that those traditions and not others were kept and that there were some reasons, complex though they may have been, why they were sequenced in the order that they were sequenced. Because one of the things that's really remarkable about the Bible as a document is that it actually has a plot. And that's really something. I mean, it's sprawling and it goes many places. But the fact that something's been cobbled together over several thousand years, maybe 4,000 years, maybe longer than that if you include the oral traditions that preceded it, and God only knows how old those are. The collective imagination, part of the human collective imagination has cobbled together a library with a plot. Now this is a really critical point. And it both is a great point in and of itself that the Bible does have a plot and that the people who pieced the Bible together were geniuses and they understood what they were doing. This was not haphazard, yet it was not one group or individual that did it all on their own. But then again, in terms of the basic premise that I'm working with some of the commentary here on Biblical Series 4 is that the Bible is so often dismissed as, well these are the Marxist dismissal, the Freudian dismissal, and he's saying those dismissals don't hold water. This book is incredible and it's incredible if you're a pragmatist because you can evaluate the Bible. And again, I know some of you in a sense treat Peterson in the same way as skeptics treat the Bible because you say, well I don't want to listen to Jordan Peterson because he believes in Darwin and because what he says about the resurrection isn't up to snuff in terms of what I think it should be and blah blah blah. Yeah, look in his wake. If you want to judge something, look in its wake and get an idea of its meaning and consequence and importance and value in terms of looking into it. And so again, this point, Peterson is in front of his viewers elevating the status of the Bible in terms of something they need to contend with. That in and of itself is really significant and I think part of why we are seeing in Peterson's wake what we are seeing. And like I see the Bible as an attempt, a collective attempt by humanity to solve the deepest problems that we have. And I think those problems are the problems of, primarily the problem of self-consciousness. The fact that not only do we are immortal and that we die, but that we know it. And that's the unique, that's the unique predicament of human beings and it makes all the difference and I think that's laid out in Adam and Eve in the story. Now this business about the problem of self-consciousness, probably the first few times I listened to this video I didn't get that, but after listening to Transliminal 2015 and a bunch of other videos, if you want to understand Peterson's ontology, what is real, what exists, what matters, you know, he is not a materialist although he is living in a secular realm. And so right there, now we can begin to understand what the logos means for Peterson and part of what's interesting about Peterson is that if you're a religious person and you listen to him, he can sound very religious. But if you're a, not a religious person and you listen to him, he makes sense looking at him in that way too. And in that sense, Peterson is scalable. Now what's really interesting is that, a question I have, is he more scalable in terms of his psychology and his Jungian aspect than he is politically? Because if you look in his wake politically, well some of that has been interesting to follow. But in terms of these metrics, Peterson can very much be heard two ways. If you're coming at him from a religious perspective, wow, he loves the Bible, he believes that the logos was made flesh. If you listen to him in this way, you can say, boy, he's a Christian. You listen to him from the other direction, you say, boy, he's like me. Well, and now we're getting into the sense of he's talking in a way that in some ways he's making himself a nice screen that people can project their own ideas upon him. And while that's not a bad thing in and of itself, if you want to know the screen and not just the projection you're placing upon him, you'd better pay careful attention because there's going to be a lot going on in this. I think the reason that that makes us unique is laid out in that story. And interestingly, and I really realized this only after I was doing the last three lectures, so the Bible presents a cataclysm at the beginning of time, which is the emergence of self-consciousness in human beings, which puts a rift into the structure of being. That's the right way to think about it. That is very, very, a cataclysm at the beginning of time, which puts a rift in the structure of being. And so often people say, oh, you should talk to Peterson. I don't need to talk to Peterson. He's talking plenty to me and I'm still just soaking all this stuff up, learning it. But in a moment like this, you might ask, why would you call this a cataclysm? I can understand how in your framework, what Christians often call the fall, what I prefer to call the rebellion, that certainly is a cataclysm, but it's an interesting cataclysm because it raises consciousness. Now if with the materialists, you can posit being without consciousness or the logos, without consciousness because the logos precedes the cataclysm, not only in terms of the story, but in a sense necessarily. Cataclysm is such an interesting word. I'm going to have to think a lot more about that. But again, I mean, so often you listen to Peterson, he's just ramble, ramble, ramble, talk, talk, talk, talk. But when he says everything, I'm very careful about how I choose my words. And when he pauses there and he even slows down and he's picking his words carefully, yes, slow your hearing down and listen carefully because he is indicating the roots of his system. So cataclysm, yes, that brings consciousness, yes, and the snake gets into this, yes. And one of where I'm going to go eventually with the commentary on biblical series four is we're going to get into I think a basic foundation of how we come into beliefs by orientation between experience and representations. So that right there, important phrase by Peterson, he's working, just like he said a minute ago, he's working this stuff out on the fly. He has to prepare for these. And for those of you, I know a few of you have been watching my adult Sunday school classes on the church side. I mean, for me, those hour long Sunday school classes are for me very much like this Peterson series is for him. And we go through the backwaters of the Bible. Right now we're in the middle of the book of Ezekiel. Talk about a place that Christians don't read or go to because it's far away from the Bible. It's filled with wild animals. It's filled with chaos. And I think some Christians, if they read that part of the Bible, they'd say, I can't read this or I'll lose my faith. But it's there in the wilds, in the chaos of a place like the book of Ezekiel that you can find dragons and you can find treasure and you can save your father from the underworld and find gold. So, you know, slow down the hearing on some of these things and repeat this and ponder what Peterson is saying and figure out exactly what he means and line that up with your worldview and ask, now, how does this fit? How does this fit together? Because in a sense what, you know, again, in a conversation with someone online, I said, you know, for me, you know, someone's, well, Peterson's a gateway drug to Christianity, yes or no? That's a sloppy question. What is Peterson for me? Well, he is forcing me to think through a lot of things that I am finding helpful. And for me, this is what I call fun. I could do this all day long every day because this is what I call fun. I don't just mean making videos. I mean thinking this stuff through. And we had a meeting here in Sacramento with a bunch of the Buccos. And that was what I call fun too because for a lot of us, it was like getting together. And who can I talk about this stuff with? One of my sons is listening to Peterson and our whole family is doing this when we have something to celebrate or when we do something great. But part of what the Internet has done is bring nerdy people who like weird things together to do this kind of stuff. And yeah, this is really cool. Okay, keep going. And that's really given cosmic significance. Now, you can dispense with that and say, well, nothing that happens to human beings is of cosmic significance because we're these short-lived mold-like entities that are like cancers on this tiny little planet that's rotating out in the middle of nowhere on the edge of some unknown galaxy in the middle of infinite space. Nothing that happens to us matters. And it's fine. You can walk down that road if you want. I wouldn't recommend it. I mean, and that's part of the reason I think that for all... Before he interrupts himself yet again, this is, you know, everyone wants to come to Peterson and ask a question about the resurrection. He is answering it in this moment right here. And he is saying, again, if you look at the video that was just put out very recently by the Roman Catholic Patrick Coffin, Patrick Coffin, that was the guy's name. And Peterson talks about this on the Dave Rubin Report when he's talking to Ben Shapiro when he's saying, you know, the metaphysics and the... I mean, these things come together. I mean, and Peterson says, I'll need another three years to think about this. Well, this is what he's talking about now. In what way does the fall of Adam and Eve change history? Now, this has been a really tantalizing question in that traditionally in Christian theology, the fall ripples from the image bearer throughout creation. C.S. Lewis talks about this towards the end of his book, Miracles. I've done a lot of thinking about this because the attack on the Bible that has come... Well, there was death before Adam and Eve. There was certainly plant death or animal death or cellular death or was there or wasn't there and all these kinds of issues that say creation scientists have to deal with now. And all of these kinds of issues that as a young boy learning reformed theology and hearing about the fall and how in Christian doctrine, how the fall of Adam and Eve changes, in a sense, the entire fabric of the world. And even my phrase, the age of decay has the implication that what happens in the fall brings death to all. Well, if you look at the world from a scientific perspective, you say, no, that can't be. It can't bring death to all. In fact, your skin can't work without dead skin cells. So what does it mean that the fall happens? How can this story over here line up with the science that we have over here? And the big reason that Peterson caught my attention and the big reason why he's the chaos that I'm rummaging through to try to look for the gold is because what happened since the Enlightenment and since the scientific revolution and since Darwin is that Christians worlds have come apart. And I've spoken about this in past lectures that the Bible is told on upon a representation of a flat earth and a firmament with waters above and waters below and the sun, moon and scars within the firmament and heavenly temple above. And again, if you watch my temple videos, you'll get at that. This is this is the representation within which the Bible is told. And so what does it mean when a Falcon Heavy goes up and does orbit? Well, that means that the Bible isn't true. Well, it depends what you mean by true. And this and so when you listen to Peterson, now he's not a traditional religious supernatural. And I want to talk about the cultures of these different groups as I continue on in this project. But it's all of these questions of how the world fits together that are vital for belief in the Christian God. And it comes together at certain points in time. And one of these points is what traditionally in the Christian faith we've called the fall. And what Peterson is saying, this cataclysmic events of the beginning of consciousness and the beginning of history. And now, again, for Peterson, if I were to put on the hat of someone say, well, you know, the first homo sapiens that are that are like that developed out of a genetic pool of some 10,000 individuals, blah, blah, blah, historical Adam and Eve, blah, blah, blah, historical Adam and Eve and the historicity of the resurrection on and on and on with those conversations. It's at these moments that OK. When does and I've talked about this a number of my past videos. When does logos, which is in our experience, a mental operation. When does logos become flesh? And so, you know, part of I know I have to really start reading Peterson's Maps of Meaning book. But, you know, I've been working off his videos because I'm more of an auditory learner and I'm a little dyslexic. So auditory is easier for me. But but but when Peters talks about alchemy, you could say, well, so I was, you know, I was listening to use I was listening to use autobiography at the gym and he started on alchemy. And I thought, you know, first I got to listen to this dude's dreams. And now we're going to talk about alchemy. And Peterson had mentioned this, but it didn't didn't stick. And then why on earth are we going to talk about alchemy? Oh, well, we're not here interested in turning lead into gold. And, you know, chemistry will tell us why you cannot easily turn lead into gold and why it's probably not an economically feasible operation. Why would you want to do that? But but what were the alchemists trying to do and why? And and and why would you go back and say we should look into alchemy? Again, your point isn't turning lead into gold. But what we are talking about is the logos becoming flesh. And what are the implications of that? And well, now we're very much in the realm of supernaturalist Christians. And this is part of the reason that I doggedly maintain myself as a supernaturalist Christian because I'm not giving this up and I'm not giving this up for emotional reasons. I'm not giving this up for philosophical reasons. And and when C.S. Lewis walks us through his arguments and his book, Miracles, I don't need to give this up because I believe in the resurrection. I believe in the historicity of the resurrection. I believe when Thomas touched his hands, he felt flesh. And I believe Jesus ate that fish and that poor little fish gave its life for Jesus dinner. But that makes sense to me. And so then the question is, well, how can I hold together this Bible that is a story world built on the representation of a flat earth and a dome and the world that I live in that imagines myself the third rock from the sun on this globe going round and round where Elon Musk sends us to the moon. And this is up Falcon Heavy and where, you know, Yuri, he was actually an orthodox person. But this is one thing C.S. Lewis, you know, I went up into heaven. He didn't really say this. The Russians just put the words in his mouth, you know, went up into heaven and there's no God. Okay, well, we can be simplistic like that. Or maybe we don't want to be. And maybe we shouldn't be. And maybe, as in the words of the psalmist, this knowledge is too wonderful for me. So pay attention. When turn dance and purposes, it's untrue. You know, it isn't it isn't a road you can walk down and live well. In fact, I think if you really walk down that road and you really take it seriously, you end up not living at all. So it's certainly very reminiscent. I mean, I've talked to lots of people who are suicidal and seriously suicidal. And, you know, the kind of conclusions that they draw about the utility of life prior to wishing for its cessation are very much like the kind of conclusions that you draw if you walk down that particular line of reasoning long enough. If you're interested in that, you could read Tolstoy's Confessions, Leo Tolstoy's Confession. And I heartily agree. I read Tolstoy's Confession a number of years ago. Oh, what a book. What a what a terrific book. And Peterson is dead on right here. It's a very short book. It's a it's a killer, man. It's a powerful book. Very, very short. And Tolstoy describes his obsession with suicide when he was at the height of his fame. Most well known author in the world, you know, huge family, international fame, wealth beyond anyone's imagining at that time, influential, admired. He had everything that you could possibly imagine that everyone could have. And for years he was afraid to go out into his barn with a rope or a gun because he thought he'd either hang himself or shoot himself. And he did get out of that. And he describes why that happened and where he went when that happened. And so if you're interested in that, that's a very good book. I got I got the idea to read Tolstoy's Confession after reading Dallas Willard. And again, Dallas Willard is another one of the people one of Dallas Willard has passed away now. But I want to virtually bring into the Jordan Peterson universe. I've got I've got one hundred videos planned in my head and not anywhere near enough time to do them. So the biblical stories and starting with Adam and Eve, they present a different story. They present the emergence of self-consciousness in human beings as a cosmically cataclysmic event. And you could say, well, what do we have to do with the cosmos? And the answer to that is it depends on what you think consciousness has to do with the cosmos. And perhaps that's nothing. And perhaps it's everything. And you'll see him run through these arguments with Brett Weinstein, with Sam Harris. This is this is foundational. When Peterson says being. Being for Peterson almost means ontology. I'm going to go with everything because that's how it looks to me. Now, of course, ontology wishes to is welcome to disagree. But if you believe that consciousness is a force of cosmic significance, which which which which being itself is dependent on in any real sense, at least in any experiential sense, that it's that it's not unreasonable to assume that radical restructurings of consciousness can worthily be granted some kind of cosmic or metaphysical meaning. And then the question is going to be for us. OK, cosmic or metaphysical. I still haven't figured out what Peterson really means by metaphysical yet, because, again, I'm I'm getting to know him well enough with how he uses language to know that what he means by a word might not be what I mean by a word. And so this is just like biblical studies. How do I know what Peterson means by a word? I've got to listen to enough of him. I've got to listen to his words. I've got to listen to enough of him. I've got to listen to his words and enough contexts to understand what he means by a word, which when you're doing biblical studies and word studies is exactly what you do with this. So as a pastor, all my grammatical, historical tools that I've developed for years, studying the Bible is really helpful in terms of studying Peterson. And even if it's not true from outside the human perspective, whatever that might be, it's bloody well true from within the human perspective. That's for sure. And so that's the that's the initial event in some sense after the creation is the cataclysmic fall. And then the entire rest of the Bible is an attempt to figure out what the hell to do about that. And that's exactly right. Creation, fall, redemption, restoration, the rest of the Bible. So so what I do is and you'll see this in my sermon. So so you have the you have the representation of the Bible where you have and I ran through this in my earlier videos where you have the temple where where where the God lives and you have the earth and that's that brings the temple and everything. And what happens in this cataclysmic event is heaven and earth is cut off and we are separated from the source of all life, which is why we decay. And so then the main question of the Bible is, well, how can we get back there? Well, now you can understand the Tower of Babel. They wanted to use their technology, both social technology in terms of organizing themselves and building technology, which probably at their time was the greatest technology they had. They wanted to use it in order to get to the heavens to once again be in the control room of life and beauty and everything else, which again, the idea that that the source of life is up there and it comes down to us. You know, that's the that's the foundation of astrology. It's the foundation of how many other, you know, pagan religions. Well, it's it's in a sense in terms of the representation of the Bible. It's the story of the Bible. And so after the after the cataclysm, as Peterson says, the rest of the story is how to fix this. So then you get all the way to the book. You get it all the way to the end of the Book of Revelation. And it's the story of it. And then for Christians, obviously, you get into the Gospels and then Jesus is the key to it being fixed. And part of part of what happens in terms of the rupture of science and religion is is, I think, in many ways, the rupture that Peterson is here in the middle of with Peterson. This is what he's doing, because again, if you have the ontology of Peterson, if you understand what being is for him, you can understand why he answers his questions about the resurrection in the way he does, because it makes perfect sense. The guy's not crazy. The guy's not stupid. He's not a Christian. He's not a Christian. He's not a Christian. He's not a Christian. He's not a Christian. He's not a Christian. It makes perfect sense. The guy's not crazy. The guy's not stupid. We all know that. He's it makes perfect sense. What he what he's not ready to do is, in a sense, say, I know that my Redeemer lives. And to imagine as Christians do when I do a funeral and I stand I stand in the green grass and I look down at those graves and I did I didn't I didn't make a video about about death. I did some Facebook posting about it. But when I when I stand at a graveside and when we're about to lower someone that is precious to me or precious to all who gather there and I say I know that my Redeemer lives and in my flesh I will see God in my flesh I will see God. Next Christmas listen to Handel's Messiah about a hundred times. And that might just make you a Christian because you might say, OK, well, Vanderkley, why? How dare you? How dare you believe that you will see your father and not just maybe spirits in heaven. How dare you believe that you will see your father resurrected? How dare I? It's a good question. And as a Christian, I would say I dare because I believe the testimony that the disciples dared to see their friend and touch his flesh. Well, how do you believe that? Well, there's plenty on the Internet about that. Read NT Wright's massive book. I don't need to read it. I believe it. Well, maybe I'm fortunate because I was raised with this belief. And so it's easy for me. Lucky me. You know, we're all lucky or unlucky depending on who our parents are. That's true of all of us. How dare I believe I will see my father in the flesh again? But why not? And this is where postmodernity where Peterson and I are on the same page because postmoderns come from the same And this is where postmodernity where Peterson and I are on the same page because postmoderns come up and say, well, it's all just, you know, we can't believe any of these narratives. Well, if you can't believe any of these narratives, please don't use the word should or ought with me. And if you can't use the word should or ought, I believe whatever I feel like believing. And so if I want to believe in Jesus and his resurrection, try and stop me. Everything in it is. And so you could say, for example, in the earliest in the Old Testament stories, what seems to happen is that the state of Israel is founded and it rises and falls and rises and falls. And so there's this experimentation for centuries, millennia even, with the idea that the way that you protect yourself against the tragic consequences of self-consciousness is by organizing yourself into a state. But then what happens is the state itself begins to reveal its pathologies. And as those pathologies mount, the state becomes unstable and collapses and then it rises back up and becomes unstable and collapses and then it rises. And I'm going to have to take a look, a much stronger look at Northrop Fry. Fry is an interesting critter, but I'm going to probably have to read quite a bit more on him. He's often cited in the commentaries that I read. He clearly had some really interesting ideas about literature and the Bible. And there's a lot of truth to what Peterson is doing. Now, in terms of my work at church, I'm not going to be here and preach this week. I'm going to be preaching at City Life Church over in Midtown. But when I get back, then we're going to be in Lent. So actually in my sermons, I'm going to be doing a lot of these Old Testament stories, which are going to be fun again. And then after Easter, at some point, I'm going to go back into the Old Testament. I'm going to go back into the Book of Second Kings and talk about Elisha and then ramp up to the destruction of Israel. And I haven't quite figured out what I'll do with the prophets because, boy, they're tough to get through. That's why I'm doing them in Sunday school. I always save my hardest stuff for my Sunday school lessons because the people who are in my Sunday school class are heroes to me because these people endured 75 weeks of the Book of Revelation. These people endured a year in the Book of Isaiah. And these people are probably going to endure a year or a year and a half in the Book of Ezekiel. And they hang in there and they work it through. And so they're my heroes. They're the biggest asset I have because, you know, you don't just like Peterson says, you don't know this stuff until you talk through it. So this is back up after it does this a number of times. This is primarily from Northrop Friar's interpretations. People start wondering if there's not something wrong with the idea that the state itself is the is the is the pathway is the place of redemption. And the last saw in the middle of Ezekiel with my Sunday school class. And one of the things that you have to come to terms with when you're dealing with the Bible is empire. And when Peterson is talking about the state, in many ways, you're talking about empire in the Bible. And so not this past week where I talked about masculinity and femininity and the I and the framework is Ezekiel 23. The week before that, when I began Ezekiel 23 and in a number of classes before that deal with empire because this is the first time I've ever seen Ezekiel 23. You know, if there's a rival for Jesus, it's Caesar. And when you get to the Book of Revelation, Babylon, the great, what are we talking? We're talking empire. And so, you know, Peterson was talking about the state here and talking about these issues. Boy, he's dead on right. And so what part of the reason that I started listening to Peterson was that on one hand, it's blatantly obvious to someone with my background that when it comes to the Bible, he's a neophyte. He's looking up stuff on Bible Hub. Well, good for you. But when he's coming out the Bible with the tools that he's using from the realm he's been working with his maps of meaning, he's teaching me a ton. And the stuff he's teaching me is opening up new vistas when it comes to the Bible. Well, what does that mean? Well, that means there's something worthwhile to explore. That means he's got a way into the Bible that my background hasn't given me. Now, as a Protestant, that's really foundational. And so that's why I'm paying attention to Peterson. And again, some of my pastor friends say, well, you know, but we should, we might have some interesting psychological ideas, but we shouldn't listen to him about the Bible. I, in fact, I disagree. I think we should listen to him about the Bible. And I think he's got a lot to teach me about the Bible and why I'm doing these videos, because as I talk this stuff through, it's helping me piece stuff together. There's something wrong with that idea. And so then I think on the heels of that comes the Christian Revolution with its hypothesis that it's not the state that's the place of salvation. It's the individual psyche. And then there's it's the individual psyche that's the place of salvation. Boy, we're knocking on the door of the resurrection. There's a there's a an ethic that goes along with that, too, which is quite interesting. So the ethic of redemption after the state experiment fails, let's say, is that it's it's the it's within the individual that redemption can be manifested, let's say, and even insofar as the state is concerned, because the state's proper functioning is dependent on the proper functioning of the individual rather than the reverse, most fundamentally, and that the proper mode of individual being that's redemptive is truth. And truth is the antidote to the suffering that's that emerges with the fall of man in the story of Adam and Eve. And then that relates back to the chapters that we've already talked about, because there's this insistence in Genesis one that it's the word in the form of the of truth that generates order out of chaos. But even more importantly, and this is something like I said, I most clearly realized just doing these lectures for the last three weeks is God continues to say as he speaks order into being with truth, that the being he speaks into being is good. And so there's this insistence that the being that spoke into being through truth is good. And so there's a hint there. It's so interesting. There's a hint there right at the beginning of the story that the the state of being that Adam and Eve inhabited before they fell, before they became self-consciousness conscious insofar as they were made in the image of God and acting out the truth, that the being itself was properly balanced. And it takes the entire Bible to rediscover that which is a which is a journey back to the beginning. Right. And that's a classic theme. It's a classic mythological theme that the wise person is the person who finds what they lost. Now he is at this point. And this is where we get into wisdom. So he's telling the cosmic story and he's telling the cosmic story and he's integrating the state figuring out that narrative in the Old Testament and then the individual figuring out that narrative in the New Testament. And he's and he's almost there getting it put together. And then he shifts gears and we're back into wisdom. And I want to say, whoa, isn't it bigger than then wisdom? Now, now probably the problem isn't that wisdom is too small a word. It's that our wisdom, it's our vision for what wisdom is, is too small. And you get it. And this gets into some of the Christian Jewish conversation with respect to wisdom and Torah and the Jewish community in some ways serve as Christ and the Christian community. But but I want to pause him here and say, OK, Peterson, you're walking at the edge of the cliff. Jump. What do you mean jump? Dare to believe that. Dare to believe the full thing. Dare to believe that all of the layers, the physical layer, the social layer, the all the being, dare to believe being. Dare to believe being is made flesh. Dare to believe logos is made flesh and logos will be remade in flesh. There's creation one point. And in the resurrection of Jesus, he embodies creation two point. Oh, Jesus is the icon of the invisible God. Colossians one dare to believe this. Why now? What what what what pride are you preserving? Why not go all the way and say, you know, and say, hey, I have hope that, you know, well, he hasn't lost either of his parents yet. It's a good thing. Dare to have hope to stand on a grave. And look into that grave and say, this is not the end. And it won't be just spirits mingling. But in my flesh, I'll see God and in my flesh. And you might say, well, you shouldn't you shouldn't believe that. Well, at some point, I want to talk about Descartes and Locke and Hume because somehow in the West, we've gotten a very strange conscience about. Well, don't don't believe that you shouldn't believe in the resurrection. That's dangerous. Read Miroslav Volf about what it means when a bunch of materialists go to war, when this world is all that they have and it makes us bloodthirsty and killers. What does it mean when Jesus, when he's dying, says, Father, forgive them for they don't know what they do? A materialist will say, don't you dare forgive them. Now you're in social justice warrior territory because all the stakes are here. And what happens is with the belief in the resurrection and the renewal of heaven and earth, we declare that I can lay down my life for my enemy in this world. Well, not willy nilly, not in a flippant way. I'm always done in freedom. You know, Jesus, Jesus dies when it's his timing. But I can lay down my life for my enemy. And I can surrender the physical stuff of my world for people that don't deserve it. That's grace. That's power. You're so close. Take the step. Lost in childhood and regains it. Right. That's a I think that's a Jewish idea. That's Zadik, if I remember correctly, who is a messiah figure, is the person who finds what he lost in childhood and regains it. His idea of this return to the beginning, except that the return is you don't fall backwards into childhood and unconsciousness. You return voluntarily to the state of childhood, well awake, and then determined to participate through truth in the manifestation of proper being. Now, you know, I'm a psychologist and I've taught personality theory for a very long time. And I know personality theories, the profound personality theories pretty well. And I'm reasonably well versed in philosophy, although not as well versed as I should be. But I can tell you in all the things I've ever read or encountered or thought about, I have never once found an idea that matches that in terms of profundity, but not only profundity, also in believability. Because the other thing I see as a clinician, and I think this is very characteristic of clinical experience and also very much described explicitly by the great clinicians, is that what cures in therapy is truth. That's the curative. Now, there's exposure to the things you're afraid of and avoiding as well. But I would say that's a form of enacted truth, because if you know there's something you should do by your own set of rules, and you're avoiding it, then you're enacting a lie. You know, you're not telling one, but you're acting one out. It's the same damn thing. So if I can get you to face what it is that you're confronting that you know you shouldn't be avoiding, then what's happening is that we're both partaking in the process of attempting you to act out your deepest truth. And what happens is that that improves people's lives, and it improves them radically. And the evidence, the clinical evidence for that is overwhelming. We know that if you expose people to the things they're afraid of, but that they're avoiding, they get better. And you have to do it carefully and cautiously and with their own participation and all of that. But of all the things that clinicians have established that's credible, that's number one. And that's nested inside this deeper realization that the clinical experience is redemptive, let's say, because it's designed to address suffering insofar as the people who are engaged in the process are both telling each other the truth. And then you think, well, obviously, because if you have some problems and you come to talk to me about them, well, first of all, just by coming to talk to me about them, you've admitted that they exist. Man, that's a pretty good start. And second, well, if you tell me about them, then we know what they are. And then if we know what they are, we can maybe start to lay out some solutions and then you can go act out the solutions and see if they work. But if you don't admit they're there and you won't tell me what they are, and I don't and I'm like posturing and acting egotistically and taking the upper hand and all of that in our discussions, how the hell is that going to work? You know, it might be comfortable moment to moment while we stay encapsulated in our delusion, but it's not going to work. So a lot of that seems, if you think it through, it seems pretty self-evident. And, you know, Freud thought that repression was at the heart of much mental suffering. The difference between repression and deception is a matter of degree. And that's all it's technical. It's a technical differentiation. And Alfred Adler, who was one of Freud's greatest associates, I'd say, and much underappreciated, I would say, he thought that people got into problems because they started to act out a life lie. That's what he called it, a life lie. That's worth looking up because Adler, although not as charismatic as Freud, was very practical and really foreshadowed a lot of later developments in cybernetic theory. And of course, Jung believed that you could bypass psychotherapy entirely by merely making a proper moral effort in your own life. And Carl Rogers believed that it was honest communication mediated through dialogue that had redemptive consequences. And the behaviors believe that you do a careful micro analysis of the problems that are laid before you and help introduce people to what they're avoiding. It's like all of those things to me are just secular variations of the notion that truth will set you free, essentially. And when you look at Peterson's lying pastors, when you look at Peterson's, the lie is what causes tyranny in society and Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. Yeah. And lie, it lie and truth. It's right there at the bottom. And this explains who Peterson is and his ruthless pursuit of telling the truth, which is why he won't say certain things that the state attempts to compel him to. And there it is. So, you know, it's a pretty powerful story. And I think we'll pause here because again, I'm trying to break this up into smaller chunks. And I don't know how I'm going to title these now, but because he rambles and so he makes me ramble in different things. But I'll pause this one now and then I got to take a look at some other things in my life.