https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=v3rLCnCQaqM

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm doing a series on Jordan Peterson's biblical lectures and this is some commentary on biblical series 3 in Peterson's series. You can see it down here. And this is the third video I'm doing on that, so hence this is 3C, a number of you have asked about numbering of these. And I've done one already on Sam Harris, Richard Dawkins, memes and extended phenotypes and religion. And I want to continue on to the next comment that Peterson made. Here it is. But these, the density of these stories, I do really think still is a mystery. It certainly has something to do with their absolute, their impossibility to be forgotten. You know, and that's actually something that could be tested empirically. I don't know if anybody has ever done that. And I've made comments in other of my videos that this is something I'd really love to see him test empirically too, because I, what is it about certain stories that get remembered? What is it about certain events that get triggered? The whole Kathy Newman incident. There's, when something like this just catches everyone's attention and all of us together know it, well, that's when we're getting into Jung's collective unconscious and where this goes. Because you could tell naive people two stories even equal length, right? One that had an archetypal theme and the other that didn't. And then wait three months and see which ones people remembered better. It'd be a relatively straightforward thing to test. I haven't tested it, but maybe I will at some point. But anyways, that's all to say that I'm very excited about this lecture because I get an opportunity to go over the story of Adam and Eve and the story of Cain and Abel. And I hope we manage both of those today and maybe we'll get to the story of Noah and the Tower of Babel as well, but I wouldn't count on it. And now with the hindsight of history we know he's not going to get anywhere near there. But that's okay. Not at the rate we've been progressing. But that's okay. That's no problem. There's no sense rushing this. All right, so we're going to go, before we do that, I want to finish my discussion of the idea of the psychological significance of the idea of God. And I've been thinking about this a lot more because of course this lecture series gives me the opportunity and the necessity to continue to think. And that's true. And I've, you know, in terms of this discipline for me, and now I've always got another video hanging over my head, but this has given me the luxury and necessity to think through these things and requires a discipline that I probably wouldn't have if I weren't doing this. It certainly is the case. So the hypothesis that I've been developing with the Trinitarian idea is something like Now, his comment here on the Trinity, and that timing is interesting because, you know, the doctrine of the Trinity, pastors and scholars will say something like the doctrine of the Trinity is in solution in the Bible, but it's not there present yet. And you see that in some instances of, for example, the end of the Gospel of Matthew, they're worshiping Jesus and you'd have to step and say, well, why are a bunch of Jews worshiping Jesus? That's a problem. That's an inbuilt part of us. So that's our structure. You could think about that as something that's been produced over a vast evolutionary time span. And I don't think that's completely out of keeping with the ideas that are laid forth in Genesis one, at least if you think about them from a metaphorical perspective. And it's hard to read them literally because I don't know what, you know, there's an emphasis on day and night, but the idea of day and night as 24-hour diurnal, you know, daytime and nighttime. Okay. And this is where we're going to spend a lot of time talking about this word he used literally. You'll find it was used by Tim Lott when he's trying to figure out what Jordan Peterson believes, which is what I dealt with in my last video that I put up on Monday. And we're going to have to come to terms with this word literally. And here he says, yeah, literally, you know, Genesis one, you've got the day and the night. Is that talking about literal days and nights? The changes that are based on the earthly clock seems to be a bit absurd when you first start to think about the construction of the cosmos. So it just doesn't seem to me that a literal interpretation is appropriate. I mean, it's another thing that you might not know. And again, we're going to get into origin in a minute because this is something that comes up early because almost anybody who reads the text says, how can you have day and night and you don't have the sun and the moon that are made yet? Because I think if we go back and talk about John Walton, we'll talk about the fact that what we really see created in day one is time because he calls the light day and the darkness night. Well, why doesn't he call the light light? And that, of course, kind of launched John Walton on a mission of exploration. No, but you know, many of the early church fathers, one of them origin in particular, This was in 300 AD that these ancient stories were to be taken as wise metaphors and not to be taken literally, like the idea that the people who established Christianity, for example, were all the sorts of people who were biblical literates. It's just absolutely historically wrong. I mean, some of them were and some of them still are. That's not the point. Many of them weren't. And it's not like people who lived 2000 years ago were stupid by any stretch of the imagination. So they were perfectly capable of understanding what constituted something approximating a metaphor and also knew that fiction, in some sense, considered as an abstraction, could tell you truths that nonfiction wasn't able to get at, unless you think that fiction is only for entertainment. And I think that's a very, that's a big mistake to think that. OK, so now we're going to jump into some of this here. And yeah, let's get into the PowerPoint. So well, we have to come to terms with this word literal because it's one of these words that everyone literally imagines they know what it means and nobody seems to because the word itself is quite a bit more slippery. The application of this word to biblical interpretation is by no means self-evident. And this is not a small debate, as you can even peruse my comments. Most of the people seeming to watch my videos aren't necessarily biblical literalists, but there are a few out there. And you make your comments and we can talk about that. But most have what I'd call a shibbolethic low resolution confessional attachment to the word. What do I mean by that? Well, shibbolethic comes from an Old Testament story where basically they'd use the ability of a certain group, they'd use their language accent and the ability of a certain group to say a certain word to decide what tribe they were from and based on whether or not they could say this word, they would kill them at a ford. It's low resolution because, and this is going to get into some other things that I want to talk about with Peterson and in terms of society, because we have all these shibbolethic low resolution tests for each other. Sometimes they're called litmus tests. And so one of the things that you find very quickly in conversations about the Bible is, well, I take the Bible literally and I think, well, okay, well, we should talk about that. In fact, we should talk a lot about that. But someone would say, no, there's nothing to talk about. I take it literally. And I think, well, why don't you please define for me what you mean by literally? Well, it means what it means. Well, it always means what it means, but by what do you mean? And so this word is by no means self-evident and it gets used all the time. Google, if you go to YouTube and you just search for mad TV sketches, literally, you'll find a lot of commentary about this because, you know, people use this word all the time, literally, and it doesn't mean what they think it means. So one of the interesting exchanges I saw recently on this was actually between NT Wright, who is, if you don't know who he is, he's likely the foremost evangelical scholar of the New Testament. This man writes more books than I think anyone has time to read. And he's an amazing scholar. And he takes on David Bentley Hart, who is a scholar from the Orthodox tradition, who is also a magnificent scholar and who writes an incredible amount. Well, David Bentley Hart has recently written a, has recently published a translation of the New Testament. And Hart has some things to say about his translation. Hart likes to brag that his translation, well, we'll start reading. When a theologian of the statue of David Bentley Hart offers a pithy literal translation of the New Testament, what do you mean by that? That is not shaped by later theological and doctrinal history and aims to make the familiar, strange novel and perhaps newly compelling, we are eager to see the results. This is NT Wright writing this book review. You say, how does this man have time to write his books and write book reviews? He promises to bring out the wildly indiscriminate polyphony of the writer's styles and emphasis converging in their vibrant certainty that the history has been invaded by God in Christ in such a way that nothing can stay as it is. Now, both NT Wright and David Bentley Hart are wonderful Christian men and neither of them is denying this, but they're going to have a vigorous conversation about the Bible. And I know some of you think that, you know, Christians are closed, narrow minded, uneducated people, but what I think is actually the truth is that the context of the church often allows us to have really vigorous conversations in a civil way in a sense because two of these people under the authority of the church, well, they've got to watch their language because there are rules in terms of how this is done and sometimes Christians don't obey those rules. But so anyway, this is NT Wright writing about David Bentley Hart's book. But his two claims to be literal and undogmatic are not borne out and the promise of displaying the strangeness of early Christian life disappears behind different kinds of strangeness. There is indeed some striking passages we read that Saul had reaped such a carnage along early believers, but it's now marshaling arguments that his men was anointed. His opponents are people whose God is their guts, Philippians 3.19 and so on. But what does literal mean? Greek and English as Hart knows well, and the same is true of Hebrew and Aramaic, Greek and English as Hart knows well do not work the same way, pretending that they do produce not literal translation, but the kind of thing you get in an inter-linear version. And if you pull up Bible software or find an inter-linear copy of the New Testament, you'll see things like that. So basically what, for our purposes here, what NT Wright is pointing out is that literal is not an easy matter. And even when you've got two wonderful theologians and scholars debating what literal is, well, they can't agree or they can't agree or they can't agree on what literal is, they can't agree on what literal is. And so what we're trying to do is to make it clear that literal is not an easy matter. And so we have two wonderful theologians and scholars debating what literal is, well, they can't agree or even how a literal translation of the Bible might be had. Now, one of the things that jumps into our conversation right away when we talk about this is, well, fundamentalists want a literal reading of the book of Genesis. And right away, you would say, okay, well, what do you mean by this? But stalking this is the debate in the United States that had the major episode of the Scopes Trial in Dayton, Tennessee. And now what is stalking this is this impression, and I think it's well-founded, that what happened in the 18th, 19th, and 20th century was a progression of sorts. And this is nicely illustrated in this newspaper illustration that was produced at the time of the Scopes Trial, that this is the descent of the modernists, Christianity, but then first they attacked the Bible, and then we attacked the Imago Dei that were made in the image of God, and then they attacked miracles, and then the virgin birth, and then there is no deity, and then there is no atonement, and then there is no resurrection. And notice the position of the resurrection in here, and then you have agnosticism, and then you have atheism. And this is seen as a descent, a progression of sorts, or a corruption of, and again, you'll notice the light that is up here, and the darkness down here, and this fellow here looks amazingly like, I don't know, Sigmund Freud. And so this is the assumption, and this is the narrative from the fundamentalist, modernist view. Now there's so much interesting, we could talk a lot about even just this one image and the progression and how it's seen, but this is the assumption that when you say, I take the Bible literally, in a sense you try to invoke all of this, and then the assumption is that politically you're going to lobby your legislature to prevent the teaching of creation in school, which is, which at least for most of you, when you listen to this, you say, well, isn't that what the Scopes Trial was about? Now in my previous videos I got into the fact that what happened after the Protestant Reformation is that the Bible, European civilization loses confidence in the ability of the Bible to present truth to the world. And so in order to stop the carnage, part of the project of the Europeans was to figure out what basis, what common basis of truth can we have that will heal and transcend religious sectarians? And so the main places to look were known obviously from antiquity rationalism, which is in a sense in the cloud, or empiricism, which is the stuff of Earth. And if you go all the way to Plato and Aristotle, you'll see that we've been working this polarity for a very long time, and it got to the point again that Nietzsche was able to declare the death of God. Now, and so what you have in modernity is in a sense a system that says there is public truth and private faith. And if you believers, theists out there, believe that, for example, abortion is morally wrong, well then you should, you know, you can decide not to practice abortion for yourself, but don't make it illegal for the rest of us, or to flip it on. And so that tends to be the way that this got worked out. And so, well, you can have the private beliefs that you have and keep them, but publicly will only allow what can be ordained by science, and that is assumed to be some mixture of rationality and empiricism. And so then in a sense what is literal is public. And well, what do we usually mean by literal? We usually mean something which is objective or physical, or something we can lay our hands on, or something we can measure, something non-subjective in terms of science. And again, Peterson talks about how science intentionally from the start strips out the subjective. But what we're beginning to see now at this late date is that there's a lot of what's going into the public sphere, which doesn't seem to be, which seems to be faith-based. And my tradition in particular has long recognized the power of presuppositions in terms of shaping what we believe to be public and what we believe to be private. And really what Peterson is getting at is this underpinning. This is part of his entire agenda. Because what we mean here as literal is a view of history. And you could remember the photograph of Alien Gonzales and how everyone looked at that photograph and saw different things. And my son who looked at the Kathy, the Newman interview with Jordan Peterson said, yeah, you know, but people will watch that thing and people will see different things. A friend of mine who came into the ministry in the Christian Informed Church a few years before I did at one of his examinations in the church, one of the questions that was in vogue at that time was, well, if there was a video camera in the garden, what would the video camera capture? Or would the serpent's lips move? And you might say, well, if a serpent is speaking, I don't know how the serpent would speak. Well, maybe if you watch Harry Potter, you can look at the Slytherins there. And this is why the fundamentalists fight. The fundamentalists fight so hard for literalism and how they understand literal with respect to history. And what the fundamentalists often don't realize is that in a sense they are participating in the modernist project. They have already conceded to their enemies that literal is historical in the way that they are assuming history to be. And so therefore, even though they are fighting for Genesis 1 being seen literally, they have already conceded the war in a sense to the modernists. And now they're trying to fight it on the modernist terms. And that's what they will lose. Now, and the reason they're doing this is because they very much want to have the Bible recognized in the public square. And so the line of argumentation is that if we can validate the Bible as a historical text on a par with other historical texts or other scientific texts, then the Bible will be respected in the public square. And then our other issues and agendas will have to be accepted and we can move them forward in the public square. And we're going to talk a little bit about agendas a little bit later. Now, a few fundamentalists recognize, however, that their demand for biblical literalism has implicit within it a concession to materialism. And I think again about Brett Weinstein's base reality comment that he made in the Joe Rogan Jordan Peterson video. And this is why many will say if you lose a physical snake in a physical garden with a physical Adam and Eve, you lose a physical resurrection. And that's a very important point and one that is worth considering because Christians have long, you know, stated the foundation of their religion on this physical resurrection of Jesus. And now, quite frankly, I agree. But we're going to have to have a conversation about what does physical mean. And in fact, I think the New Testament, I would argue from the New Testament that what we see in the resurrection of Jesus Christ is creation 2.0 and that in fact in his resurrection, Jesus bears with him the flesh of a renewed creation. Now, I will have to get into that quite a bit more, but I can't get into that right now, but that'll give you a little window in terms of what I see. But what you'll notice is that, and when I have conversations with people who really want to camp on this word literal in terms of Genesis 1, and I know this is going to give me a lot of comments, but hey, let's not be liars. I'll try not to be a lying pastor. I'll tell you exactly what I think. I think those who want to, who really camp on literalism in Genesis chapter 1 have some issues to contend with that they usually don't contend with. My dear mother-in-law, God rest her soul, I was in the Christian Reformed Church and she was a fundamentalist Baptist, and so the Christian Reformed Church has a reputation of kind of being in this middle ground where we're not fundamentalists, but we're not modernists, and this is because of our own rather unique migration from Europe and some of the history of the Christian Reformed Church. So she and I were having a conversation once about Genesis 1 and 2, and I was challenging some of her, you know, I take the Bible literally, and I just, so I told her, well, bring me your Bible. We're not going to have the NIV. We'll have the King James, and we'll have this conversation about the King James. So I open up the King James to Genesis 1 and 2, and I noticed that in pencil she had corrected some of the statements in the Bible, and I said, now, I said, now, Mom, you read the book of Revelation. You're not supposed to do this. You're not supposed to re-edit your Bible. But the problem that many have when they want to take Genesis 1 literally in the sense that they're talking literalism is that there are issues with it, and one of the first places you can go is, in fact, Genesis 1 verse 6, and I'll read the authorized version 1901, and God said, let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters and let it divide the waters from the waters, and now that is in many ways a very literal translation because at that point the style of translation had tended to be here's a Hebrew word, here's an English word that we're going to try to approximate it and figure out what this is. Well, part of the problem that they had with that translation is that the Hebrew word means something that seems very weird. If you know Hebrew, it seems to be, it's something about smashing. And it was used of often metal bowls. And so then actually ancient translators, and this goes all the way back to the Latin translation of the Hebrew text into the Latin, and one of the things that they used in Latin was the translation of the Septuagint word in Greek, which, and we're going to get into that. And so then we have this word firmament. But this tends to slide by us in ancient Greek, and it's a very, very, very, very, very, very This tends to slide by us in English because no one knows what a firmament is. So then with newer translations, let's say the RSV still has the firmament. The RSV was from the middle of the century, kind of a, that's when the main line was kind of at its height. The Refi standard version translated the authorized version. But then the NIV came along, which actually my denomination and some of the professors that I had, John Steck, for example, had a hand because they felt the need for a newer translation of the Bible that could be understood. Well, right away you've got an issue. Well, what are you going to translate firmament into because nobody in English knows what that is. And so then they have expanse. And now, okay, and actually modern people kind of like that word expanse. It's not necessarily alien to the Hebrew word, but it, but what it allows for modern people is to say, well, I look up in the sky, I see an expanse. And what this takes away is the material element of it. And actually, if you go a little further and you look at even the theological workbook of the Old Testament, which is often a wonderful resource in terms of looking at Hebrew words, you will find the theological filters there to try to protect, you know, nice English readers of the Bible from their Bible. And they basically talk about the Septuagint. Pre-Christian Egypt confusion was introduced into biblical cosmology when the Septuagint, perhaps under the influence of Alexandrian theories of stone vault of heaven, rendered rakia by Stereinoma, suggesting some firm solid structure. This Greek concept was then reflected by the Latin firmamentum, hence the KJV firmament. And then it goes into the, you know, what everyone knew of the of the backstory of that passage. Well, again, if you read John Walton, and I agree with John Walton, you either have to say, well, that firmament just means expanse. And that's the sky. And so God made the sky. But then you have a problem a little later in the text because what he does is he puts the sun, the moon, and the stars in the firmament. And you really haven't talked about the waters. And so often, while I'll talk to people who really like to take Genesis 1 literally, I'll ask them, well, where are the waters? And they'll say the waters, the cloud. I'd say, well, your first problem is no ancient person would necessarily connect waters with clouds. And the second problem is that basically in the world of the ancient Near East, we have a pretty good idea what those waters were because everyone else believed in them too. And then my question was, well, when the space shuttle went to the moon, did they have to go through the waters? Well, you might conceive of that there is a water belt around the entire cosmos. And okay, if that's the way you want to go, I'm not a physicist. I can't argue with it. I think physicists are probably going to have a hard time finding that water belt outside of all the galaxies because it is so, so far away. But it seems the other way, the way that John Walton is dealing with this text, is a far better way of dealing with it. And then you have the problem of, well, how are you going to cover this up throughout the whole Bible? Because, yeah, you might be really scrupulous about Genesis 1 because you're paying a lot of attention to that. But you're going to find this cosmology throughout the Bible and especially the Old Testament. It comes up again and again in the writings, for example, Psalm 148-4. Now, if you look at, if you look at, again, for example, the American Standard Version or the Authorized Standard Version 1901, and this is why I have a love-hate relationship with this word literal because the word is helpful in terms of talking about how the ASV translated the Bible because they would take one Hebrew word and try to associate it with one English word and do that consistently. And that could be really helpful if you don't know Hebrew or Greek and you're trying to do a word study. But what it does reveal is the kind of issues that N.T. Wright is talking about. And it does reveal some tricks that certain more contemporary translations are making in order to try to protect people from their own Bible. So, for example, in the ASV 1901, praise him ye heavens of heavens and ye waters that are above the heavens. And the Hebrew word is just for heavens. Now, here's the Geneva Bible and it's basically the same thing. It's a fairly literalistic translation. But now the Tanakh, the Jewish translation, does a similar thing. Now, the RSV will maintain that. Praise you highest heavens and ye waters above the heavens. But take a look at the NIV 1984. Praise, which is a translation I use all the time. My church uses it and it's translation I love. But every translation has its issue. Praise him you highest heavens and you waters above the skies. Well, why not heavens? Well, basically within the cosmology of the Hebrews, I went and checked the Hebrew and the word is repeated. Often in Hebrew poetry, there'll be repetition, but the repetition of meaning, they won't necessarily repeat the words. But here the NIV 84 decided to do it skies. Well, why? Well, that way you keep people from being a little too literal with their Bible and say, Where are these waters above the heavens? And what are those waters doing up there? And oh, were those the floodgates? Is that the waters that when God opens the floodgates in the firmament, the world flooded? Yeah, that is it. And that's what your literal Bible says. Now, how does that literal Bible connect with the rest of the conversation that we have and the representations we have from science? And I talked about this in a previous video. And again, I mentioned that some people I know have decided to basically say, Okay, I'm going to adopt a flat earth. Okay, that's going to have other issues involved with it. But at least they're trying to be consistent with their literalism. And I can appreciate that instead of just kind of kind of fudging it and being able to maintain the answers. Because where this goes is again, this representation that I put in a previous video and I again talked about representations. And I might do a whole video on that issue because that's a big issue for a lot of people who are going to look at this. But again, if you're going to really be careful about this, you've got to scour your Bible pretty completely because literal translations reflect this idea. And one of my favorite passages of this is Exodus 24 10. And in Exodus 24 10, God invites Moses and Aaron and Nadab and Abihu and 70 elders up. Well, what does he mean up? And in a sense, they go up to heaven. Well, why would I say that? And he saw the Lord God of Israel. Where would they see him? Well, he's in his temple. Well, where is his temple? His temple is up here. And you say, well, why do you connect that up here? I thought he went up Sinai, up some mountain. Ah, but let's understand how the Bible is communicating and how this representation is functioning within the story. And the key question to this is under his feet was something like a pavement made of lapis lazuli. Well, what's that? Well, it's a blue stone. Now you might look up a I forget what podcast it was. One of my favorite podcasts a while ago. I can't think of it. But but notice how little color there is in the Bible. And there's a lot of commentary, a lot of suspicion about ancients and color and all of that. But lapis lazuli. Well, this is lapis lazuli. This is this is blue. And and notice, well, where would the blue come from? Well, this is the floor of heaven, which is above the waters, which is which are above the firmament. You can see here the firmament springing leaks and that gives us rain or at least the floodgates of God. This is how God controls the rain. And, you know, Moses and Aaron and Nadab and Abihu and are since brought up to heaven. And they are welcomed into the throne room of God and the temple of God in heaven. Will we imagine look like the temple in Jerusalem? We talked about the temple in a previous video and we get into this. Now, if you look at if you look at translations and they saw the God of Israel and they're under his feet were paved works of sapphire stone, as it were, as it is, were the very heaven for clearness. What are they talking about? Now, there's a very literalistic translation of the NIV is going to try to clean this up again. So the NIV 84 under his feet was something like pavement made of sapphire clear as the sky itself. Well, why would that be clear as the sky? Because for them, it was the sky. And the NIV 2011, the pavement made of lapis lazuli. Well, now we get the name of a stone as bright blue as the sky. Now the NIV is trying to give what they call dynamic equivalence in there. Clear as the sky itself from any tea. So does does does sky help us here? Well, the thing is that I think that the connotation here is that Moses and Aaron and Nadab and Abihu and the 70 elders are at the control room of Earth where God gives them the law. That is how this is going. Now, let's let's return back to Jordan Peterson and his social political agenda. His social political agenda is basically this Western civilization and all its benefits are threatened when we lose the Judeo-Christian underpinnings. And he gets this from Nietzsche Solzhenitsyn Dostoevsky. And this is where we get into his debates about free speech and the Imago Dei. He doesn't call it the Imago Dei. This is Matt Gott. This is I would Peterson talks about this in terms of of human privilege that people are privileged over, let's say the rest of the animal kingdom. And this is where we get our sense of human rights. And he would also say that, you know, scientific and this is Jonathan Haidt's big issue, the preservation of science relies on us keeping this. Well, what does that mean? Well, what what Jonathan Haidt, Brett Weinstein, Sam Harris and many others in the scientific community, even the atheist community are basically saying what we have happening, as Jordan Peterson would call neo-Marxist postmodernism. My assertion is that what this really is, is a new civil religion and it has replaced the old civil religion that was put in place to fight the Soviet Union. And then in a little in a little gap, we thought, well, maybe we can get rid of religion. But I think Peterson is dead on right when he says, no, when you get rid of religion, you just don't get rationality. When you get rid of religion, you have mythology running amok. People will make up their own mythologies all over the place. And so in a sense, Peterson's main agenda is to say, look, we cannot rebuild Nietzsche's vision that somehow we can we can make a new mythology. We can't do that. We better keep going with the mythology we have. And what we'd better do is tinker with this mythology, maybe correct it in some places. But this is what we have to keep working with because this actually works. And what we're seeing right now happening in our culture is that pushing this mythology away means people are introducing other mythologies which say things like, well, I can be whatever gender I want to. If my gender identity is Shirley Temple and I think I'm a six year old girl who's tap dancing on the good ship lollipop. Well, this is what I can be. And again, this gets into David Brooks book, The Road to Character. And this gets into a lot of other conversations, some of which I've put in my previous videos. So, well, what does that mean? And so then Jordan Peterson goes back and says the Bible is something that should be in the public realm. But again, this is this is now kind of the opposite. This is that kind of a bizarro twist on the fundamentalists because the fundamentalists in a sense appropriate the unwittingly the philosophical assumptions of positivism and say, well, the Bible is historical in the way that we believe history works. Therefore, it should be in the public realm. Peterson's coming from Darwin and saying, no, that's all wrong. But the Bible needs to be in the public realm. And and I think and now he's offering some ideas. I think the Bible is mythologically true and Peterson gets that gets that through Jung. So but now we have the Bible in the church and Peterson wants to mention origin. The church's handling of the Bible has not always been literal. And Peterson is exactly right on that. If we could. And the assumption here in the biblical series is that if we can have a non literal understood within the fundamentalist modernist fight interpretation, then we can have evolution and the authority of the Bible, too. And there are, in fact, a number of denominations that that do not deny evolution and and embrace the authority of the Bible. Again, if you look at a scholar like Alvin Plantinga, he's he's he's you know, he's he's quite far on the conservative end in terms of his his doctrinal stances. He would believe in the Virgin Birth, the creation of the world. He doesn't deny evolution. He he sometimes plays with some ideas around that. But there are many, many Christians who say, yes, there is evolution and you can have debates about that. And and yes, I believe in the authority of the Bible. And so, you know, by a logos again is one of the websites that is that is working that field. But again, what do we mean by literal and why are we afraid of literalism? Well, if you want to know why we're afraid of literalism, I would think that a lot of fans of this conversation, well, maybe if maybe you don't know it, there's a there's a radio show in England called Unbelievable by Justin Briarley. He's been doing this thing for years. It's a podcast. And here's an episode that I heard a few years ago, which which was really interesting between Richard Dawkins now and between Richard Dawkins, a Hebrew rabbi and a and an evangelical Christian. And what's what's interesting, Justin Briarley does a terrific job with with these things. And but what's interesting is because at this point, I think I caught attention to this because Richard Dawkins was was making a public case in England for not withdrawing Bible reading from the public curriculum in England. Now, the church state relationship in England is different from the church state relationship in the United States. But but as you can hear in this podcast, Richard Dawkins actually loves the Bible. And in fact, you'll find some interesting things in this podcast about Richard Dawkins and the people he's talking to. And so then you have to ask the question, well, what is Richard Dawkins afraid of? So let's let's take a listen. And he's put these on YouTube, too. Well, as Channel 5 screens 10 hours of the Bible in a mini series this December, I have three guests joining me to debate the rights and wrongs of the stories in the Old Testament. As we ask today, what do we do with the Old Testament? What about things like the story of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah or God asking Abraham to sacrifice his son, Isaac? Can we make sense of them for today? Or are they Bronze Age myths that we should be happy to consign? And again, these are all the standard questions I get and all the standard questions a lot of people are dealing with. To history, to the bin of history. Well, those three guests joining me today are Professor Richard Dawkins, well-known biologist and, of course, a leading voice in atheism. His bestselling book, The God Delusion, included a chapter on whether we can draw morality from the Bible. So we'll be asking him about that. His latest book is his autobiography, An Appetite for Wonder. Chris Inkinson is a Christian pastor and lecturer in the Old Testament at Moreland College. His new book, Time Travel to the Old Testament, aims to show how the books of the Old Testament are realistic and relevant for today. Rabbi Josh Levy is from the Northwestern Reform Synagogue in London, also known as the Eilith Synagogue. He's part of Reform Judaism as a movement and is an occasional speaker and commentator on radio and TV. So you have Richard Dawkins, a rabbi and a pastor walk into a radio show. Saying for the record, if you're listening to this on a Saturday afternoon, we are pre-recording today's program. So there are no Sabbath rules being broken in order for Josh to join us on the program today. A very warm welcome to all of you gentlemen. Thank you for being with me today. Thank you. Richard, let's start with you, someone I've long wanted to have on this program. So thank you for making the time to join us today. First of all, would you want to just give us a little bit of background? If people want the full story, of course they can buy your latest book. But you kind of embraced atheism really in your late teens, was it? Yes, I suppose you could say that. But that's not got a lot to do with what we're talking about, which is the Old Testament. Indeed. Which you can appreciate as a work of literature, and I do. Yes, I mean, you've been familiar in that sense with the Bible from a young age, haven't you? Yes, indeed. And what sort of an impact would you say the Bible had on you as a youngster, and how did your views develop on it over time? I learned the stories of the Old Testament. I learned the stories of Genesis about Abraham, the stories of King David and so on. As a child at school, I seemed to have had a near photographic memory in those days and almost seemed to know them by heart. This gets into Peterson's idea about stories and memory. Maybe he had a near photographic memory, which he very well may have, but these stories are memorable. I suppose the sort of Christian attitude in which I was brought up was that the Old Testament God wasn't as nice as the New Testament God. We were kind of slightly warded off the Old Testament in a way. But I love the books as literature in the King James translation. I, of course, can't read the Hebrew and I have no time for modern translations. It seemed to me to lose the poetry. Now, again, here he loves the King James translation. He has no time for modern translations because he enjoys the poetry of the Bible. I can appreciate, as it were, especially in the King James translation, that there is a beauty of sorts to aspects of the Bible. There's certainly beauty in the English. I'm aware that the books that made it into the canon are pretty arbitrary collection. Noticed arbitrary. And not to be treated with actually much more reverence than any of the or many of the other books that didn't make it into the canon. Well, something we could certainly open up in the course of the discussion today. Now, I understand you haven't had a chance to watch it, but throughout December Channel 5 is airing a mini series, in fact, 10 hours altogether of Bible stories. What do you think about that? Do you welcome people becoming familiar again with those Old Testament stories and so on? Yes. Well, I haven't seen the program, as you say. I will make a point of watching it in the future. I do welcome it in the sense that it's a part of our literary heritage in this country, in our English language. And you can't appreciate English literature without being familiar with some of the phrases, indeed, many of the phrases. I think in the God Delusion, I had a couple of pages solidly packed with phrases from the Bible which are familiar, proverbial. And you can't really take your allusions without them. Many people are probably not aware of the fact that they do come from the Bible, many of them from the Old Testament. So you encourage people to be familiar with the Bible, even though you obviously don't necessarily agree with all of the contents therein? Yes, I do. I encourage people to be familiar with the Bible for literary and historic reasons. You also, of course, can't understand history unless you are familiar with the religious tradition of our country and other European countries. OK. Well, thank you for joining us on the program today. And we're going to be getting into some of the issues that you outlined several years ago now in the God Delusion when you spoke about some of the moral issues, especially in the Old Testament in Scripture. Two other guests joining me in studio today to discuss this whole area. OK, and I'm going to jump up a little bit ahead in the conversation. Let's go to the next link. Known as Alith. Coming back to you then, Richard, how do you take the Old Testament? Do you believe that it is essentially mainly fictional sort of literature? I'd be surprised if very much of it was factual. I mean, the early parts of it, the Pentateuch is clearly the Jewish foundational myth. It includes the creation myths and the sort of myths of the origin of the Jewish people. I understand from archaeological friends, there's almost no factual content in it. There certainly isn't any factual content in the scientific parts in the bits about creation of the world and the universe and so on. And I suspect there's rather little factual content in the stories of Abraham, of the exile in Egypt, of the escape from Egypt, Egyptian plagues and so on. So it is a collection of myths. They happen to be Jewish myths. Some of them are inherited from earlier peoples like the Sumerians. As myths, they are fascinating. I mean, myths all around the world are fascinating. All three of us happen to have been born into cultures which were immersed in this particular Jewish myth, as opposed to the myths of the North American Indians or of the Chinese or of the Indians or South Sea Islanders or any of the other myths or Africans, any of the other myths that we could have been brought up in. So there is really no reason at all to be talking about the Jewish myths any more than any of the other myths around the world. And this is where you'll get into the question of should the Bible be in the public space? If it's in the public space, in what way should it be in the public space? And now I hear Richard Dawkins essentially saying, well, it's important to our history. It's important to our culture. But in terms of functioning as a mythological, as basically a myth, and I don't mean this as fictional. Peterson is right when he talks about fiction, but as a governing document for us. And he's saying, well, it's arbitrary. Any of the other government, any of the other myths could, you know, are there. And so there's there's no reason for it to be privileged. All of them are anthropologically interesting, but that's it. You're looking a bit pensive there, Josh, in response. Well, I mean, I can understand why Richard would say that as a Jew. Obviously, I come to those texts in a very particularistic way, which is they're my foundational myths. That is, I am necessarily in relationship with them if I am going to live as part of a Jewish religious and cultural life. So they are the foundational texts of my people. They're the formative stuff of the religious and cultural life that I lead. I mean, as it turns out, I doubt the region. I will disagree very much on his issues of historicity. What we're going to differ on, I think, is probably whether or not that text continues to enrich people's lives. OK, so now this is a this is a Jewish rabbi from a reformed Jew now reformed Judaism and reformed Christianity. The branch of reformed Christianity that I'm from, those are two very different things. And my understanding reformed Judaism tends to be the more what we would call, let's say, the modernist, a modernist element of the Jewish community. And so Rabbi Josh Levy here will say to Dawkins, well, historically, I can be with you. But for us, this is much more of a formative document for us. And this informs us because, OK, this is my ethnic particularity of Judaism. And so this is something we hold dear. We can understand why you don't necessarily. But this is that this is then kind of our this is kind of our ethnic deal. And as a Jew, it clearly continues to enrich my life. It is the foundational myth of the people of which I'm part of the formative stuff that I do. It's my poetry, my story, the source of the legal code, which then came to shape my religious and cultural practice. So as a Jew, I have a very particularistic relationship with it. Go ahead, Richard. Well, I just I mean, presumably you would agree that if you happen to have been born in China or India or Fiji or somewhere, you would say, Well, the Fijian myths are the myths of my people, the Indian myths of the Hindu myths of the myths of my people. I mean, you recognize the arbitrary accident of the fact that you happen to have been born into a Jewish household. And we're going to have to talk about this argument because the pluralism argument is a very interesting one. And Dawkins is basically making it. And in response to Rabbi Levi's argument that, hey, I'm a I'm a I'm a Jewish person. And so this is important to my heritage. And Dawkins says, of course, everybody has something important to their heritage. But but who you were born with is arbitrary. Now, now, whenever you make whenever you hear that argument now, now take a step back and ask yourself, is there a you that is not you? Well, what do I mean by that? Well, could Paul VanderKlay have been born a a young blonde girl in the 19 teens and then had a movie career that sang songs like on the good ship Lollipop? Would would that have been Paul VanderKlay or would that have been Shirley Temple? And so there's this this there's this funny thing about the pluralism argument that imagines myself as someone that I'm not. But, you know, I often hear that argument and say, yeah, but then I wouldn't be me. In other words, history is a kind of thing that that that I am me. And, yeah, there's commonalities between me and other people. And there's lineages and all of this. But it's a it's a strange argument. But but I almost never hear anybody point out the strangeness of that argument. I'm also going to have to make another take another shot at the pluralism argument. But that's basically the conversation they're working now. And in a minute, the evangelical is going to jump in because he's going to want to more keep the Bible in the public conversation and make arguments for that. And that's why these are the myths of your people. Right. I mean, I think our own personal religious and cultural identities are inevitably arbitrary to some extent. And but it is mine. And that's that's for me to live as a Jewish life engaged with my cultural traditions involves being in relationship with that text. I'd be interested, Chris, to a couple of things that Richard pointed out as he started there. Now, Chris is the evangelical. He doesn't believe there's any historical basis really to most of the Old Testament. Is that something you disagree with yourself? I would disagree with that. I think that just to clarify, there's a couple of words that we've been using so far that I do think need some unpacking. One is the word literal and what we mean by literal interpretation. And the other is the word myth, which is very easy to use. But I think there's a much more complicated debate around what we mean by myth. And in fact, to be honest with you, in terms of popular debate, I think the word myth has been so stripped of any clear meaning that it's almost a useless word, which would have been much to the annoyance of someone like Tolkien, you know, who spends so much time discussing mythology and the meaning of myth. So just to take these two words very, very quickly. First of all, if I could go with the word literal first, then what do we mean by interpreting the book literally? Literal does not mean simply interpreting something for its face value meaning. You know, the sun rises and the sun sets. You know, this is language we clearly know. It's a conventional way of speaking about the relationship of the sun to the earth as we view it from our viewing platform. Likewise, with the Old Testament, we could talk about how there is a perspective on history in the world and that's reflected in the way the stories are told. So to interpret the Old Testament literally doesn't mean always taking its face value. It means taking it seriously for the kind of literature it is. And myth, I don't think is a particularly helpful word here. I mean, theologians use the word saga sometimes to describe the Old Testament. I think that might be more helpful because when we think about the history of the Old Testament, I'm sure Richard would agree that there's a historical kernel to the Old Testament story. I'm sure he wouldn't doubt that there are there's a historical story unfolding, but it's to what extent is that wrapped up in figures of speech and forms of writing and perhaps later traditions that have been incorporated into the story. That's what we need to disentangle. But that there's a core of history. I'm absolutely. And you feel that that is confirmed by archaeology and so on when you look into some of these core aspects of the Old Testament's history. I do. I've been involved in an archaeological dig in Israel and for a couple of seasons. And what I'm aware of, I don't know which friends Richard was talking to at Oxford, but there really is a wide open debate here. I mean, you'll have archaeology doesn't provide a discipline where things are coming up from the ground date stamped until you get to coins anyway. They're not date stamped with a record of who said what to who archaeology provides evidence, which can be ambiguous. It needs explaining. And so there's a very vigorous debate going on in archaeology right now. And there are those who hold to a minimalist position and would suggest that there's very little evidence at all for the events of the Old Testament. But there's a very significant number of archaeologists, a very significant number who would argue for what's sometimes called a more maximalist approach to reading the evidence. People like William Dever or Kenneth Kitchen. And sorry, I mean, yeah, I do disagree with that. Well, I don't disagree with that. I mean, I do think we need to be very careful about two things. That's the rabbi again. Perhaps the really fundamental question is whether the history matters, whether actually this is not a history book. That's not its function. It's not a science book. Notice how the conversation has gone towards history. Because why? Because in our in our philosophical frame, history is the determiner of what can be in the public realm. And so, well, how does myth then is myth allowed or not allowed in the public realm? And again, this gets very much into Peterson's into Peterson's agenda. It is a people's grappling with their identity, their story, their experience of the world around them that then came to inform other people's doing of that same thing. So for me, as it happens, deeply unconcerned with historicity. That doesn't bother me at all. In other words, the rabbi is saying and now again, a reformed rabbi is saying, well, it doesn't you know, I don't care about history. I just take the myth. And if I find the myth useful, then then so be it. But but then you have to ask the question, well, well, how is this myth actually governing? And so now we have questions of, well, history and authority. And that's exactly when you when you have the coupling of history and authority, it's then you say, OK, now we're within our now we're within our public frame because only what can govern is historical. And now we're going to have to deal with, well, authority and myth and history. And how do all these things, in fact, relate? I do think we need to recognize also that the Old Testament is not a unity, that there are different books within it doing different things. Clearly, there are points in the sort of pseudo historical books at which the Old Testament is describing events that we know took place because we have evidence. We have quite a lot of it in the British Museum, which describes the event taking place. But the Bible isn't doing history. It's doing theology. So. And I would hear that and say, that's true. The Bible isn't doing history. It's doing theology. But I'm more with the evangelical scholar that's saying, yeah, but the Bible is working an interesting relationship between history and theology, which I think is actually the relationship that we have going on now. When Jordan Peterson and Ms. Newman have an interview, well, that's history. But then there's also theology and Connor. I forget his last name. I can't pronounce his last name. He writes for the Atlantic, wrote a terrific piece today about, you know, why isn't anybody listening to Jordan Peterson? Oh, because there's this habit of interviewing and this habit is on Fox News and it's on MSNBC and it's on Channel 4 England. And, you know, is the job of the interviewer to basically score points, ideological points for the crowd, or is the job of the interview to illuminate and perhaps challenge the thoughts of the person being interviewed? And how do you get that balance right? When the Babylonians rampage and destroy Jerusalem, we know that happened. We know that the Bible is describing it, but the Bible is doing theology. It's seeing that in terms of reward and punishment and behavior. It's doing a different thing. Do you do? And again, I mean, if you want to listen to my Old Testament classes on the church, on my church YouTube channel, well, what was the relationship between the book of Ezekiel and history? What is the relationship between the book of Daniel and history? Very clearly, and this gets into the question of the resurrection, very clearly the Bible wants to make claims about history. Because in a sense, let's say if you read Harry Potter or Lord of the Rings, and any other fiction, they are trying to inform reality. But, you know, I think it's really hard to read the Bible and not say this book is making claims about the future. They're like, oh, I don't know about that. I mean, the second coming, he's been away a long time. You know, the resurrection of Jesus, that will be a general resurrection. How do we talk about that? Can we talk about that in the public sphere? Richard, coming back to you, do you think that the Bible has, the Old Testament especially, any value in terms of a moral dimension that it may cast upon? Oh, now you're changing the subject, and that's an interesting change. Well, I just wanted to, you know, we'll... Dawkins is no dummy. He's a very smart man. ...cover a variety of subjects, hopefully. I mean, I agree with Josh that historicity doesn't really matter, but I think I put it in a slightly different way. And again, when he says historicity doesn't really matter, oh, no, no, no, no. You're pretty clear on the Bible not being historical. You might say the Bible is not historical, but do you really mean historicity doesn't matter? It doesn't matter because you wouldn't be bothering to ask the question about the, say, creation myths or the tribal myths of the Incas or the Aztecs. I mean, they are interesting. They're fascinating myths. But you wouldn't be having a debate to say, is there any historicity in the stories of sun gods and things? And now we get to the question of regard. Do we privilege the Bible in any way greater than the myths of the Babylonians or the Incas? The only reason we're bothering to ask the question about the historicity of the Jewish myths is that we happen to be brought up in them. But they are not special. They are just tribal myths like any other. Well, they're not special. We're brought up in them. They're tribal myths just like any other. You're making a pretty big claim about all tribal myths. I mean, well, Chris, do you think... Well, could I make a distinction there? Because you gave a very helpful description. This is the evangelical again. Right at the beginning of the power and influence of the Old Testament narratives on Western culture. And I'd go even further than that and say that even history writing itself can find its roots in the Old Testament, in the way the Old Testament was written. Not that it's history, except Josh's point that it's not history as in a modern history textbook. It's not science as a modern science textbook. But in terms of history, it formulates a way of describing events which have a certain linearity and a certain meaning, which is reflected in the historical traditions, which will... We also look to the Greeks and Herodotus, but in terms of the modern world, our development of history and our understanding of history reflects a view which we find in the Old Testament, which I don't think we find in the Chronicles of Babylon. I don't think we find them in the Inca myths. I mean, that's for sure. And again, this is a critically important point that... So Dawkins wants to concede, yeah, we're brought up in these. Okay, we were brought up in these and these have formed us and these have shaped us. And in fact, our entire conception of history and again, getting back into the Peterson conversation, our entire conception of science and our ability to do science is also shaped by these things. In other words, we are not just, you know, if I was born in the... If I was born in, I don't know, what, 1920, a blonde haired blue eyed girl with musical talents, I would be Paul VanderKlay. No, I'd be Shirley Temple. My gender identity is not Shirley Temple. My identity is Paul VanderKlay and not Shirley Temple. So it matters the way history runs. And again, this, in fact, this, even this idea is part of this mythology, part of this book, part of this history. And the reason this has been incorporated into the way we think and the assumptions that we have is because of this book. And this again gets back to Jordan Peterson's main argument that, you know, you can't just make up a fairy tale and replace it. Tolkien gave us a pretty compelling mythology and a mythology that I love and live within. But even Tolkien, you're not going to replace, you're not going to replace how the Bible functions in our world. You would, in a sense, then say these, it's not just sort of equal weighting between different myths around the world. There's something quite unique about the Old Testament. Absolutely. OK, Richard. I just don't see that. I mean, I notice you're quite happy about using the word myth for the Inca myths and the Aztec myths. Yes. I mean, I'm not saying the word myth that, well, I'm using it because you used it to describe their stories and legends. And, you know, I do accept there is a categorical myth. I just want to define it very carefully. I mean, I think myth does not have that rooting in linear historical progression. And that's where I think our modern understanding of history has a much more reliance on the Jewish tradition than would have come out of the Inca mythological cycles, you know, stories which aren't rooted in time and place. I mean, we find that in the great Hindu epics as well, which, again, are not rooted in time and place, not concerned with the genealogies and the locations and who was king when in the way that the Old Testament narrators were. Yes, Richard, and then we'll bring in George. That may be so. I mean, I don't think it's a very deeply important point. If it's so, I suspect the same is probably true of some other mythologies. I don't want to make a big thing of it. But how much mythology have you really read? Because you really didn't find it important. But it's deeply important in terms of our respect for the historical processes and the development of history as a Western discipline. And that's why this is important. It's foundational for more than just the Jewish people. It's foundational in other respects. There's so much of the Old Testament which is taken to be historically... I mean, both of you gentlemen are sophisticated who don't do this. But more than 40% of the American population think that the book of Genesis, including the six-day story of creation, is literally true. And this is a problem which I have as a scientist. And I hope and believe that both of you stand up and vigorously oppose such literalistic fundamentalism. Right. But I think that... Now here we have what's behind this. And Dawkins says, hey, wait a minute. I wrote my book because these 40% of Americans who believe that the book of Genesis is literally true, I have to stand up and oppose this. And I hope you two will stand up and oppose it with me. Now on one hand, okay, I understand now your social agenda is pushing your... You're writing this book. I get that. Now one of the things I'd really love to talk about at some point is why we imagine standing up and opposing something. I mean, in some ways, Richard Dawkins here is like a social justice warrior who just has to be out there and advocate and protest and make their voice heard because this is how to change people's minds. Is it really? Is this how people's minds are changed? Did either Jordan Peterson or... I can't remember. Is it Kathleen Newman? Were either of their minds changed by that interview? I think we all learned a lot through it. But what's going on with this? And Dawkins, again, in this radio show, and you can listen to the... I'll put the link to it, will go again and again say, Well, you two aren't the kind of people that I'm having my conversation with. I want to convince those fundamentalists in the United States who don't believe in evolution. And so you write a book called The God Delusion and you really imagine anybody's going to read that and say, Oh, gosh, I was just going to my Baptist church and the Bible, oh, the God Delusion. I'll read this. It's wrong. I'll give it up. People don't work this way. And so why keep trying this way? So let's get back to the PowerPoint. And so basically what you're left with is, you know, with these subtraction stories that Charles Taylor talks about in A Secular Age. I'll say read A Secular Age and it's not an easy read and it's very, very long. But there's this popular conversation that's, well, the Bible keeps proving wrong. I mean, Galileo, everyone in Galileo's time believed that the Roman Catholic Church said via Genesis. Well, what did the Roman Catholic Church believe during Galileo's time? Was it Genesis or was it Aristotle? Do your homework. Look back into these things and ask critical questions instead of just buying the subtraction story. Because what you will see is that the story is far more complex than this idea that, well, we used to just have the Bible and now we have science. Now that might be a subtraction story for some people who grew up in a fundamentalist church and they heard all of this stuff that these evil people at university who believe we came from monkeys, they're horrible people, they're deluded. Then they go to university and discover they are not horrible people. They're not deluded. They've got some really good reasons for what they believe. Well, the flip was partially given because of the story they were told first and then they discover they're not horrible people. It's kind of like, well, I believe, there are two friends of mine lived across the hall at college. One grew up in Pakistan, one grew up in India. And the grandmother of the Pakistani would always tell him, don't turn your back on him. He'll put a knife in your back in the middle of the night. And these guys had been friends since high school and were college roommates. And, you know, this is what goes on. So ask questions about the subtraction story. And then again, looking at the pluralism argument, few see the implicit humanist foundation beneath this argument. What does this mean? This says that, well, the pluralism argument says that basically, well, you know, the Jews have their story, the Christians have their story, the Muslims have their story, the Hindus have their story. They're all human stories. Okay. Well, why do you put all humans on the same plane? Well, it's the Mago Dei that grew out of the Jewish Christian story that people are people and they ought to be treated with privilege and respect. Well, where do you get that foundation? In his image, he created them. Man and woman, he created them. That's where this foundation comes from. Well, if you had the Inca myth for your foundation story, would you have the Mago Dei? Would you have us being image bearers of God? Or would you have, well, the gods need propitiation. Let's say you had Aztecs. The gods need propitiation, so we're going to do human sacrifice. The content of these stories matters, which is one of the foundational things that Peterson has been trying to say. And so what's really interesting is that Dawkins basically says, and if you go on in the story further, say, well, just accept modern morality. Oh, okay. But who's modern morality? Modern morality of 2018? What, from the right or the left? Well, there's a great deal of commonality between them when we compare them, let's say, to morality in the Islamic world or morality in the developing world and all these other different tribal. Who's modern morality? And what basically Dawkins is saying, accept my morality, which is wonderful, but let's get back to your pluralism argument. Why should we accept your morality and not another morality? Well, where does morality come from? Let's get back into the conversation that we started. Now, one of the things that has really appreciated me from Peterson, I've learned so much from this man on all kinds of different levels. One of the things that he says is that, you know, we don't see things. We don't just see books. I've always got this book here. You know why I do. We see tools. I see this microphone in front of me. This is a tool. I notice this. I get out of my car in the parking lot. I'm coming to work and I've got something on my mind. And I see the director of the child care center. I know I've got to see I know I've got to talk to her. So I stop and say, Hey, Crystal, let me talk to you about something. Have the conversation. And after that conversation, I'm ready to go into the building. And I remember that some of my deacons were going to meet here and do something. And that's when I see one of the car from my deacons. And I think, now, wait a minute. My eyes passed right over her car to see the director of the center. Why didn't I see her car? Why didn't I see your car? Because in my mind, I was thinking about how I needed to talk to that person. And so what you want impacts what you see. We don't just see the world flat, full of images and see it objectively. What we want shapes what we see. Again, I've told this story before. I have a friend who's legally blind. And he tells me, he says, basically, I see out of this little hole and that's what I see. But I also know that what his mind does is fill in the blanks because sometimes if I wear dark things and I move up next to him quietly, he'll just jump because I popped into his view. It's like I dream of Jeannie. Poof, I'm in there. Well, we see tools. Well, what does that mean? Let's talk about the Scopes Trial a little bit. Because I know most of you say, well, you see at the Scopes Trial, that proved that the school should teach evolution. And I do agree that the school should teach evolution. That's the prevailing scientific paradigm. And if you're going to go to university and you're going to get an education and you're going to be a doctor, you had better learn all this stuff and you'd better learn the prevailing paradigm. But what was the Scopes Trial about? Well, you probably have a very low resolution view of it. Or you could watch Inherit the Wind. That'll give you another low resolution view of it. Or you can read a little history and do a little study and learn that William Jennings Bryant, who took the, you know, who basically was the against evolution side of the trial, was a Christian and a populist. Now you say, well, was he like Donald Trump? Well, he ran for president three times. He never won. Was that who he was? Well, what did he fear? Well, he feared social Darwinism. Well, what is that? Well, you know, if you if you read much literature before World War II, at the turn of the century, a lot of us when you read that literature will say, that sounds racist. Abraham Kuyper is a important theologian and became the prime minister of the Netherlands. He's important for my subculture. If you read the stone lectures, I remember the first time I read them, I thought, boy, a lot of this stuff sounds racist. Well, why does it sound racist? Well, it sounds racist because these ideas that well, OK, so we we descended or we we evolved from animals and you say, well, you know, Africans are there by gorillas and they they're darker. And so, well, Africans are less evolved humans than let's say what a blonde haired Aryan. So, gosh, where's that idea going? Well, it's going someplace really bad. And so, William Jennings Bryan and many Christians saw this as being connected with with evolution. And so part of the reason he wanted to fight this was that, you know, racism was being scientifically promoted and he saw it as a threat to the Imago Dei that somehow, you know, white blonde little Jew, not Jewish, little Aryan boys and girls were somehow more evolved and deserve. Well, when was brave new world written? Those ideas were all around us. So what was William Jennings Bryan trying to do? He was, in fact, the egalitarian in the debate. Well, that might twist your social justice noodle a little bit on both ends of it. These things change in history. Others feared for the preservation of science against religion. Well, that's that's Dawkins fear. And in fact, this comes out in look back at the cartoons of the age, do a little history. No wonder the monkeys are worried. Thousands of children employed in factories. Woman shoots man in a fit of jealousy. Motorist drives into crowd of children. What were they Islamic terrorists? No. William Jennings Bryan is saying we'd better be careful with this stuff. And so one monkey says to the other, I say, Genevieve, in this evolution case, are they trying to class men with monkeys or monkeys with men? And, you know, some of my friends who love animals will say to me, you know, you know, I don't have a problem with animals. I hate the way humans treat each other. But they've apparently never watched a cat toy with a mouse. So, you know, where are we going with this? What are we talking about? Many of you look at William Jennings Bryan a little closely, you say, the context between evolution and Christianity is a duel to the death. William Jennings Bryan proclaimed in the 1925 Scopes trial, for many Americans, Bryan's is remembered for his defense of fundamentalist Christianity and the face of modern science. There's the subtraction story, the low resolution image. But turn up the resolution and take a look at what was going on in this trial. And this isn't public record. This isn't hard to find. For many Americans, Bryan is remembered for his defense of the fundamentalist Christianity in the modern, in the face of modern science, evolution and Darwinism. But Bryan's career and his life spoke to a larger cause, the protection of the weakest and most vulnerable Americans from the powerful and the most uncaring forces of modernity. Born in Nebraska in 1860, Bryan launched his political career as a populist Democrat, championing the interests of the workers and farmers bypassed by industrialization. Do you see him in alignment with Donald Trump? You might see him in alignment with Bernie Sanders. Bryan advocated changing the nation's monetary policy from gold to silver, proclaiming, you shall not press upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold. He was for abandoning the gold standard for the silver standard. Bryan frequently linked Christian rhetoric with populism, believing his Presbyterian faith he really did go to church. His Presbyterian faith and his Democratic politics to be one and the same. He felt compelled to defend those he thought to be defenseless against the ravages of an unsympathetic modern world. Catapulted onto the national stage after just two terms in Congress, Bryan was the Democratic nominee for president in 1896, 1900 and 1906. Despite losing every race, he remained a popular figure. President Woodrow Wilson, where have you heard that name before? Want to take his name down from, what was it, Princeton? And, you know, okay, folks, read history. These lines are, they go in and out. So President Woodrow Wilson named Bryan Secretary of State in 1912, but Bryan quickly found the position to be at odds with his fate. As Europe descended into war in 1914, he staunchly opposed American involvement in the conflict. He later wrote, in war, science has proven itself an insane genius that has made war more terrible than before. Bryan sounds like a liberal, but he's against evolution. Bryan watched the massacre of Europe's use with horror. He could not send America's future into the same fate on foreign battlefields. Resigning from Wilson's cabinet, this guy had, this guy had convictions. He resigned from the president's cabinet because he disagreed with the president's policies. Bryan devoted himself to social reform. Is he a liberal? The greatest threat to America's spiritual and materialist future, he declared, was Darwinism and its offshoot social Darwinism. In Germany, he believed the might is right theories of Darwin coupled with the philosophy of Nietzsche. Oh my goodness, all of this stuff gets connected. The philosophies of Nietzsche to create a malignant offspring. German barbarism. Now read, there's a terrific book on the religious roots of World War I. Read it sometimes. It's not what you probably learned in history class. Fascinating history. In America, social Darwinism allowed rich and powerful capitalists to justify trampling the poor and the weak. It was the poor and the weak, the people Jesus called the least of these. Is he a Christian social justice warrior? Whom Bryan was determined to protect from those who believe that might makes right. His duty to the downtrodden and his innate sense of justice propelled Bryan on his crusade to save public schools from teaching Darwinian theory. Okay, Dawkins, have at it. Which is it? Whose morality? William Jennings Bryan morality? Where do you have your foundation for morality? How does this play out? Now, watch Peterson again, this time on Being from the Transliminal Video. ...today. Or they were kind of crowd control tools of elite sin. Yeah, yeah. They're straw man arguments, fundamentally. I mean, one of them is just Marxist. You know, it's like, what are power structures there for? Well, they're there to serve the purposes of the elite. It's like, no, that's one of their purposes. You know, that monomania, that insane desire for singular causes, to me, that's also the expression of an archetype. It's monotheism in action. It's like, you know, so you... I would tweak that and say it's monarchy in action, and we're going to have to talk about that. Again, I'm almost ready to start C.S. Lewis in Miracles. But we've got a lot of prolegomenon to do before we get that. This is monarchy. What is archie? Hierarchy? Monarchy? Do a little Greek. You see these people who claim to be atheistic, they just invent a new god. Foucault did that with power. Freud did that with sex. You know, if you're smart, too, you can take a major motivational drive or system. They're not really drives. They're really personalities. You can take a major motivational personality like power or sex, and you can explain everything on its basis, because everything is... every human action is motivated by the major motivational system. Some add mixture of them. And then if you're smart enough, you can always figure out a way that some complex phenomena is related causally to some simpler motivation. So in other words, our motivations are all over the map. This is exactly why Peterson, in that first video that launches him, says, you know, well, these aren't my pronouns. What are your motivations? What do you mean, what are my motivations? Peterson is a smart guy. He's saying, hey, baby, we all got motivations. William Jennings Bryan wanted to get rid of Darwinism because it saw it hurting people. Dawkins wants to get rid of the Bible in a certain way because it sees it threatening science. We've all got motivations. And what we tend to see is, well, we tend to see the defining, the presenting issue in front of us. And then we say, well, that's the motivation. And Peterson, dead on right here, he says, there's lots of motivations going on, baby. But it's intellectual masturbation, as far as I'm concerned. It's not the attempt to explain something. It's the attempt to reduce everything to one simple principle that you can be master of. Now, so that's so, you know, was religion for crowd control? Well, he's referring again to the market, the Marxist assumption that religion is the excuse me, is the opiate of the masses. It's just that's an empty theory. Well, so this is what a multigenerational conspiracy. That's what it is. It's a conspiracy that stretches as far back into the past as we can imagine, right back to where people were tribal and maybe farther back than that. So in other words, he's basically saying to Marx, yeah, you think religion is just merely can be reduced to the opiate of the people. That's a nice trick, but it doesn't hold water. And again, if you read, if you watch Jonathan, Jonathan Heights video on the rationalist delusion, he makes exactly the same point. You can't apply Occam's razor to people like this. People are way too complex. Their motivations are way too multiple that there's a lot more going on here. Don't just dismiss things. I mean, that's not an explanation. And the the other one, the supernatural explanation. Well, you know, there are there are there are people who think they think scientifically, but they don't because they're not very good at it. And then there are people who think scientifically at a genius level. It's like, well, there are people who think they think religiously, but don't. And then there are people who think religiously at a genius level. In other words, you know, deos ex machina in all the lives of the religious folks that my gosh, I've you know, this has happened. God brought me a miracle. Well, maybe he did. Maybe he didn't. I think I just don't think we how do we talk about this? It's extremely hard. And you can't assume that you can use the same motivational explanation at every single level of analysis. So, yes, there are elements of religious belief that are superstitious, although, you know, that's that's kind of a sleight of hand, too, because if you want to argue that religious religion is only superstition, you collect up all the superstitions. You define them as religious and then you define religion as a collection of superstitions, which is in a sense what you do with the Old Testament. You say, oh, there's barbarism in the Old Testament. Therefore, the Old Testament is wrong. And how we usually if you watch people long enough, basically, you've got everything's a tool. So we're motivated to see things in certain way. We're motivated. These are called biases. We all have them. And there's lots of them within ourselves. And we're unaware of them. We're, in fact, more unaware of our own biases than the other people around us are aware of our biases, especially the people that are close to us. And if you've ever been in a marriage or if you've ever had a parent, you know that. So, you know, it's not very careful articulation of the whole class of phenomena that are attempting to be that that that people are attempting to explain. And there's also a big difference between explaining and explaining away. So, well, then it likes to explain away things like consciousness, you know, and you can't explain away. You can't explain away consciousness. Well, you can. It depends on how you structure your initial presumptions about the world. You know, so the logos that we were talking about earlier that's associated with, let's say, articulated truth and the communication of articulated truth, that's basically the prime function of consciousness. And the Judeo-Christian story is predicated on the idea that that is a fundamental element of being. Now, you can you can structure your world with different presuppositions. So you could say, well, consciousness. OK. Presuppositions foundational here. We all have them. Where do they come from? They're they're they we inherit them about as. We inherit them about as naturally as we inherit an identity as Paul Vanderclay or Shirley Temple or Jordan Peterson. They're they're part and parcel of what we inherit that doesn't make it arbitrary. This is an epiphenomena of the material world. Well, you can make a perfectly coherent and useful set of tools out of those presuppositions, but that set of tools does not cover everything that you need. And it's no more viable as an explanation than the explanation that no consciousness is somehow fundamental to being. And of course, being is different than material reality. Now, for a long time and listening to Peterson, I had to wrestle with what do you mean by being? And so I I've made progress in that. What do you mean by being? Well, he's about to tell us what he means by being. So and these things aren't grappled with properly by. Positiveistic scientists who have no real training in philosophy and who know nothing at all about religion, you know, their religion, the Christianity that Dawkins criticizes is the Christianity that a smart 13 year old boy objects to. So it's like, well, you know, how can you reconcile Genesis with evolutionary history? It's like, well, no, that's really not the problem. So it's a straw man argument. Hello, ugly man. Sit. Lay down. I'm glad Levine included this in the video. It's fine. One of the things that I've learned about argumentation is that if you're trying to distinguish between the validity of two different worldviews, you want to make the strongest possible case for both worldviews. You're not trying to be right. You're trying to figure something out. And this again, I know some Christians pipe in in the comments and say, well, you should be. Well, I'm still I want to understand Peterson's worldview. I want to engage with it. I need to understand it as deeply as I can. I've got differences with him. I'll get into those differences. I've mentioned a few of them already. But, you know, I've got to understand that. And the easiest way to be right is to make your opponent into an idiot. So there's no doubt that empirical science has kicked the slats out of the way people think about religion. Because it wasn't easy for people to understand that there could be different. That different systems of thought might have different purposes. You have to be. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. You have to be able to understand that. And so you can't assume that every system of thought is doing the same thing. And then you can't assume also that there's only one way to formulate your basic assumptions about the nature of reality. I mean Heidegger, I didn't discover the relationship between the system of thought that I derived, say, from Nietzsche and Jung and some other people that I read. And Heidegger until much after I had written Maps of Meaning. But Heidegger's study of being is predicated on the idea that being is the fundamental reality and that is not objective reality. So what is being? Nothing he's going to tell us. For Peterson it has three constituent elements. Not material reality, it's lived experience. It's something like that. Lived experience is real. Okay, that's a presupposition. So you start with that presupposition. Then you ask yourself, well, what are the basic elements of lived reality? And then what happens there, or at least what seems to have happened, is that Heidegger identified the same basic elements of lived reality that I identified in Maps of Meaning. And one was the social world, the world that's constructed by humans, which I think is basically the elaborated dominance hierarchy. And it's permanent. So this is where the issue about what constitutes reality becomes very critical. Dominance hierarchies are 300 million years old. They're older than trees. So if you think that's one definition of what's real is what's persistent across time, then it's almost impossible to find anything more real about life than a dominance hierarchy. About life is critical there, because again, the being is real in terms of the Heidegger approach. That's a good point about lobsters. Absolutely, absolutely. It's the same bloody circuitry, serotonergic circuitry. I mean, there's another circuit that lobsters use that we don't have that's based on octamine. I think that's the right word. But a lot of the way that lobsters maneuver within dominance hierarchies is the way we maneuver within dominance hierarchies. If you're an evolutionary thinker, you can't just push that away. And dominance hierarchies are, although you can think about them as a social construct, they're also a natural phenomena. So the dominance hierarchy is actually a major part of the environment to which we have adapted. So there's the dominance hierarchy. That's, we'll say, the social world for the sake of argument. There's the natural world. And there's the experiencing subject. Well, those are Heidegger's categories of being as well. And in some sense, what religious thinking seems to do is to continually posit those three things as interacting causally at the base of being. So... Mark that. And that's not material reality. There's a lot of things about being that we can't attribute simply to material reality. We may eventually be able to do that, but by that time, our notion of what constitutes material will be much different. Okay, so we can't deal with subjectivity within the confines of our materialist theories. And that's partly because those theories are predicated on the elimination of subjectivity as an a priori move, right? The whole point of objective science is to remove subjectivity. Okay, so then it gets removed, and well, you're surprised about it. It's like, well, no, you can't be surprised about it. You removed it right at the beginning. Now, that works for certain purposes. It works very well. But it has consequences, and some of those consequences, as far as I'm concerned, are serious enough to produce two forms of social and mental illness. And one of those would be the succumbing to the temptations of authoritarianism. And the other would be succumbing to the temptations of nihilism. Because there are logical consequences of the definition of subjectivity as non-real. And there, again, is Peterson saying what he keeps saying again and again and again. This is being. So it's constituted by the social world dominance hierarchy, you know, nuanced dominance at some point. But lobster, serotonin, social mechanism, older than trees, the natural world. Now, he uses the word natural there. We're going to get into that word a lot when we get into C.S. Lewis. The experiencing subject, I would say. And religious thinking posits these things as interacting causally at the base of being. And that's right. Well, what is real in age? Now, it's interesting. The dominance hierarchy is older than trees. What about the world of physics? Well, that's 16 billion years old. Well, what's before then? Well, now we're into mythology. Which world is most real to us? Remember, in some ways, these things are all tools. And then can we actually engage directly with the physical world apart from being? And this is where I get into the conversations I've had about, you know, just try doing science in the story sphere. Once human beings get a hold of, let's say, the physical world, we change it. And again, we're going to get into this a lot when we get into Lewis. Now, origin. This is where I started. I've got to keep my head on the time because I've got to go someplace. Back to origin. If you can't understand origin without understanding the Gnostics, without understanding Platonism, and in a sense without understanding pluralism or origins interpretation. Well, he had a non-literal interpretation. Well, why was that? Well, who was origin? Well, if there's a real fun book, 131 Christians Everyone Should Know, written by the current editor of Christianity Today, and wrote a fun chapter on origin. The first paragraph, a quote from origin. We who by our prayers destroy all demons. Well, right away, you know he's not a modernist. We who by our prayers destroy all demons which stir up wars, violate oaths, and disturb the peace, are of more help to the emperors than those who seem to be doing the fighting. Oh my goodness, who is this guy? What does he mean? Well, origin is much closer to principalities and powers. He's by no means a materialist. Is he doing allegorical interpretation? You bet he is. Augustine's going to do it too. This third century religious fanatic gave up his job, slept on the floor, ate no meat, drank no wine, fasted twice a week, wore no shoes, and reportedly castrated himself for the faith. He was the most prolific scholar of his age, with hundreds of works to his credit, a first-rate Christian philosopher, and a profound student of the Bible. He also became a heretic. Origin worked for 20 years on his Hexpla, a massive work of Old Testament analysis written to answer Jewish and Gnostic critics of Christianity. An examination of biblical text, it had six parallel columns, one in Hebrew and the other five in various Greek translations, including one he found at Jericho in a jar. It became an important step in the development of the Christian canon and scriptural translation, but unfortunately it was destroyed. So massive it was that scholars doubt anyone ever copied it entirely, and then it gets into some of what origin got into. But now, one of the things he did in terms of his biblical interpretation, the first Bible scholar analyzed the scriptures on three levels, the literal, the moral, and the allegorical. Why? As he put it, For just as man consists of body, soul, and spirit, so in the same way does the scripture. And Origin, in fact, preferred the allegorical not only because it allowed for a more spiritual interpretation, but many passages he found impossible to read literally. Now what man of intelligence will believe that the first and second and third day existed without the sun, moon, and the stars? In any event, Origin's method of interpretation became the standard in the Middle Ages. There you have it. Switch back to PowerPoint. So I quote the beginning, and if you really want to locate Origin, I've been lately going through a great course of series. I enjoy a lot of these. Philosophy and Religion of the West, Philip Carey teaches, I think, at Eastern College. And he's walking through the kind of where religion and philosophy meet in terms of the Judeo-Christian tradition, and it's well worth listening to. But now back to Peterson. It's clearly foundational for the producing Western civilization in terms of credibility, and so this is why Peterson is working through the Bible audibly, and he's basically, he's exploring the claim. Can this old book continue to be foundational for our civilization? And if so, on what terms? And he's got his own interesting scientific concordism. Now, concordism since the 19th century has been a popular thing, usually by creationists, and so there's been all kinds of theories that tries to say, take science over here and take the Bible over there and see if we can fit them together. And in interesting ways, Peterson is doing a similar thing. Snake scape human beings' vision, self-awareness, color vision, pattern recognition, Jungian dream manifesting in mythology. And people will say, well, why is Peterson important? Peterson is important because he is, in some ways, he's doing what fundamentalists do. We want to bring the Bible back into public life. But he's doing it through science, and he's doing it through Jung. This is a fascinating development. Now, applying the Bible. Now, remember, Peterson is a pragmatist. In other words, the truest manifestation of what you believe is in your action. And one of these days, I'm going to come back to the liar thing, and I'm going to come back to his church attendance, because we're going to have to talk about worship. Because worship, which is what happens in church, and prayer seem to be the craziest thing you can do in this era, because what does worship change anything? Well, what does Origen say? Well, to the emperor, he should be happy Christians are praying because the principalities and powers, the demons. Well, if Christians battle against the demons, and a lot of folks will hear this today and say, oh, man, Pentecostals, fundamentalists, lions and tigers and bears. Well, yeah, you know, Pireti, this present darkness. Yeah, this world is very strange, but what are we talking about? So then many will say, let's just be done with it and live in the material. We can't just do that either. And because Peterson's got a point with his sliding into tyranny, or sliding into nihilism. So Peterson wants to say the Bible offers wisdom, but to what degree does the Bible have authority? Because that really is the issues we're dealing with under the surface. And then what of the church? Again, this quote, which a lot of people have you picked up on, I got it through Andy Crouch from Os Guinness. Without individuals, nothing changes. Without institutions, none of those changes last. And in another video, I'm thinking of maybe a shorter one, because we have to talk about Jordan Peterson and institutions. Now, he's battling against institutions in kind of his Don Quixote way, and he's getting results, but all of these ideas Peterson is doing, if these don't get instantiated, right now he's got the makings of a movement, at some point you're going to have to talk institutions, if you want to continually engage these issues. I think Ewing is right. People don't have ideas, ideas have people. This connects up into principalities and powers. And I'll talk about that in some of my church work. But this is where all this stuff goes. And so, Biblical interpretation is a connective process. We saw Origen do it, and Origen was trying to deal with Greek philosophy and then the Bible, and he was a Christian, and he studied philosophy in order to try and put it together. And so his allegorical, moral, and historical interpretations, and that's not unlike, again, what became the dominant means of interpreting the Bible in the Middle Ages. Why did that stop after the Middle Ages? Again, we went through that story. It's the Reformation. We're looking for a common ground that can transcend church sectarianism. And so then we look outside of the Bible. But now we're back in the Bible. We're trying to bridge these cultural worlds, the social world, social hierarchy, which is better than dominance hierarchy because it includes competence and authority. Thank you, Jordan Peterson, you taught me that. Physical world, I like to use physics because that's the world that physics governs. It isn't just matter. I like to say matter and energy are related, equals MC squared, so on and so forth. Social world, the physical world, and subjective experience. And Peterson says, religious thinking posits these things at interacting causally at the base of being. So then my question is, are there more than three? Well, why were Jung's friends embarrassed by his talk about spirits? And why was Freud so unnerved by Jung's stories of the report from the bookshelf and the broken knife in the cabinet and the broken table? And I make reference to these in one of my past videos. Can non-physical things dictate the actions in the physical realm? And C.S. Lewis will basically say non-physical things dictate the actions in the physical realms all the time. Why? Because what moved my brain to pick up this book? Motivation. Oh my goodness. See, so Peterson is bringing such interesting things into the conversation. And that's why maybe the next video I'd see, see, I've got to do shorter videos because a bunch of y'all, understandably so, don't want to sit through an hour or two hours. Some of y'all have sitting through very long YouTube videos integrated into your world and you can listen to it in different ways. So I've got my shorter videos I want to keep doing. I've got my vlog I want to keep doing. I've got the biblical series I want to keep doing. And I want to start with the C.S. Lewis conversation. And I want to do a conversation with Dallas Willard. So the problem with this project is it just keeps getting bigger, but it keeps getting more fun. So I'm having a ball. I hope you're enjoying this. Obviously I probably hear more from the people who are appreciating it from the people who aren't because quite reasonably you just click off and you go to someplace else. But again, I started this project because I said I want to do this thing because I have to talk through this stuff. And I need the discipline of having to produce videos and talk to y'all to keep working through this stuff. And I found Peterson so helpful in so many levels of piecing things together both in terms of the biblical world, in terms of social and political world. And I've stayed away from the politics stuff for the most part. There are reasons for that. But who knows if I'll get into that. But anyway, so thanks for watching. This was another big one. I hope it was helpful. Leave a comment in the section. I haven't had a chance to read the comments from the last video I've been making. Just a matter of being a human being limited by time and space. But I hope it's good for you because it's been good for me. So thanks for watching.