https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3bQBHyNsKLE

 Okay, we did three, two half hour, one forty-five minute, and we're continuing on through biblical series four. A, it's not that easy to dispense with, and B, the other thing is you dispense with it at your peril, because what I have seen as well is that the people that I've seen who've been really hurt have been hurt mostly by deceit. And that's also worth thinking about, that you know, you get walloped by life, there's no doubt about that, absolutely no doubt about that. But I've thought for a long time that maybe people can handle earthquakes and cancer and even death maybe, but they can't handle betrayal and they can't handle deception. They can't handle having the rug pulled out from underneath them by people that they love and trust. That just does them in. You know, it makes them ill, but it hurts them, you know, psychophysiologically, it damages them, but more than that it makes them cynical and bitter and vicious and resentful. In other words, the hurting that it does in them, hurting your body is one thing, hurting the core of who you are makes them bitter, cynical, resentful. That's even worse. So which layer, the physical layer, which layer is really the foundational layer? And then they also start to act all that out in the world and that makes it worse. So you know, the story starts, God uses the spoken truth to create being that is good. And then the cataclysm occurs and then human beings spend untold millennia trying to sort out exactly what to do about the fact that they've become self-conscious. And you know, by the way, we have, right? We are in fact self-conscious. No other animal has that distinction. Now you'll read that chimpanzees can, for example, if you put lipstick on a chimpanzee, it's kind of a strange thing to do. Well, I won't pursue that. The chimpanzee will wipe off the lipstick if you show it a mirror. And dolphins seem to be able to recognize themselves in mirrors. And there is, so there is the glimmerings of self-conscious recognition in other animals. But to put that in the same conceptual category as human self-consciousness is, to my way of thinking, is to put that in the same way that human beings are. It's, well, it's uninformed to say the least, but I also think that it's motivated. It's motivated by a kind of anti-humanistic underlying, an underlying motivation. Because our self-consciousness is so incredibly developed compared to that that they're hardly in the same conceptual universe. It's like comparing the alarm cries of vervet monkeys when they see a predator to the language of human beings. It's like, yeah, yeah, there's some similarities, man. There are utterances, and there are utterances with meaning, but they're not language. And the self-consciousness of animals is proto-self-consciousness, and it's only there in a very small number of animals. And it's nothing like ours. They're not aware of the future like we are. They're not aware of their boundaries in space and time. And that's the critical thing, and most particularly time. Human beings discovered time. And when we discovered time, we discovered the end of each of our being, and that made all the difference. And that's what the story of Adam and Eve is about. So Genesis 1 is derived from the priestly source where God is known as Elohim or El Shaddai. And there's God in the singular, and there's gods in the plural, and I suppose that's because it seems that if you analyze the history of the development of monotheistic ideas, that monotheism emerges out of a plurality of gods. And as I mentioned, I think it's because the gods represent fundamental forces at minimum, and those fundamental forces have to be hierarchically organized with something absolute at the top, because otherwise they do nothing but war, right? You have to organize your values hierarchically, or you stay confused. And that's true if you're an individual, and it's true if you're a state. If you don't know what the next thing you should do is, then there's 50 things you should do, and then how are you going to do any of them? You can't. You have to prioritize. Something has to be above something else. It has to be arranged in a hierarchy for it not to be chaotic. And so there's some principle at the top of the hierarchy, and maybe the organization of the gods over time. That's the battle of gods that Mircea Eliade had talked about, and if you're interested in that, you could read A History of Religious Ideas, which I would really recommend. It's a three-volume book. It's actually quite a straightforward read as far as these things go, and Eliade does a very nice job of describing how and even why polytheism tends towards monotheism. Even in polytheistic cultures, there's a strong tendency for the gods to organize themselves in the hierarchy with one god at the top. In a monotheistic culture, in some sense, all the other gods just disappear across time, and there's nothing left but the top god. But even in a polytheistic society, there's a hierarchy of power among the gods. And if, I don't remember which week it was, but in my Ezekiel class, this conversation, which I really wish I could have found then, was amazing because when, for example, the Babylonians destroy, they kick Judea's little butt, they take exiles up, and Ezekiel's part of those exiles. And then the Lord basically tells Ezekiel that Babylon is going to come down and they're going to destroy Jerusalem, and they're going to destroy the temple, which if you have any, if you thought the fall of the World Trade Center and the attack on the Pentagon was dramatic for an American, that's just a taste of what the destruction of the temple was for the people of Judah in terms of their being, in terms of their entire life. They're a worldview. And you would expect in that situation that the Jews, the people of Judea, the southern kingdom, would, along with everyone else, say, okay, well, Marduk and the gods of Babylon are clearly superior to the gods of us, and therefore, we will incorporate our gods into their gods, and we'll give deference to the public god. This is what the book of Daniel is about. We'll give deference to this public god, but maybe we'll worship our own tribal ancestral gods at home, blah, blah, blah. The word of the Lord comes to Ezekiel, and in a sense, the Lord says, Babylon is my tool. What? You know, the gods are supposed to have these proxies. Babylon is my tool. What do you mean Babylon is your tool? And then Ezekiel is out by this drainage canal outside of Babylon in his refugee camp, and who pulls up? But the Lord and his chariot, and this vision in Ezekiel of the wheels, and it's like, well, what's going on? Well, what happens is that the prophetic word transcends this pattern of God hierarchy, and the Lord puts himself right at the top and says, I destroyed Jerusalem. I destroyed my own temple, and it's just like, but here's the crazy thing. You might think, oh, you know, some nutty Hebrew prophet whose mental health was suspect. If you read the book of Ezekiel, there are signs there that have caused some commentators to say, well, maybe he was schizophrenic or had mental health issues. Comes up with the idea that the God of the Hebrews is actually running the whole show and running Babylon, and he can employ Babylon and Assyria to punish his disobedient and adulterous people. And wow, isn't that a neat idea, but you'd better listen to Peterson and say, no, that's an incredible idea because here's the thing. We have churches all over the city of Sacramento and all over North America and all over the world, not to Marduk, but to the Lord. Well, what does that mean? Well, that means that that idea transformed the world. Well, how powerful are ideas? Well, you know, I think Ewing has a point. Ideas have people. People don't have ideas. Well, this idea owned the world. And people believed it. Well, why did they believe it? Well, you know, and these this insignificant tribe of people who, you know, they had, yeah, one some day in the sun under under David and Solomon and a few, you know, a few glory times after that, but nothing insignificant to that. Their story wins out over everyone else's story. Why? Because of because of power, because because the winners of history wrote the rules. If the winners of history wrote the rules, you know, we'd be worshiping Marduk, not the Lord. So what does that mean? And yeah, what does it mean? The first story is newer than the second one. So the story I'm going to tell you today is actually older than the one I already told you, even though their order was flipped by the redactor who's the hypothetical person or persons who edited these stories together. We don't know exactly why he or the committee or what I suspect it was a single person, but who knows? We don't know why the stories were edited together in the order that they were edited together. But we could infer. I mean, they were edited together in that order because the editor thought they made sense that way, because that's what an editor does, right? An editor tends to take diverse ideas. And then usually what happens in terms of biblical studies is you ask, what sense do they make in the order that they're in? And then to organize them in some manner that makes sense. And part of the manner that makes sense is that you can tell them to people and the people stay interested and you can tell them to people and people remember them. That's one of the ways you can tell if you've got an argument right, because it's communicable and understandable and memorable. And so this person was, let's say, motivated by intuition to organize the stories in this particular manner. So the second, the Yahuast strand contains the stories, the classic stories in the Pentateuch. That's five books, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, which we'll try to get through perhaps in these twelve lectures. It's strongly anthropomorphic, so the God in the Yahuast account is for all intents and purposes a sort of meta-person. And I dealt with that a little bit last week because people tend to think of that as unsophisticated. But when you think that the mind, the ground of consciousness is the most complex thing that we know of, then it's not so unsophisticated to assume that the most complex thing that there might be is like that, or at least it's as good as we can do with our imaginations. And so I don't think it's so unsophisticated. It's also the case, and this is practically speaking, is that it is not at all unreasonable to think of God as the God of the universe. And this is practically speaking, is that it is not at all unreasonable to think of God the Father as the Spirit that arises from the crowd that exists into the future. And that's, we talked about that in relationship to the idea of sacrifice, at least a little bit, or we're going to. And I don't know what he means by that, but I suspect he got it from Jung. You make sacrifices in the present so that the future is happy with you. And the question is, what is that future that would be happy with you? And the answer to that is, it's the spirit of humanity. That's who you're negotiating with, because you make the assumption that if you forego impulsive pleasure and get your medical degree, that when you're done in ten years and you're a physician, humanity as such will honor your sacrifice and commitment and open the doors to you. So you're treating the future as if it's a single being, and you're also treating it as if it's something like a compassionate judge. You're acting that out. And maybe we had to imagine God in that form before we could understand, once we started to understand that there was a future, perhaps we had to imagine God in that form in order to concretize something that we could bargain with so that we could figure out how to use sacrifice to figure out how to guide ourselves into the future. Because a sacrifice is a contract with the future, but it's not a contract with any particular person. It's a contract with the spirit of humanity as such. It's something like that. And that's a, I'm going to have to think a lot more about that idea. And again, this gets into Peterson's backstory for the Bible and how he understands it to be. It's an interesting point that he makes. I'm not quite sure what I think about it yet. And so when you think about it that way, that should make you faint with amazement because that is such a bloody amazing idea to come up with that idea that you can bargain with the future. That is some idea, man. And again, his bargain with the future idea, I think is really interesting and something that I had never thought of. But again, here back in terms of the premise where I began the biblical series for commentary, you know, why is the effect Peterson is having on people that they want to learn more of the Bible? Because Peterson is saying things like the Bible is full of brilliance. And instead of hearing things like, well, the Bible is an old book and we all know that older cell phones are not as good as newer cell phones. And therefore, you know, old history, old textbooks aren't as full of newer information is always better than older information. It's this chronological snobbery that C.S. Lewis talks about. And here Peterson is a sense upending this and saying there is incredible brilliance in the Bible that we are simply not taking stock of. That's like the major idea of humankind. We suffer. What do we do about it? We figured out how to bargain with the future and we minimized suffering in that manner. And we would also have to point out that implied in that is that we know we will suffer in the future. And in a sense, what occupies local television and news are all stories about the future. And if you read, one of the things on my list is I want to reread Charles Taylor's A Secular Age and I want to read more of Charles Taylor's books. Charles Taylor is a phenomenal philosopher who writes excruciatingly long books. But this orientation towards the future, Taylor says, is a product of this not a simple subtraction story, which is what Taylor is trying to argue against, but is what is created by our secular age and some of the steps that we have made on the way to this. And so as I, you know, in the process of doing these videos, I've been reviewing a lot of my philosophy. You know, there's at some point I want to, again, as I said before, I want to talk a bit about more Descartes and Locke, because the conversation that we're having right now is nested in that. So we're going to have to talk to Hume and we're going to have to talk to C.S. Lewis in Miracles. Even if we don't agree with what everyone says along the way, it's important to understand where we're located along the way. Like no other animal does that either. You know, like lions, they just eat everything. I think a wolf can eat 40 pounds of meat in a single sitting, right? It's like there's some meat, eat it. It's not like save some mammoth for tomorrow. That's not a wolf thing, man. That's a human thing. And that might mean you have to be hungry today. Or maybe you're a farmer, you know, several thousand years ago, six thousand years ago or so, when agriculture first got going and you're starving to death, waiting for the spring planting. And you think we bloody well better not eat those seeds, right? And that's really something to be able to control yourself, to make the future real, to put off what you could use today and not just in some impulsive manner. Man, maybe your kids are starving to death. You think we are not touching the seeds that we need for the future. And for human beings to have discovered that and then to also have figured out that we could bargain with the future, it's like, man, that's something. And I think that the stories that are laid out in this book actually describe, at least in part, the process by which that occurred. And this, I mean, what he says right there is so important and is so indicative of his project. And we all get this and act this out. Well, actually, as Americans, we're getting it less and less and acting it out less and less often. But how did we get this way? And so Peterson is saying, well, these stories are a record of how we got this way. It's not the kind of chronological snobbery that we say, oh, gosh, can you imagine animal sacrifice? How primitive. And Peterson is saying, no, wait a minute. You practice sacrifice when you go to school and go to bed on time and get up in the morning and go to work and sacrifice for your family and kids. You practice sacrifice even if you're not killing an animal in your backyard and putting it on the fire, although you practice sacrifice in order to take a dead animal and put it on a barbecue and then we eat it. I mean, let's not be too full of ourselves here. The Yalwas stories begin with Genesis 2-4. This is the account of the heavens and the earth when, so there's two real creations. And this is the account I was going to pull up a commentary, but that's the Toledote structure and it structures a lot of Genesis. And the scholars aren't really exactly sure what these are the generations. These are the histories. This is and it's always connected with a name. And that kind of this, I mean, the book of Genesis is highly structured debates, scholarly debates about its structure and the meaning of its structure continue to endure. And again, if you want to if you want to get into the structure of biblical narrative, read Robert Alter. And he he basically was the founding father of an entire school of biblical interpretation. It's waning now to some degree, because after Alter wrote his book, everybody was finding kiastic structures and structures all over the place. And at some point you have to say, we're probably imposing some of these onto the text. But it's it's it's pretty amazing stuff. Stories at the beginning, the newer one, which is the first one and the older one, which is the second one. And the older one begins in Chapter two. And that's the story that we're going to that we are getting into now. Adam and Eve are in that. Canaan, Abel, Noah, the Tower of Babel. In the Alwist strand, Exodus numbers along and there's some of the priestly version in there, too, as well as the Ten Commandments. There's some lovely representations of of paradise. This is a. Garden of earthly delights. What's his name? Say that. Yes, a crazy coming few. How he didn't get burnt at the stake is absolutely beyond me. Some of you know about Salvador Dali. I suppose most of you do. I mean, Dali's a piker compared to Hieronymus Bosch, man. You could spend because there's three pieces of this particular painting. You could spend a very. Bizarre and surreal month looking at that painting. I don't know what it was with Bosch, but he was some sort of creature that only popped up once and probably. And I often think if I if I if I were to go back to college again and get a undergraduate degree, I'd want to get a degree in art history because, boy, there's there's a lot there. And I didn't I didn't spend any time. Didn't spend any time in my undergraduate looking for art history. And now I go to a place like the Getty down in Southern California. I'm just I'm just amazed at that the stuff for the best. And so there's been very many representations of paradise. I mean, God only knows what that is. It's like. I could probably guess, but I won't. And then look, I mean, that's that's that's the lion lying down with the lamb. Right. So that's this idea that's it's maybe projected back in time that there was a time or maybe will be a time when when the horrors of life are no longer necessary for life itself to exist. Right. And, you know, I think Peterson, if you buy into his ontology to a degree, you can understand without self-consciousness what paradise was. And, you know, I've lectured a friend of mine often has me come and talk about the Bible and Christianity and in a secular classroom environment. And, you know, when you read and so I've talked through this story in Genesis too many, many times. When you read the story, you get the sense of the innocence of the man and the woman. And they're there, you know, it's childlike, they're naked and Peterson will get into to get into some of these things. And so, you know, I probably wouldn't have had so much respect for his understandings of self-consciousness if in fact I hadn't been reading and rereading and rereading and rereading Genesis two and three over and over and over again. And each time reading it understanding at a deeper level what the story is saying about this prelapsarian couple. And they are there, they're like children, they're innocent. And what it means to realize that you're naked. I mean, like Peterson said earlier, this story is so packed. It is each you can just keep studying and see more and more and and not just in the English language, but in Hebrew. And, you know, if you look up on my shelf, my commentary section is almost an entire shelf and on Genesis alone because, man, and there's a reason he spent 15 lectures and spent it all on Genesis. Because and even when he knew he wanted to get done, he had to zip over some things because you could spend a lifetime just studying the book of Genesis and you won't get bored. You won't you won't get to the bottom of it. The book is that good. And the horrors of life are, of course, that everything eats everything else and that everything dies and that everything's born and that the whole bloody place is a charnel house. And it's it's a catastrophe from beginning to end. And this is this is the vision of it being other than that. And, you know, there's a strong idea. This was also implicit in the alchemical ideas. And I think it's also implicit in the scientific revolution that human beings can interact with reality in such a way so that the tragic and evil elements of it can be mitigated. And so that we can move somewhat closer to a state that might be characterized. Well, that's obviously imagistic, but it might be characterized by something like that, where we have the benefits of actual existence without all of the catastrophe that seems to go along with it. And Carl Jung, when he wrote about the emergence of alchemy or the emergence of science from alchemy, he thought of science as being motivated by a dream. Because for Jung, dream was the dream was the manifestation of the instincts. It was the boundary between the instincts and thinking. He said, well, science is nested inside a dream. And the dream is that if we investigated the structures of material reality with sufficient attention and truth, that we could then learn enough about material reality to alleviate suffering, right? To produce the philosopher's stone to make everybody wealthy, to make everybody healthy, to make everyone live as long as they wanted to live, or perhaps forever. That that's the goal, to alleviate the catastrophe of existence. And that that idea, the idea that mysteries, the solution to the mysteries of life that might enable us to develop such a substance, or let's say a multitude of substances, provided the motive force for the development of science. And Jung traced that, the development of that motive force, really over a thousand years. And if you're interested in reading his books on alchemy, which are extraordinarily difficult, and that's really saying something about Jung, because all of his books are difficult. And then the books on alchemy, they kind of take a quantum leap. That's actually a very small leap, so I shouldn't say that. They take a massive leap into a whole different dimension of complexity. But that's what he was trying to get at. He went back into the alchemical texts and interpreted them as if they were the dream on which science was founded. And Newton was an alchemist, by the way. I mean, Jung's hypotheses are certainly well supported by the historical facts. Science did emerge out of alchemy. The question is, what were the alchemists up to? And they were trying to produce the philosopher's stone, and that was the universal medicament for mankind's pathology. And this, I think, is something... When Peter talks this way, people criticize him, but I think... Well, let's look at our own biases. Where did science arise from? Look at people... Newton's Newtonian mechanics. We look at it and every physics student in the world learns Newtonian mechanics. But Newton's religion, which he wrote a ton about... Well, what do you think of that? Science coming out of alchemy. You see, C.S. Lewis, again, who I think for me is one of my favorite conversation partners when it comes to Peterson, and I think will be for Jung, too, is helpful here because C.S. Lewis helps understand what magic is, and in a sense, where magic comes from. And it's interesting how magic plays a role in Lewis and then Tolkien and obviously later in Harry Potter. And what is magic? What are we trying to do? You know, if you go back in my sermons, you know, there was a while when I would talk about the fact, just try to expose the fact that we live in... Part of how we live in this world is that we imagine if we had more power and money and time, we could fix everything. That is such a biased, shallow idea because we're not using our power, money and time to fix things now. How are we using our power, money and time? And so often it's our fixes that poison the world. You look at right now, there was, I thought, the Rubin Report that had the Weinstein brothers and Brett Weinstein talking about global warming. You know, there's a fairly simple chemical reaction that we can look at and say, yeah, the higher levels of these greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and then in the oceans, you know, and then the heating up, you know, if that is true, and I think there's good reason to believe it is true. Well, we all know this. This is simple chemistry. And well, why did we get into burning hydrocarbons? Well, because we decimated the whales and, you know, whale oil is getting expensive. So kerosene, well, we could use kerosene and then my goodness, we can use this for all kinds of things. And my goodness, we can have horseless carriages that won't have all kinds of horse crap all over the road and on and on and on we go. And each time we create something new, we don't realize what we're creating. And one of my favorite parts in one of Peterson's courses is when he talks about the automobile. Well, what is the automobile? What's a way to get from point A to point B? Or is it a thing that reorganizes all of human life and and adjusts the adjust the chemical composition of our atmosphere and our oceans? So how good are we at Masters of the Universe and that that Dave Rubin report with the conversation between the Weinstein brothers? That was that was a scary one. And it's sober. And one of the things again, C.S. Lewis is such a good companion on this, because if you look up the C.S. Lewis doodle about the how what does it mean to live in an atomic age and C.S. Lewis just calls our bluff and says, well, what kind of age did you think we were living in? What kind of world did you think we were living in? Just because now we have the power to blow up the world. Does that mean that somehow you didn't believe that the world wasn't going to end? I mean, everybody everybody knows that the world is going to end. And if if being is 100 percent. If being is dependent, and this is, I think, where Peterson and the and some of the the atheist materialists, you know, are in a sense aligned. Peterson's afraid to walk away from them. If being is dependent on the consciousness of myself. There's kind of an implicit solipsism in that philosophical position. But if being is is is dependent upon the consciousness of myself. Well, being ends when they put me in the grave. And is there any really real question that I'm going to die? Oh, but then we're going to keep people alive. Oh, yeah, right. Really? How's that going to go? And what exactly are you going to keep that alive? And will that be you? And again, both in that Rubin report, they had a very interesting conversation. Or who was who was talking? No, that was Peterson and Shermer. That was that was on Peterson's channel. Another really interesting conversation again. I mean, all of this for me is is just plain fun. And maybe I should never write to be having so much fun. I felt that what had happened was that Christianity had promised that the cessation of suffering promised it for a thousand years. And yet suffering went on unabated. And at the same time, Christianity had attempted to really put emphasis on spiritual development, let's say, at the expense of material development. Right. Thank you. And I think that is something that comes up. But I don't know if that's actually fair or true, because Christianity put a tremendous amount in terms of in terms of helping reduce human suffering. And if that again, listen to Peter Creaf's The Dark Side, which I played in a previous video, Christianity, you know, it was in it was out of the Christian West that hospitals came. It was out of the Christian West that that medicine comes. So, you know, people say, you know, Christians aren't aren't invested in this world. I think it's a little bit later when we get into dispensational theology. And and when the traditional the traditional beliefs of Orthodox Catholic Lutheran Calvinist, you know, even, you know, Anabaptists can get a little gnostic. You know, it's not not to quite a bit later that that certain forms of American evangelicalism following dispensationalism tends to dismiss the goodness of creation that is testified to in the beginning of Genesis. Of material development as something akin to a sin, trying to get a control of impulsivity and all the things that went along with a too embodied existence. There was a reason for it. But that by about a thousand A.D., the European mind, somewhat educated by that point, somewhat able to concentrate on a single point, perhaps because of a very long history of intense religious training, turned its dream to the idea of a Christian. Dream to the unexplored material world and thought, well, you know, the spiritual redemption that we've been seeking didn't appear to produce the result that was promised or intended. And so maybe there's another place that we should look. And that was in the damned material world. Right. Which, which, which was supposed to be at least according to. And I mentioned before, Philip carries philosophy and religion in the West. I'll probably use some of that when I talk about Descartes and Locke and Hume. This, this, this progression in philosophy is an important piece of the conversation that Peterson, I don't know, is, is, is giving sufficient treatment to in that little narrative he just gave. Some elements of classic thinking, nothing but the creation of the devil. So, but the three point I'm making is that, you know, it's very difficult to underestimate the amount of human motivation that's embedded in the attempt to alleviate suffering, to eradicate disease, to help people live a healthy, healthy life. And that's the disease, obviously, but to live a long life as well and to make things as peaceful as possible. I mean, you can be cynical about people and you can talk about them as motivated by power and being corrupt and all of those things. And all of those things are true, but you shouldn't throw away the baby with the bathwater because we have been striving for a very long time to set things right. And we've done actually not too bad a job of it for half starving, crazy insect ridden chimpanzees with life spans of 50 to 70 years. So, you know, we could deserve a bit of sympathy for our position as far as I'm concerned. So. And that's perhaps a, that's perhaps a good place to stop. And because I'm trying to keep these to 30 minutes, at least in terms of this format. And maybe this will be the last one I do right now. I just did a whole bunch in a row. I have a little bit extra time this week because I have a pulpit exchange with a friend. And so I'll be preaching at City Life instead of here at Living Stones this week. And, you know, there's some reasons why we're doing that. It gives me a little bit of extra time. And so I'm trying out this format again in terms of in terms of the commentary series on Peterson. And let me know what you think. Is this does this format work for you? Does this not work for you? I've got some conversations that I'm planned that I'm planning with some interesting people and I don't have the I don't have the status that Peterson has. So, you know, I'm not going to have actually if I worked at it, I could probably get some people that some of you might know. But but for me, part of this involves the fun of this for me is meeting real people because truth is stranger than fiction. And and if you if you meet me, I'll one way or another try and get your story out of you because I find human stories so interesting. And I find people fascinating and the diversity that the tragedy, the joy of human life is is just amazing. And so I love this has just been a fun project for me from start to finish. Fun in terms of what I can learn, fun in terms of playing with YouTube, fun in terms of meeting new people. So, you know, at this point, I think of today I've got about thirty five hundred subscribers. That's I haven't talked about this in a while. You know, the rate of when I first started doing this, the the rate of change was really fast. And that made me nervous. Well, it's kind of slowed down. And so it's a little easier to keep up with comments and to keep up with the emails and to not have this overthrow the work that I'm paid to do in my church and my day job. Again, the church has been supportive of this effort. So if this format works for you, let me know. I probably won't have a rough draft to Sunday's sermon this week on my channel. But, you know, who knows? I've got a bunch of new videos in mind. We do have to start just about ready to start the C.S. Lewis Miracle Series. Who knows how long that will take. But thanks for watching. Leave a comment and let me know.