https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pQhmNOqxs7o

 Hi, this is Paul and today I'm going to go back to a format that I did very early on when I started these videos because I'm going to do my commentary series and I'm up to Biblical Series 4. And in this video we're going to talk a little bit about how Peterson lends credibility to the Bible with his audience. Now, if you followed some of my commentaries, I've touched on elements of Biblical Series 1, 2, and 3, one where he introduces the idea of God. And at some point I'm going to do a much bigger video on Jordan Peterson's God. The second one we talked about chaos and order and I talked a lot about the temple. In the third one, I've talked a little bit about origin and some other elements that touch on Peterson's work. In the third one, Peterson actually doesn't talk much about the Bible. He mostly talks about Babylonian mythology, Marduk, and some of that material. And I dabbled on, I touched on some of that when I talked about John Walton and the temple, so I didn't really feel the need to go over that. But now I've been listening to Peterson and digesting this and working on this stuff hard since I've been doing the videos. And I think I've learned a lot about Peterson. I've been having very interesting email correspondence with a number of you, new friends on Facebook and such. And so this has been really a fascinating journey for me into this man and what's happening in his wake. And so I thought in this fourth one, I would let the video run and I would pop in and out with some commentary. And depending on how long it goes, I might do some more in-depth talking about the different elements of biblical interpretation that there are. And so let's get the video rolling and see where this goes. This is biblical series four, where he's going to, after much promising, after one, two, and three, where he didn't get very far in the Bible at all, he's going to start getting into these stories. The stories that I'm going to tell you tonight, I've been thinking about, well, like the ones last week for that matter, for a very long period of time. But I think these even longer. And one of the things that I just do not understand, I cannot fathom this. I cannot understand how there can be so much information in such tiny little stories, especially the story of Cain and Abel, that story just every time I read it, it just flattens me because it. Now, let me jump in here because so again, how I got into this project was when I first found Peterson. Oh, here's a guy who doesn't want to use compelled speech. So here's a guy who is kind of calmly dealing with this mob. And then here's a guy who's giving these rambling biblical lectures, selling out a concert hall. People are coming from all over the world to listen to him and watch him ramble on YouTube for hours on end about stuff he finds in the Bible, mostly using tools that you can find in public domain commentaries on the Internet. I thought, oh, I got to check out what's going on with this guy. And then as I'm getting into the comments section, finding more and more people who are saying, I've been listening to Jordan Peterson and I'm interested in Christianity and I'm interested in the Bible. And it's like, OK, well, what's this about? Well, if you notice right away, he speaks, he has a great deal of respect about the Bible. He's fascinated by the Bible. And I think part of what happened is that people are seeing this and they're seeing obviously a very charismatic man, a very well-educated man, a very articulate man, a very learned man. And so much of what this Jungian cloud of witnesses that does in us is picks up these kinds of signals. And again, you can use Jonathan Hite's image of the rider and the elephant, or you can, you know, this image that I picked up from Peterson of all these sub personalities and all these little micro Paul Vanderklees that are living in my head while my conscious self is paying attention to whatever is my conscious self is interested in. A lot of the other selves in my mind are taking in the information and making decisions behind the scenes. And so I think a lot of people are watching Peterson, not just in terms of what he is saying, per se, but in terms of how he himself in this view of YouTube. Now, again, remember, Neil Postman is one of my companions. He, in a sense, is a little guy back in my head when I watch this stuff and I say, well, why is Peterson having the dramatic impact he is having on YouTube with respect to getting people interested in the Bible? Well, listen to how he talks about the Bible. Now, if I as a preacher come to your house and say, oh, the Bible is the word of God, nothing. You're not going to pay any attention to that because, well, of course you have to say that because you're a preacher. You're getting paid for saying that. You're part of a religious community who believe this stuff and I don't identify with that community or I've had bad experiences with that community before, so I reject those kinds of things. Now, so then you have all these tribal motivations going on. But Peterson is cutting against the tribes because he's a secular, he's a secular professor of psychology in the University of Toronto and he's a public intellectual and he's saying things about the Bible and you're going to hear him say a lot more things about the Bible like this during this video where he's lauding the Bible and speaking its praises, but not just saying, oh, the Bible is wonderful, I love it, but saying there's things in the Bible that really impress me and one of the things here, how the Bible can communicate so much in so little space. That reminds me very much of an author that I've mentioned before, Robert Alter. Robert Alter is a Jewish scholar, Berkeley right down the road from me. These are, if you want to look for a reader of the Old Testament who really notes how to read a text, again, he's not a Christian, he's a Jewish scholar, read Robert Alter. Phenomenal, phenomenal reader of the text. And so, you know, and Peterson's point, which is Alter's point, that a while ago a number of people imagined that, well, the Bible was just kind of a shoddy redaction of a bunch of ancient things and that's why there's all this kind of crazy repetition and all these things going on in the Bible. And Alter, with his work, really opened the eyes of a lot of people, including a Protestant like myself, that said, no, the Bible is this masterpiece of literature. We just don't have the cultural eyes to see it. And so, here Peterson, as a psychologist, is reading the Bible in his own particular way and he's saying, these stories have packed so much in there, they're so concentrated. And then you add to that Peterson's backstory of the Bible where he says, you know, generation after generation, thousands and thousands of years of retelling these stories have worked these stories down to their kernel. They are compressed and tight and so absolutely potent and powerful that to read them just, you know, expands your mind. And then suddenly, the Bible, which has been dismissed usually by people who don't read it or people who don't know anything about the, oh, the Bible are these old archaic fairy tales and Peterson would say, yes, fairy tales. Fairy tales are not what you imagine them to be. Now, Tolkien and others have revived this tradition, but this is what's going on. And so, I think our Jungian cloud of witnesses watches Peterson, watch the Bible, and in the back of our minds, people are saying, well, there must be something there because this man that I esteem, this man that impresses me, this man who seems to have something going on, he reads this book, therefore I should read this book. This is a dynamic of sociology of knowledge. And so, even before Peterson gets around to saying much of anything about the Bible in his videos, by the time he's talking about it here, he is already signaling to the little people in the back of your head, yeah, I know it sounds a little crazy, but they're there. The little people, they're not real full people, they're just kind of little half people. The little people in the back of your head that, you know, this guy who you esteem, this guy who you admire likes the Bible. Maybe you should read it too. I think this is a big part of what's happening. Okay, back to Peterson. It's only like a paragraph long. There's just nothing to it, you know, and I think about it and I think about it and I think about it and I think about it. And every time I think about it, another layer comes out from underneath it and then another layer comes out from underneath it. I can't figure that out. You know, the rational approach that I've been describing to you is predicated on the idea that these stories have somehow encapsulated wisdom that we generated interpersonally and behaviorally and then an image. Now, the rational approach. One of the people that I've been in dialogue with offline made a comment to me about, you know, it's good that you're watching Peterson's use of language because in some senses he has his own language and uses words in his own way. And if you really want to understand him, it's important to understand how he uses that word consistently because just as he tells us again and again, he speaks very carefully. He chooses his words intentionally while he's choosing his word intentionally and especially a word like rational, which is so laden philosophically. Well, which rational? So what does Peterson mean by his rational treatment of the Bible? I would say in this sense, his use of the word is almost secular. Now, there's another laden word and this gets into Peterson's entire worldview, which is something that we've obviously been working to unpack bit by bit as we go. And, you know, sometimes people say, well, can you make a shorter video? Well, probably not yet. I probably can't make a shorter video until I'm sufficiently convinced that my view of him is fair and accurate and he's a pretty complex person. So I'm taking my time figuring him out. Now, a lot of you, we all have to filter where we're going to spend our time. So a lot of you listen to him and say, yep, no, he's not worth my attention. Others say, yes, he is worth my attention. Okay, well, I'm in the middle and I'm in the process of figuring out is he worth my attention? So he says, our rational, he's taking a trip rationally through the Bible. And in that sense, rational almost means not religious. And again, religious is another huge laden word. But he's trying to approach the Bible in a way that non-religious people can understand and respect and find profitable. That is a big deal and that is a very helpful thing. And so I'm glad he's approaching it this way. But again, pay attention to what he means by rational. And the way to do this is to kind of figure out how he uses that word in other contexts. Over very vast stretches of time and then condensed it into very, very dense, articulated words that are then further refined by the act of being. What he's giving right here now is his backstory about how the Bible gets developed. And actually, he repeats this quite often. And you'll hear him say it. And because it's so new to us, many of us just kind of mentally skip over this part. But if you listen to him repeatedly, pretty soon you begin to say, okay, I understand where you believe the Bible comes from. And it's a very different story than, let's say, someone who is a supernaturalist that says, well, the Bible is revelation. And then where we get into what supernatural means now, supernaturalism means now and why the traditional Christian belief in organic inspiration has come to really fall on hard times when Mormons and Muslims in their religious text very much agree with the Bible. And we all have this divine revelation means God turns a light on and kind of like Neo gets downloaded in the back of my head. That's not the Christian, the traditional Christian conception of inscripturation. Okay, but what Peterson is talking, laying out now is how these stories emerged and their origin story and our modernist historical milieu is a story that is necessary for credibility, which is, again, why this is getting into the purpose of this video, why Peterson is communicating to his listeners a belief in the Bible. Apart from say many what many supernaturalist Christians have been raised in and also different from what many converts have taken to believe it is remembered and transmitted and remembered and transmitted, remembered and transmitted over vast stretches of time. And that's a pretty good argument. I'm willing to, I'm willing to go with it, but it still never ceases to amaze me how much information such tiny little passages can can contain. So, we'll take that apart today. I think it's especially true with the story of Cain and Abel because it works on the individual level and it works on the familial level and it works on the political level and it works at the level of warfare and it works at the level of economics and it's, that's a lot for a little tiny one paragraph story to cover, man. Now you know you can. Now, again, I think this is why a lot of religious people are listening to Peterson because listen to what he just did with with talking about the Bible he he said that this little this little story in one paragraph works in terms of, you know, my economic life in terms of my relational life in terms of my interpersonal life and it works. And again this is something that I've learned from Peterson, I, I was mentioning I was mentioning to someone online to how you know pastors are we're thieves. I'm, you know, I ripped Peterson off all the time. And why do I rip Peterson off I take his ideas I take his ideas and I run with them. Now that horrifies some of you, but I think you've got a rather low resolution view of what ideas are and how creation works. But again, so for Peterson this little this little this little paragraph let's say the story of Cain and Abel is so true. It is true and it's useful in my relationships it's useful in understanding economics it's useful in understanding politics it's useful in understanding history it's useful at all these different layers. Well what is, well why would something be true like this that's useful at all these different layers and what's language that we could use of this? Well that language isn't far from what Christians mean when they say this is the word of God. What do you mean by that? Well what do you mean by this is the word of God? Some people have backstories of, of revelation and that God parts the clouds and down this information comes into a prophet's head and he writes automatically. No that's again the majority of Christian believers do not believe that's how the Bible happened. And that is important for thinking about how to interpret the Bible and what the Bible is and later when we talk about grammatical historical interpretation. What we mean by the word of God is that this stuff in this book as C.S. Lewis says you know kind of turns the light on in this world. I understand my life better because of the story of Cain and Abel. Now someone might say well how would the story, some ancient story that whose historicity would, would be impossible to prove how would this ancient story turn the light on for you in your world? Well it helps me understand my relationship with siblings. I don't have any brothers I have sisters. But it helps me understand, it helps me understand and Peterson's going to go into this. It helps me understand so many layers and levels of reality. Well that's the kind of thing we would imagine a word of God helps us do. Part of the difficulty that the church has and one of the big questions that people have noted in the comments again and again and again is well you know Peterson is shaming the church and he is. You know as a pastor hey I still have you know a few buckles have made it to Sunday morning but they, they're not anywhere near as obsessed with me as they are with Peterson. That's probably says something about me and says something about the poverty of my perspective. But part of what has happened in the church is that we've taken this word of God and somehow we've, we've handled it so poorly that it is not experienced as being a word from God by people out there. By people who you know just walk into church in fact they might be sleeping if I'm preaching and you know then there's the other group that listen to my videos and say well I don't, I don't really think you're a Christian. Well okay or you know I don't really think you should take these positions. Well kind of like Peterson I've been around in the Christian Reformed Church a long time. If you're curious about the kinds of stuff I preach on Sunday morning I can show you probably way more hours of video than you would care to listen to if you want to sit there and try and find theological or doctrinal error. But what Peterson is getting at here is really important and it shouldn't just be cooped up within the confines of church or religion that he is saying that his reading of this story casts light on his old world. Now you can look at Peterson and say well I don't think he's a Christian. Well his answers about Christianity are ambiguous and I just saw an interview with a Roman Catholic, a guy who's, who's died in the wool Roman Catholic who has interviewed Peterson a few times and asked him questions about the resurrection and all of the answers that Peterson gave were all the answers I would expect him to give. But what Peterson sees in some ways is the potency of the Bible in as, well he sees it as potent and important and foundational and instructive. And so again the bigger question, why are so many people becoming interested in the Bible and interested in Christianity as a result of the things that Peterson is doing? Well because of his regard for this book. He has an enormous amount of regard for this book and so people are going to mirror this regard and for example if Peterson says well I've been reading Nietzsche, a lot of people are going to start reading Nietzsche. If Peterson says I'm reading Jung, a lot of people are going to start reading Jung. This is what we do as human beings. When we see something that attracts us, when we see something or someone and we say they have qualities, you see this with kids all the time, such and such a pop star, wears certain clothing, all the kids start dressing like her. I'm old enough to remember Madonna when she broke out and you know there are all these material girls running around in the 80s. This is what we do as human beings. And so if we find someone who is productive in terms of turning on the light and showing us some different things, well then we start digging down into what he does. And this is exactly what I've been doing with Peterson. Over the last couple of weeks there have been a number of interviews and a ton of articles written on him because when he wrote his book, I don't have a physical copy of his book here, but when he wrote his book and his book was released, now suddenly he's engaging a different world. He's off YouTube. So now he's in the text space. Text, T-E-X-T. He's in the text space. And now in this space, he's making different bubbles. So now there are things written about him in text. And that will, the Jordan Peterson in text will be different from the Jordan Peterson on YouTube that will all be much more shallow, lower resolution representations of say meeting Jordan Peterson in real life. So that's why, for example, in San Francisco in a couple of weeks I'm going with some other buckos here from church and we're going to go down to San Francisco and see him in the flesh. Now my interest in this whole thing is going to be I want to see who's in the audience. I mean, truth be told, I could probably, you know, even miss the talk entirely because I tend to suspect he'll talk about the stuff he always talks about. It's a book tour, but I'm really interested in seeing who else is going to listen to him. Who else are these people and what interesting ideas they have. For me, this has been the fun of this entire endeavor. So again, Peterson is looking at this and saying he's not using the word of God, this language. That's religious language. He's looking at this rationally as a psychologist. But when he's saying, I can't believe how much is packed into this, that is in a sense a secular way of saying, well this, this, this is, this is a word from a deity. This is a word from brilliance. This is a word from the top of a hierarchy. So he's translating all of this stuff into language that secularists can know. And I think that's critical for understanding why in some ways Jordan Peterson has been so much more potent in terms of bringing other people into a place where they're interested in Christianity in the Bible. Now I'm not going to get through much of his lecture today. I can see that already for exactly the same reason he can't get through the Bible very quickly. But let's listen to some more. Could object well with these stories, you never know what you're reading into it and what's in the story, right? That's part of, let's call it the postmodern dilemma. And that's not just a postmodern dilemma. That's a dilemma that every generation has. And fair enough. And there's really no answer to that, any more than there is an answer to. How do you know your interpretation of the world is, let's not say correct, but sufficient. And again, just in that little nugget, the more I get to know this guy, the more I understand him, the more I see every little word he's using is important. And what he says right here is so foundational and it's a belief that I've had for a while, which is people will come to me and say, well, I can't believe the Bible because there's so many different interpretations. What? There's not so many different interpretations of the political sphere that you're in the midst of. You can't see that. There's not a world of different interpretations about anything in reality. We're awash in a world of different interpretations. And then this last little twist of phrase shows his pragmatism where, you know, okay, so we're in this world of interpretation, but what's really important is how you act. There's some answer to that. It's sufficient in if you can act it out in the world and other people don't object too much and you don't die and nature doesn't take a bite out of you any more often than necessary. You know, those are the constraints within which we live. So you have some way of determining whether your interpretation is at least functionally successful. And that's and that's not trivial. And I guess you can say the same thing to the interpretations that might be laid out on these stories. And at the moment, that's probably good enough. Hopefully you find the interpretations functionally significant. And again, he's told us again and again, why is he doing these lectures? He wants this to be practical. Why does he want it to be practical? Not merely theoretical. He's a pragmatist. He's an American pragmatist. At multiple levels. And I also think the chance of managing that by chance is very, very small, you know, to be able to pull off an interpretation of a story that works at multiple levels simultaneously. You think with each level that it applies, the chances that you've stumbled across something by chance have to be decreasing, right? There's a technical term for that in psychology. It's called something like multi-method, multi-trait method of determining whether or not something is accurate. And the idea is the more ways that you can measure it and get the same result, the more confident you can be that you're not just diluting yourself with your a priori hypothesis, you know, that there's actually something out there. So I guess that's another part of this method is that it's also a method. And it's also a method. And he, like me, seldom finishes his sentence, which is, again, as I'm going through this, something I'm learning. But his comment here about his attention to it, wanting it to be now, Peterson, I wish you'd come up a word with that. I use the word scalable. And again, this is an idea that I got from him that I've actually used in some of my sermons. If some of you are watching my church channel, I've got my church videos on a different channel than I have my personal videos. These are all my personal videos. But, you know, it's scalable. It's got to work for me and it's got to work for me and my family and all of my different relationships. And it's got to work now. And it should have worked in the past and it should work into the future. And so it's scalable. And so one of the things that that probably secular people are really reactive to is when you say, well, the Bible is the word of God. Well, what do you mean by that? Well, actually, Peterson's giving right here a pretty accurate secular representation of probably what that means. And then you go even further that says, well, preaching in church, and this is in my tradition for which preaching is a pretty central value. When we preach, we give the word of God. What do we mean by that? Well, well, again, functionally, if you approach it as a pragmatist, you would say, well, what you're doing when you're preaching is that you are again scaling this luminary truth for multiple people and for these people again and again throughout the week and then into the future. And so you would say that, you know, maybe I preach a sermon and someone would say, oh, pastor, that was a good sermon. But next week, they've forgotten it already. And if it's online, it probably has tens or hundreds of thousands of YouTube hits. That may be a good sermon. But then the question is going to be how's that sermon going to last? And is that sermon going to last not only one year or five years or 10 years or 100 years? Or is that sermon going to last for a long time? And then you would say, well, I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. I'm going to do a sermon. And then you would say, well, is that sermon going to last 100 years or 100 years? Or is that sermon going to last 2,000 years? And this gets back into Peterson's idea about, well, how can we have any respect for the Bible? C.S. Lewis called it chronological snobbery, that we dismiss things that are old. But Peterson, in a sense, flips that on its head and says, really old things that have come down to us? You should show a little bit of respect because, yeah, you're going to kick off in about 100 years. But boy, that thing's been roaming around for 3,000 years. And so, you know, who are puny little, who is puny little you to disrespect that thing? It survived and you won't. And, you know, this is, you know, I guess I'm starting to channel Peterson in that you listen to somebody and if you start sounding like them. But that's basically the argument that he's making. That's basically the argument that he's bringing to the Bible and saying, this is why you should respect this book. This book has shaped the world in ways that, oh, puny little distracted you in Western civilization who summarily dismiss it. You have no idea about, and this book is in fact traveling in Africa and Asia and South America. And people every day are picking up this book, even though there are horrendous obstacles to have any of them understand it. They are reading it and they say, huh. And they may leave the book with a different interpretation than what you have from it and maybe a different interpretation that is far from the authorial intent. But they are saying, huh, that really helps me in my life. Well, what do you do with a book that is so chuck full of these things and that doesn't stop? And in fact, that not only doesn't stop, but it ranges into hundreds and thousands and tens of thousands and hundreds of thousands and millions of lives across how many countless cultures, across how much time a story like that you had better not just dismiss and say, I don't believe it. Well, but there are many such stories. So which ones do you believe in? How do you interpret it? This is no small thing we're doing here that I use in my in my speaking. I think I don't try to tell people anything that isn't personally relevant, you know, because you should know why you are being taught something, right? You should know what the fact is good for and then it should be good for you personally, at least in some sense. And then if you act it out in the world, it should be good for your family and maybe should have some significance for the broader community. And I think that's what meaning means. And I don't scalability in being taught things that aren't meaningful facts that aren't meaningful because there's an infinite number of facts and there's no way you're going to remember all of that. That's how pragmatism limits and undercuts the postmodern critique that texts are basically texts are pointless. They have to have the aspect of tools, essentially something like that, because we are tool using creatures. Well, these these stories have that aspect is as far as I can tell, there's nothing. There's no doubt about that. So here's the stories in Genesis to very famous stories, obviously, virtually everybody who's even vaguely versed in Western roughly speak. And I think I'm going to stop there because I know some of you said, you know, if you do some shorter videos, that would help me. So because there isn't really a natural breaking point, he's going to go ahead and talk for the next I don't know how long before he actually gets to a Bible story. I do know how long it's at least an hour. And we're just a few minutes into this and I've already taken a half hour. So I'm going to pause and I'm going to cut and then we're going to do for be next.