https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wEuke-tJGLI

 Hi, this is Paul. There are some interesting stuff in the Sticks and Hammers 666 Peugeot conversation that happened. I made some clips and I posted one on my clip channel. I posted a few of them on Twitter. I've been playing around lately with doing some reaping from videos in short things and posting short videos on Twitter and trying to prompt discussion there, but I thought this probably deserved a little bit of treatment on my channel as such. So let's take a listen. That would be close. I was raised. This is Sticks and Hammers sort of giving his background story. Now, over the last four years, a number of you have pointed his channel to me. I've watched a few of his videos, haven't really paid a lot of attention to him. Obviously, Sticks and Hammers 666 is there to attract attention with respect to Satanism. And he talks about that a little bit in his introduction here. He's marginally Christian, like in the liberal Christian sense. So you have a Bible in the house. Sometimes you read it, you go to church on Christmas and Easter basically, and then you do the Lord's Prayer at night. Became actually much more religiously Christian in the Protestant non-denominational sense when I was in my late teens, had abandoned that contemporary to when I went to college. Some people think that's because I was indoctrinated, but it actually had more to do with witnessing fundamentalist Christians on the internet, had nothing to do with my studies or anything. Became a Satanist. And well, technically a hard line, just atheist first. Then I discovered atheistic Satanism. I use that as a stepping stone. You know, it's very interesting. I was young and I'm old enough to remember the Satanist panic of the eighties. There were all these stories about Satanists and, and it seems like part of what happened was just a big piece of Satanism was just simply trolling. And you find that today with some of the Satanists, it's just the easiest way to troll certain kinds of Christians is to say, I'm a Satanist and then go off, go off with that. Eventually to purge myself of false guilt and fear. And then I realized, well, you know, that's all the Satan. Now that, that false guilt and fear is not a small thing. And it comes up in a fair number of Randall's comments, not as much, not as often as you would think, but it's the sense that you heard in the Audrey Assad deconstruction story where especially certain types of people who tend to be high in trait anxiety or neuroticism and they're always anxious. And so what is God thinking about me? What is God thinking about me? And I've long noted that for certain kinds of people, a big piece of their deconstruction is again to depersonalize the cosmos because then if bad stuff happens, it's nobody's fault, but it really drives them crazy that if bad stuff happens, it's God's fault and it's betrayal because betrayal is feels worse to us than mindless purposeless calamity. It's sort of the difference between, Peterson talks about this quite a bit, between malice and just bad stuff happening for no reason at all. Now that's framed obviously within certain assumptions, certain metaphysical assumptions about the universe, but again, that little piece that he said right there is actually pretty important. Humanism can never offer anyone. What am I doing? And I decided to just study all spirituality. When I call myself a pagan, it's because I'm not part of the Abrahamic mainline religious tradition. It doesn't mean I have a specific denomination or church and I'm an occultist. So I'm interested in studying every religion I'm working on. Now, when people talk this way, you just have to pause because it's sort of like saying, I'm a friend to all people. Okay. But you do not have enough time in your life to actually develop a friendship towards all people. You will only have the capacity to touch on a limited amount. And in fact, when you approach it in this way, given the story that he's had, there's a lot that's already built in, in terms of your biases and your approach. There is no clean slate from which to view the world. None of us have it. There's no metaphysical clean room from which for us to have this pure view of the world. Now, again, those of you who've been following my videos for a long time, the monarchical vision tries to imagine we have such a view, but to the degree that it's basically a pretty naive position. I'm not saying his position is naive, but just to imagine that I see the world simply as it is. No, you see the world through all the history and all of the culture and all of everything that you bring to the world because you need all that machinery in order to see the world. If you imagine you are seeing the world just as such, you might think that you're as simply as that my pliers sees the world as such. No, my pliers has no capacity to see the world at all. A book of mystic Christianity right now, another one on actually religion, denomination or church, and I'm an occultist, so I'm interested in studying every religion. I'm working on a book of mystic Christianity right now, another one on actually Jewish fables from the Talmud, the religious history works from paganism. I don't really care. I just want to study as much as possible. Excellent. And how about yourself, Jonathan? Well, I mean, it's interesting because in a way I think I have a similar story as Tarle. I grew up in a more practicing family. My father was a Baptist pastor. I didn't experience the crazy fundamentalism in my own family. My father was actually a very intelligent and curious person who encouraged exploration and thought, but let's say around me in the culture, that's what the culture I was bathing in, let's say in terms of evangelical Christianity. And the same like in my twenties, I just realized that this is not going to do, like it's just not going to do for many reasons. And so I started to study mystical traditions and to some extent. So, you know, it's very interesting. The deconstruction stories, because this is right there in a sense, Peugeot deconstructed. I mean, he did. He deconstructed the faith, his parents. I gotta pause. Trying to make videos this time of year is just nuts. It's just that I'm just somebody made the comment in one of my videos that you seem you seem a little scattered lately and you're, you know, and yeah, I've just I'm just beset by needy people right now who have some legitimate needs that need attention. And I just don't have the time to kind of sit down and formulate things. So a lot of the stuff you're getting in the videos recently is pretty is pretty chaotic and not terribly integrated. So it's really raw material. Anyway, back to the video extent, let's say what you could kind of call esotericism or, you know, late occultism. Okay. I remember what I was thinking before I got interrupted by the phone. Peugeot, I mean, deconstruction again, as we said often in this channel, it's not necessarily a bad thing. One of the interesting things is what we know of Jonathan Peugeot's family is that even though he departed from the faith that his father, so his father, I don't know this for sure. I haven't interviewed his father. So so Jonathan or Matthew, if you think your father would like to talk to me, I'd be curious to talk to him too. But the fact that even though he, Jonathan Peugeot, it's pivoted, you know, changed his perspective coming from a from a well put together Christian family matters. You know, all of that investment, all of that credibility, all of that trustworthiness that matters. And so so even when Jonathan sort of pivoted and and moved into what he moved into, it's like he didn't lose the investment. And that's different from that isn't that's different from let's say a shallow or a marginally or nominal Christian family. And that isn't to say that great saints and and wonderful Christian people can't come from nominal Christian backgrounds or even tremendously antithetical Christian backgrounds or really screwed up Christian backgrounds. And people come from all different places. But, you know, if you're if you manage to to love your children and and your your Christianity is well integrated, you know, even when they turn from the faith, but but also if they keep the faith and sort of pivot within it. But I also felt like physical traditions and to some extent, let's say what you could kind of call esotericism for many reasons. And so I sort of felt like that's a very important part of the tradition. And so I felt like that's a very important part of the tradition. And so I felt like that's a very important part of the tradition. And so I started to study mystical traditions and to some extent, let's say what you could kind of call esotericism or, you know, late occultism. But I also felt like that wasn't enough because I felt like it was that there was something off about about occultism, especially. And then when I discovered Christian mysticism itself , I realized that everything I'd been looking for was there already. And then I know part of what's interesting is we've talked on the channel before, especially with respect to the rest is history podcast. So I was watching The Bachelorette last night, the season finale, and Michelle and Nate with a Y are, you know, they're in their final date. And they're going to be a Mexican holy man and he's burning some stuff and some bowls that look religiously and and he's telling them things and they're pushing the smoke on each other. And what's amazing about these neo this neo paganism is how absolutely up to date it all is in terms of the little prescriptions they're pushing. It's all the it's all the buzzwords, the holy words. It's it's all it's all the cult of authenticity. And it's like, isn't it amazing that when you peel back Christianity, you find twenty twenty one postmodern cult of authenticity, which again back to the back to the Ralph Degan quote, you know, the old saying, you know, the old saying, you know, the old saying, you know, people report feeling most authentic when they are doing what external society values, not when they are acting in accordance with their actual personalities. You know, you would expect, let's say, if you could time travel a shaman from pre Colombian Mexico into the twenty first century, there would be no frame of reference in order for these two worlds to connect. And and this is part of what Pujol will go on to to talk about and what what Paul North, the King's North talked about in his rebel wisdom that and what was discussed in in on the rest is history with respect to neo paganism. It's sort of you basically take the this baseline squishy Christian ethic and put on top of it a bunch of things that maybe you can take from pictures and descriptions mostly recorded by by Christian missionaries and Christians and put them on top and sort of blend it all together in service to the people who are interested in this. And then of course, everyone will go, oh, ah, and it's sort of the the cult of the old. Now, I want to be careful here because I think there are ways in which you can take the old and the new and the old and the new and the old and the old and the old and the old and the old and the new and the new and the and the new and the new and the new and the new and the new and the new and the new and the new and the new and the they they deconstruct from one thing and then let's say in evangelicalism. Oh, this is the this is the true Christianity of the Apostles, not the stuff with all of the Roman Catholicism or or orthodoxy and drama and what you sort of get is is what you have in Jerusalem where they have I've never been there, but you know, it's a very similar thing to the church of the Holy Sepulcher, but you have the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, which is probably on the site where the tomb was. But then you have this other thing called the Garden Tomb and the Garden Tomb looks like all the stuff on Christmas Easter cards. And so, you know, Americans, especially evangelicals flock there and like this must be it. Well, why must it be it? Because it looks exactly how I imagine Jesus would picture this. But that's the point. I'm I'm working on my sermon on Jesus in the temple as a 12 year old. And I one of the things that I I started doing was working on the so this is my this is my this is a blog where I just keep tons of books and I just read the book and I read it and I'm just looking at tons and tons of links and so, you know, stories of Jesus as a boy and these are fascinating because we know we know pretty much the the text that we gather these stories from are all quite late and they're basically sort of fan fiction for Jesus, but they're filled with stories like this. One of the children moved with the children moved with envy about the passages for water or you know pools of water. Jesus, little Jesus was making you know working in the mud or making you know water pipes or something and overthrew what Jesus had built. Jesus caused him to die. I mean in these in these sayings you know little children cross Jesus and he kills them and the parents came complaining. I think they would complain if your son killed my son. Joseph asked Mary to speak with Jesus but like you know honey he's killing kids again. Oh Jesus don't kill any more children please. Okay mom I guess you're right. So Jesus kicked the boy's backside and he came back to life. Okay. Whatever you think of the Bible and the canonical accounts okay and I'll make an argument in my sermon it'll be in the rough draft. This story says a lot about the culture. I think if people were making up stories of Jesus today, stories of little boy Jesus running around Nazareth, they would not include Jesus killing his playmates. They would probably include Jesus being nice and Zen and kind, really really kind, so kind that you know Jesus is including you know people from all over the world and Jesus is basically doing exactly what everyone would expect spirituality looks like now. That's what it would look like because what we do is we take our imagination we just sort of fill in the gaps and there we have it and this process is inevitable because that's simply the process by which we appropriate things and what that means is that the truth is always stranger and in fact more offensive than we can really get our minds around. And this is I think to me this is part of the validation of of canonical orthodoxy because when we imagine God coming to world what we imagine is basically some Freudian projection of ourselves just sort of writ large but the the Jesus we find in the Gospels you know so then you compare this as I do in my sermon with Luke chapter two and Mary's all upset because Jesus has lingered in the temple and they've been looking for him for three days and Mary is you know all upset with Jesus and this isn't Mary scolding Jesus I mean it sort of is but Jesus kind of scolds her back and the text says and they were confused and a story like that as a ring of truth to it because it just doesn't fit. Now once the story is set that story then begins to shape things moving forward and real things have that sense and what I mean by real you know kind of following on C.S. Lewis is that they're durable in a way that they don't they don't seem like they're sort of like they're not really like they're sort of you know they don't seem like they're just sort of made up from the from the fabric of religious things and that's that's often the problem with a lot of neo appropriations of old things that we want usually to use against other established things that we're trying to improve upon. I also discovered the art of the church like these the amazing iconography that the church had developed for about the first thousand years and it became my own art practice so I'm an iconographer and the you know the architecture the liturgy all of this kind of amazing dance you could call it like this this great ritual dance that was there in the church. Now let's give it to the orthodox and the Catholics. What we're really looking for is is a living tradition is something that there's sort of a a chain of memory that goes back now now let's be fair to the Protestants those chains get corrupted but part of the difficulty that any neo-paganism has is that okay do you have a chain now if you look at let's say Native American spirituality in the Americas well they have a much closer hope of something because they you know their their chain is so much newer you know let's say Navajo spirituality Zuni spirituality in the American desert southwest other places in the Americas there are other places in the world where it's not so far away they actually sort of have a hope but if you're five ten fifteen generations twenty generations removed from something you're probably not in any way dealing with the same thing this is a point Peugeot will make a little bit later on. So then I just became orthodox because it seemed like it was the only branch of Christianity that had preserved this mystical aspect that not only preserved it but that was central to the faith and that also preserved all the art and all the this language that you could call it so that's and this for me was actually one of the cleanest clearest articulations I've heard by Jonathan of this is why I chose orthodoxy so and when I heard it I thought that makes makes perfect sense that's what happened to me and so I've been orthodox since 2003 now and I want to go on and that's not since 2003 that's not an incidental point that's he's coming up on 20 years and so someone who is able to stay within something for two decades it says a lot about the person and again talked about the formation of his parents and stability but it also says something about the tradition and that he's not just all over I was this and there was that there was this there was that there was this and that no I've been in this and in this in terms of a community not just sort of self-identifying as this and sort of freestyling all the time which this is sort of where sticks and has sticks and hammer is sticks sticks hexen hammer is gonna sort of go and where they're gonna talk yeah oh no I had a question to start the combo but if you want to go ahead well the only question would be here as far as Jonathan's path you mentioned that you were interested in a lot of the mystical occult elements but eventually you found when you were seeking within those elements within Christianity if you were to make a good persuasive argument let's say but in a friendly way obviously to sticks as far as what was it about the occult that you know eventually got you away from that and what was it within Christianity that brought you to that so that maybe who knows maybe sticks will be converted today well we'll see what happens the other side would be what what they're so evangelical sticks found lacking in Christianity would be exactly yeah that'll be after and everybody by the way subscribe and also need those super chats we're going to read those at the end anyway go for it Jonathan so I think that if we look at western Christianity we kind of see a change in the late middle ages happening and we you know through nominalism and through different through different things when the the reformation happens and the counter-reformation happens it kind of crystallizes all of this and so it seems like what we see is what I call a kind of reincarnation and so you what you see is you see a kind of Christianity that's at the bottom that is more is very basic that becomes very literalistic and very moralistic as well and then what happens is out of that comes these weird Christian esoteric branches you know if you look at freemasonry but then you know the idea of the rosy cross and all of these these organizations that pop out of Christianity and then start to want to have the more mystical aspect of it but let's say divorce from the the church or divorce from the ground you could you could say and and so I have sympathy for that like I have sympathy for people that wanted that because I don't want this meal toast moralistic Christianity I don't want that and I think this is a very interesting insight on Jonathan's part about the rise of a whole host of movements you know some of which we touched some of which you know Michael Martin has talked about in his Karen Wong interview and his conversation with a lot with John Vervecky and Nate Heil there's just slews of movements like this that developed especially at the end of the 19th century beginning of the 20th century and everybody trying to recapture I mean what one might even one might even so much of of Christianity has had the same impulse there's often a sense that what we have lost we have lost the thing in itself and we have gone astray and we want to try to get back to it and the way we can get back to it is and it might be you know a whole variety of things we're going to but we're going to take the Bible even more seriously or we're going to double down on the teachings of this one person who seemed to capture it that there's always the sense that the the thing itself is available to us and I'm not I'm not saying that skeptically but we can we can get closer if we do this and and so in many ways it's it's part of Jonathan's search as well and he he came to the decision that following orthodoxy as such was was the best way to have a connection all the way back to to Christ and to Christ because in in almost every case there's a person who we try to connect ourselves back to I mean Islam to Muhammad the Quran a person or a book let's say. Either but I think the problem that happens is that at some point this separation becomes a hostility and then that hostility becomes one of the sources for the breakdown of the West that is it's it starts to manifest the fragmentation of our societies and I think that one of the problems that happens with kind of esoteric thinking in general is that it's it's so high up that there's no room for the regular people to participate in it and so you drop the regular people and then the regular people they end up doing their thing and then you're not that you're not part of their world and it breaks the world apart and I thought this was a tremendous point that Jonathan made. I think to to maybe connect the worlds a little bit more I think we should include in the conversation the what we would call folk religion because folk religion tends to be the filler you've got people who are obviously intelligent like Sticks and Hammer at a very interesting conversation today with a with another academic but you know an autodidac likes like Sticks and Hammer who is obviously able to read text he's self-learning he's he's going about this he's got a YouTube channel I mean YouTube is the YouTube is the glory for autodidacs in many ways and and so you can just search all these things and read all these things and write books and have a following and and of course this this stuff has gone on long before that you've had founders of of many movements who have been brilliant and they find patrons and they they produce things in the world and those things get picked up by by cults and groups and fan bases and on and on but what what tends to fill in the the gap tends to be folk religion which we have which which usually I think in some ways continues to preserve the kinds of religious instincts and habits and traditions that sort of naturally arise out of the combination of a culture which has been infused by one of these far more powerful world religions with the the sort of practices that help people get by every day with all the common sorts of challenges that ordinary everyday life presents to them which in many ways makes our own time quite interesting because the nature of those challenges is changing and then it leads people especially then it leads them into idiosyncrasies up here and then you get all the weird stuff you know you get you get weird stuff like saboteanism and basically satanism where the people that are super smart and are supposed to be the elites are basically acting for themselves or actively acting to destroy the society like I mean not in the sense that they're taking they're taking they're physically doing it but let's say intellectually they're breaking down the structure and so I think that all of that has led to the to the breakdown of our of our world and has led down to the breakdown of society and so what I see in orthodoxy is I see now now when he says this has led to the breakdown of our world or the breakdown of our society I was thinking about today I was thinking about the role of world religions I forget what video I was listening to but but how I think in many ways these world religions have enabled societies to scale up and it isn't when we think about a capacity to scale up we usually look at the visible structures bureaucracies institutions that we say oh this is this is what is scaffolding the society and those being the visible manifestations I think are are really again sort of the tip of the iceberg I mean that that whole analogy is based on the idea that only the tip is visible all of the other assumptions that are in culture in society transmitted implicitly had a had a good conversation on the discord uh didn't didn't record it it's still trying to figure out how to manage you know how to play around with the discord in this way but you know someone asked me about again I get the question quite often because the demographic mass of my channel is sort of in the age where you're having your first children and they're small and they're still at home and as a parenting advice and the first advice I always give is be be the person you want your child to become work really hard on that because more than your words more than a lot of the the overt religious things that you are going to try to show them those are the things that will imprint on your child to an enormous degree because we are again it's the video I did about joint attention that that is how we are forming our children and forming ourselves and so again this is part of the reason why if you have really solid Christian parents the odds are that the worldview that your children will eventually inhabit will have a good amount of the solidity that yours did I mean these these questions and these let's say computations I have been watching devs a little bit um I haven't gotten through it um it was some people recommended that show to me but but the computations are are just so enormously complex we can't we can't help but but use narrative and other other symbols to to sort of approximate the the kinds of processes that are that are that actually result in a person's life see that you have room for these high mystics that live you know like idea of the naked aesthetics that live on the top of mount Athos and are like invisible and naked and no one sees them and then they can manifest themselves it just reminds me of that movie um was it magic men where they had you know these uh these these these fake superheroes um then you know there's this is the one guy his power was invisibility but it only worked when he was naked so easily popping out they're like we can see you to the monks if they want to and so there's this whole hierarchy of spiritual realization but at the bottom of that is like my you know is your cousin your aunt who doesn't know much but they can still cross themselves and go to church and go to confession and take communion and it's all integrated into a giant thing okay and that's the scale issue and I haven't yet got around to finding those other conversations that John Verbeke was doing about scale because this this point of scale is fundamental to I think the larger question a big piece of what we're chasing here is is just how to describe what it is we're looking for and and that which is attainable and and the only that which is attainable in the short term we're not trying to get too ahead of ourselves in terms of eschatology things that are finally ultimate and eschatological it's still the best word for it but civilizations in the past imperfect though every single one of them were achieved something and they only achieve it if in fact you achieve that level of scalability that that Peugeot is talking about here and so if in fact the system that you are promoting is too high you're just going to be you're just going to be you're just going to be a just yet another strange person out there writing things and in all likelihood forgotten and sort of the mass of the folk religious will be the ones that shape history you know in a lot of what's going on I did a video a little bit about the you know some of the fight against the within the evangelical world a lot of that is actually a dealing with folk religion because a really robust healthy powerful religious tradition will impact and scale down and afford betterment and improvement at the levels of folk religion and in many ways the the challenge of a religious tradition and the challenge of those who would like to shape a religion into the future is all about engaging people at every level and so if if the the core or the body of the religion that you're attempting to promote is the one who does not have niches all up and down a whole variety of scales and again it isn't IQ isn't the only scale we're dealing with you're dealing with vocational diversity you're dealing with age diversity it's it's got to work for the 90 year old it's got to work for the 50 the 90 year old who is likely facing their death it's got to work for the 50 year old who is at the top of their power curve in terms of their career and their family life it's got to work for the 30 year old who is just starting a family and trying to figure out how to feed kids and make money and house them and and manage them it's got to work for the 20 year old who is just getting started in life it's got to work for the 15 year old it's got to work for the six year old and the five year old and it's got to work across cultures part of what you know the difference between a kingdom and an empire is that an empire is made up of hundreds of little kingdoms and we're in your religion's going to have to scale in that way too and so this this point that Peugeot is making is really rather vital so i think that to me that makes a lot more sense and i think what what unites it is christ is united is that notion of incarnation and how incarnation kind of joins the extremes together into into one one moment and again because i wrote the sermon this afternoon you see this even in the lukean account where jesus you know you basically have in luke you have two two accounts of when jesus was before for jesus public ministry the first account is his dedication in the temple where jesus is obviously an infant and so his parents and the ana and i forget the man's name who who come and you know prophesy over jesus they're forefronted but then jesus then is forefronted in the story of jesus in the temple but again even in these texts jesus is from nazareth which is no place so he's from the fringe but he's vital in the in the center of the world which is the temple and so again you see that scalability in jesus life and and part of what you see in christianity is in fact this radical scalability where you can have people who know very little you know again i've used the illustration before of there was a man who made profession of faith at the church and he was an individual with down syndrome and for decades later i would hear testimony from council members who were in that room when that when this at that point he was middle-aged a really young adult maybe maybe in his 20s or 30s the profession of faith that he made moved the the church leaders to tears it was so beautiful and it was so powerful and well part of that is obviously the individual making the profession but part of that is the capacity of that religion to scale and so it's got to be you know we've been talking you know quite a bit more beauty first it's got it's got to be it's not only got to be intelligible at every level it's got to be beautiful at every level and it's got to work at every level and that's not something that you just sort of ad hoc or make up and there's again there's a reason everybody's looking to old things and that's again back to the naseem talib lindy effect because old things endure and that becomes the the fruit for for the church and the fruit for yeah so that's why i think i think it makes more sense yeah well that's a very good and you know they get this little window with the comments and this person says while carrying on important pagan traditions under christianity now christianity is on its way out paganism is still here actually paganism has been wiped out and what a lot of people are trying to do is to create a new paganism basically out of drips and drabs of christianity and pragmatism and stuff that they find left over in books mostly written by christians about pagans that's that's really more of and and then probably and then probably out of the study of of anthropology but obviously all of that study is through the filter of modernity which again has a tremendous amount of christianity built into it so all of this talk about christianity being on its way out that's that's sort of like saying yeah air breathing that's i think air breathing is on its way out oh okay well um yeah i'm not quite sure how you're going to retrofit all these humanoids and um have us breathe breathe whatever it is you think we're going to be breathing next good understanding of contextualizing christianity within our own contemporary epoch of immense um liquid modernity fragmentation i know we're very lucky to have both of you i know people have referred to you as part of the uh what do they say for a horseman of meaning or whatever which i think is totally cringe me i was just so yes yes yes um defense of christianity in the modern world but you as an occultist or a pagan what led you down to the questioning of the roots of christianity and what do you find within i don't i don't know if you're a polytheist or anything like that but no no yeah but well well first of all what do you believe in terms of a sort of yeah spiritual source or so for the so maybe contextualize your belief i know it's very hard like i don't want to pin people down but what do you know that's that's that's what that's what i would say is the occult the search for truth the search for what is hidden um it doesn't posit necessarily proof of truth uh what i've done my my metaphor for it is with most mainline religions you're trying to find the right path and you go along that right path to your end goal and by the way to jonathan i don't begrudge you that because you feel that you've found you know your now now what's amazing to me is that whenever someone says well you're trying to find the right path and our right path is that there's no right path okay and what you mean is that there is a right path and there isn't okay you're gonna have to say more because actually living this out it'll be a little tough particular path it fulfills you it gives you meaning and so forth and i've pointed out several times okay so the the the question is self-validating if this feels authentic to me well then but again then we go back to this little tweet people report feeling most authentic when they are doing what external society values not what they are according to their own actual personalities now again the actual personalities that they're talking about here um is what they're looking through them basically modernistic lens the big five personality profile but it's a the the criticism in general seems to hold in the past when i was more linked to hardline atheism i considered that you know maybe stupid now i'm like well as far as the pragmatic effect it's not destabilizing anything it's not harming anyone it's the organized religious structure when it's abusive that i have a problem with and that's partially my own civic views what i would say though in my belief is that and also when it's abusive and rightfully so but that's all that's all the dead reckoning ab testing stuff um because yeah the the two-year-old says well you spanked me you don't really love me or you're not giving me chocolate you don't really love me maybe maybe you shouldn't have chocolate it's not trying to find one path stick with it forever to the exclusion of others it's more looking at all of the paths wander down one for a while switch to another one if you feel inclined to do so research and learn as much as possible think as much as possible and what i've said is that the occult doesn't really work for uh most people the the occult as i envision it being that which again is exactly what peugeot was just talking about that kind of strenuous search for truth is only going to work for a minority of human beings and by the way has nothing to do with intelligence it has more to do with interest and and maybe maybe stamina as far as that kind of subject material goes so you have ignorant people following organized religion because they were born into it they don't want to question it you have intelligent people like jonathan who have found a religion and again so often when he talks it's like wait a minute you just said it has nothing to do with intelligence but now you're using intelligence as the differentiator when you i thought what you said before was more sound in that well it really doesn't have anything to do with intelligence it has a lot to do with a whole range of other things most of which are constraints and real things relationships context in our lives that actually have a lot of power in terms of determining what we're going to do and where we're going to do it and they've decided to stick with it because they've they've got that sort of importance that they give to it they've looked into it they feel fulfilled i would also say that technically speaking if you're following a more mystic version of christianity and this would be more definitely closer to the orthodox tradition or some of the others than like catholicism or mainline protestantism oh so orthodox is mystical and catholicism and mainline product well maybe mainline protestantism but there's plenty of mysticism going on all over the christian denominational tree um technically speaking that is occultism as far as i would personally describe it if if you are attaching mystic symbolic importance to the christian tradition in your understanding technically speaking that doesn't make you separate from the occultists well if if technically speaking according to his definition of the word now you get to a folk religion technician of the definition of the word occult and they're going to be hearing something else if you define it as like like the secret society side of the occult like the freemasons and rosicrucians maybe it's different from that but again those are organized groups which is something that i myself have always shied away from i'll study them i'll listen to what is study isn't study an organized approach to a body of knowledge otherwise you're browsing or you're gazing or you're yeah i mean i'll certainly read their books but i'm not going to become like a freemason or something i don't even think they'd welcome me because i'm technically an apotheist well sticks in terms of your search for the truth what would be the reasons why you wouldn't go completely on jonathan's path as far as becoming let's say more of an esoteric christian or maybe going up to mount athos you know joining a monastery things of that nature what would be the things that would make you hesitate about that if we're going more into the nitty gritty in terms of what the truth is yeah because i give the search and and more importance than the end goal it's like when you read a good book the ending is sort of bittersweet it's the adventure that leads up to the ending that really is where you're living and now again if you listen to peterson he would say yeah the the sort of the the power portion of the meaning curve is much more in the search than in the arrival and that's true and so basically you're saying well i'm a i'm a meaning junkie i'm if if it's if it's giving me meaning right now i'm going to be there but i'm going to keep looking for that meaning and i'm going to follow meaning wherever it takes me okay but then you're not really searching for truth then you're searching for the experience of meaning you're you're basically comparable to an adrenaline junkie that says well landing isn't so much fun but the the the falling and hopefully the parachute opens that's that's really the that's really the thing that i live for and basically what you're saying is you're you're living for a a chemical hit that's um life you know ends it terminates biologically at the end of that life it's all the things you've done up until then all the searches and adventures that you've had that are notable that someone would write about the death is a little postscript ah the anadromist was in the comment section look at that that's how i choose to live my life looking through all these things but i would say i'd have no problem going up and talking to monks in a monastery and if i looked into mystic christianity after the orthodox path and i'm sure i all encounter books on it at some point considering my both my voracious reading i'd be very interested in studying and learning more about it and the symbology associated with it it's just i wouldn't i'd go to a monastery but i wouldn't consign myself to one and say okay for the indefinite future when i might get bored this might not be for me i'd like to sleep with your wife i just don't want to marry her oh okay i i can understand that i'm just gonna sit here i'm gonna meditate upon god etc it sticks don't you say that that's maybe i'd like to go and i i'd like to i'd like to go and participate in the olympics i just don't want to train for it oh okay be a life that is ungrounded in or uninstantiated within a particular tradition that's sort of like that wayfair state like as you've admitted isn't for everyone but also uh oh sorry go ahead go ahead oh no i just said yeah oh yeah oh so jonathan it's funny recently um my father was doing um a driveway near this orthodox church and uh he was talking to the head um priest and his son and uh he handed me uh this pamphlet and everything and i don't know if it's a sign but i don't think i could really give up catholicism i mean it's as an italian it's genetic you know but i do wish that we had that pope though you'll see how long well they say he's on his way out health-wise i don't know that's just a rumor but um yeah i mean there there is supposed to be an anti-pope at a certain point according to uh revelation right yeah isn't there a prophecy of the popes and yeah the promise on that's allegedly around the last one now yeah yeah but as far as oh go on it's no i was gonna say that i wish that uh oh my and uh civilla's in the comment section saying please make sure sticks obtains the language of creation by peugeot's brother metu catholicism we had a word that the orthodox have uh pre am i pronouncing right pre last per last yeah yeah yeah the russian accent over here it seems that the world has been caught up in um various spiritual delusions within well the past hundred years but i would say the last two years especially but um so sticks claimed that you uh that orthodoxy is another form of occultism which is very spicy well the mystic side the mystic side of it at least um so maybe jonathan you could just i'm sorry i cut you off live i'm sorry well i would say so listening to what uh sticks is saying i i understand like i understand the impetus but i but i think that it think about it like that the spiritual path is something like going up a mountain that's a pretty simple vision that you have you know and you see that in many mystical traditions that the idea that you're going up this mountain and that you're going higher up in the world like you're basically understanding more of it participating in more of it when you get to the top of the mountain you're at the summit of the world and you basically you're above everything and you basically kind of you can encapsulate the world in your in your view you know um the difficulty i think with this sim simply this exploratory path is that you don't end up going up the mountain you end up hop skipping and jumping around the base of it you know and so and there's a there's a value in practice right yeah and there's a value in practice where practice is difficult and if you want to practice something let's say you you practice a certain form of meditation or a certain form of prayer a certain form it's actually difficult and it takes time and it takes a lot of energy to to do that so what what this what this approach prevents is achievement what happens if i think if you skip and jump around the base of the mountain and you're like oh well here's a little kabbalism here's a little bit of of you know of like american uh esotericism theosophy it's basically the difference between reading let's say uh reading a significant book on something and reading the encyclopedia or whatever all these things that that that exist that i think the difficulty that happens is that you don't end up you become a dilettante in a way you become someone who knows a lot about things but you don't necessarily have the deep practice that will lead you up the the mountain and you see that like uh and and then the question is what is all of this for is is your your telos to know a lot about a few things like sort of like an encyclopedia or is your telos a degree of transformation and right now transformation is a very big deal a lot of people are looking for transformation uh christian non christian and a lot of people are giving up christianity because they say well i don't think christianity has has demonstrated itself um to be capable of transformation not only for me but scaling up and transforming my society i'd say broadly speaking that's in in a sense what many many people are looking for simply a mapping of the landscape is not a changing of the things that are going to be reflected in the map i remember reading an interview with joseph campbell and someone asked joseph campbell you know have you had some of these mystical experiences you talk about and he said he says no and he says no because i you know i just study religions basically i don't have access to them like he can be initiated because he i don't have access to him that's that inside outside again if you go back to vervecky talking in the four horsemen video i thought he made you know a powerful point in that modernity presupposes that all information is sort of flat available and public that's what knowledge is it's all flat available in public and the reason is it is so is because the reason that's connected with modernity is because it's all propositional and propositional is all it's upper register it's timeless it's can be put into little boxes and there it all is and so anybody hovering above can look at all the propositional information now this is easily demonstrated to not be the case because sit down with someone let's say a therapist and the therapist will be well tell me what it's like to be you tell me what it's like to be in your marriage tell me what it's like to be in your family tell me what it's like to be in your religion tell me what it's like to be in that relationship and you can talk and talk and talk and talk and talk and talk and talk and talk and there's a sense in which the therapist might learn and learn and learn and maybe with that great pains through many years gain this it's again sort of the difference between sabed and kono said in spanish sabed is sort of surface modernist knowing that propositional kono said is participatory procedural perspectival that's what the kono said is it's a deeper way of knowing adam new eve oh that's eve hi eve no that's not what it's talking about and when it comes to well i know lots of things but you might not know any one thing and in many ways to know the world not only do you need to know many things but you need to know everything all the way down to the roots and you say well nobody can know that well that's sort of what the point is of having this word and this concept and and imagining the reality of god because all the things all the way down all the time forever both ways that's kind of the purpose and in fact understanding why so many religions begin to use this idea of god because that then is the way into everything apart from that you're just up here at the surface knowing all things and knowing nothing in a sense it's like saying i know exactly what marriage is have you ever been married no i know exactly what it's like to be a dog most of us wouldn't say that because we have a sense of i can kind of imagine what it's like to be a dog but i can't really know what it's like to be a dog and actually the more you learn about the dog the more you realize that dog is living in a strangely different world than i am but to run around and saying i've seen lots of dogs i know dogs and that's where peugeot kind of makes this point about being a dilettante part of the irony of this is that we're talking about mysticism and if there's almost anything that has built into it the idea of achievement and development and private knowledge as opposed to exposed propositional knowledge it's mysticism it just boggles my mind that that this is the position well it's like saying all mysticism is the same all marriages are the same all countries are the same all cultures are the same the world is full of in many ways cono sad type knowledge he does he's not on a on a path and so i think that that to me would be the difficult part like think of it of it that way because there is an aspect of initiation in in even in esoteric christianity there's a sense in which you kind of have to be initiated and that now what do you what does he mean by initiation it means that there is a a chain of people that this isn't something you're going to cook up out of a book as such it's something that there's going to be it's going to be embedded in the procedural the participatory the perspectival not just the propositional that and you have to have someone who basically brings you up either whether it's institutionally or just informally that's at least that's how christianity works you're initiated christianity is an initiatory uh religion you receive you you know you you're baptized and then you're chrismated and those and then you take communion and so all of this is like a movement into the mountain or movement of the mountain you could say well i think that that to me is maybe the at least like as an idios as an idiosyncrasy i can understand that that that he would that tar that you would do that but i think that it definitely can't be a model i don't know if you see what i'm saying it can't be a model for for society well can there be i understand your point well here i've got a way in on that though but what i would say is this there are millions of mountains and the mountains have more than one path up them and so what you've done is you've now i i talked about this on on twitter and that that's something you say if you don't know a mountain well i mean right now on netflix there's all these all the people love making documentaries about these mountain climbers and what do they do when they climb a mountain they they plan a route and now they're they're going to be doing a lot of figuring things out on the way up but there isn't every way up that mountain that that happens if maybe you have a helicopter but even a helicopter is going to be paying attention to wind it's that sort of abstraction that in in some senses reveals its ignorance because there's not every way up a mountain and in fact mountain climbers pick mountains and hierarchies of mountains develop and everybody is wanting to climb these certain mountains because these certain mountains have certain qualities and in fact you have this entire world of both a a given a given world of constraints and desired achievements and desired goals that's what in fact gives meaning to the whole process and it sounds smart to say well there's millions of mountains well yeah there are but you know what they're all at yosemite on on el capitan and they're all going to mount everett and there are lots and lots of other mountains but each one is valued and prized for different things for different reasons and in fact there's a highest mountain and that's why there's this big long line of people trying to get up everest because it's the tallest mountain you say well you can you can climb mount diablo down here between sacramento and the bay area yeah you can you can drive your car up it is that what we're talking about you can drive your car up the mountain any old way and when you say it that way you say no you can't i don't care what kind of car you have you can't drive your car up any mountain any old way someone who says that absolutely knows nothing about mountains so you found your path up one particular mountain that's okay your path well now there are other constraints great you get to the top of the mountain you can see all the things around you but if i climb to the top of killington in the middle of the spine of the green mountains in vermont i can see new york i can see the edge of new hampshire you can see almost down into massachusetts depending on the weather conditions and i can almost see canada but i can't see tibet i can't see mexico i can't see the middle of the pacific ocean what i stress is that there are an infinite number of paths i don't believe in just one particular and and what he the argument he made there seems to undermine the other argument that there's a specific mountain and the specific mountain has affords different things and different limitations you say well all things in different all things and limitations are the same well not exactly there's near infinite numbers of things and limitations but yet hierarchies develop very quickly and in fact the presence on something like this means that we actually desire a little bit of competition and achievement in order to achieve something that we both desire and perhaps might both be able to attain an equal measure killer physical mortal existence i believe in reincarnation that goes into the realm of science more even than spirituality almost i just had to pause there and so i i don't personally feel compelled to do that and also the idea of a society yes for a society maybe they need more rigor and that rigor is ever changing one religion rises up they get slaughtered or they get converted they slaughter and convert others and this is the history of organized religion another reason why i'm when christian missionaries were trying to convert people who are not tied into the main networks of civilization these tiny little groups that live in jungles are in very far out of the way places out of the way in terms of the network why do these groups kill strangers sight unseen we're going to blame that on organized religion no they almost are poster children for the opposite of organized religion yet somehow we're going to blame humanity's blood thirstiness on religion when nature is red in tooth and claw which where is the blood thirstiness coming from is it coming from the upper register or is it pervasive in terms of humanity skeptical of never supporting one although the orthodoxy is less uh blood thirsty than most of the other major organized religions that have existed uh the czar so congrats for that what i would say though is that what works for a society doesn't necessarily work for an individual if you're talking about an initiatory system in christ well i guess i guess plato's republic is out then of course jesus deviates from the religious orthodoxy not the orthodox church but the orthodoxy of his own day it isn't a Pharisee isn't following the saddacy uh jesus says to his rivals because rivalries exist he says if you knew moses you would know me in fact jesus was basically asserting as many groups do as almost each christian rival denomination does we better encapsulate encapsulate it tradition um isn't following in in large part technically roman law you know going into the temple and then you know whipping people because they're money lenders and they're basically a bunch of grifting shysters and the bankers of the day uh that is something that someone might say having only a cursory understanding of jesus cleansing clearing cleansing the temple just saying you might find that in a it's a hey i give hot takes that's sort of a hot take and again that hot take itself illuminates the fact that he takes present populism and reads it onto the text and says this is what is happening there instead of let's say maybe a more thorough growing knowledge of the traditions around the temple the role that um in the tradition that messiah and temple why they were together why in fact harrod revitalized the temple as as sort of a messianic move and on and on and on and on but unless you actually devote yourself deeper into a tradition you might look at that and have a hot take and maybe you're right maybe you're wrong maybe it doesn't matter maybe it does um didn't follow that path was was one of the individuals who became the the the master as opposed to getting initiated by a master and throughout time we see this happening again and again and by the way i'm not declaring myself to be some sort of spiritual master but i believe that if you want to become more knowledgeable that's implicit in this in this in this autodidact rugged individual take on the right path to spirituality is that there's no master higher than me and so everyone's a master and in a sense when everybody's a master nobody's a master will help others etc you don't have to ah and right there was the christian tell follow if you want again and again and by the way i'm not declaring myself to be some sort of spiritual master but i believe that if you want to become more knowledgeable help others etc help others why i christianity rolled through our culture and is so much part of the background we don't even recognize it anymore you don't have to follow that one path of the mountain or any other specific path and i don't know whether you believe people on those other paths can make it to the top of your mountain or not um but they can find their way up they don't necessarily need a bunch of signposts or at least they don't necessarily need a guide you can see the top of the mountain from the ground level well then find your way up the mountain and on the way you'll see cool mushrooms and pine trees and maybe a deer and all of these other wonderful things and i think some people sometimes people are so fixated on this end goal that they can't see the forest for the trees and and this is sort of stream of consciousness i just stream of consciousness all the time but oh by the way we're going to have um we're going to again what is the attention paid to the mushroom i don't need to look at any one particular mushroom because i know all one mushroom i know all mushrooms all mushrooms are the same well you're pausing on that mushroom the pause itself is exactly what peugeot is saying now maybe it's a tiny little pause but it's not going to be the brotherhood of mushrooms so then would you default to assertive perennialism then i guess you'd say some court maybe not a good nonian perennialism but maybe the sentiment maybe is there are you are you asking me oh yeah yeah yeah but then then we'll get john but i what i'm just saying is that i think that the main importance is not on where you end up the right way is not it's it's how you get there and the experiences you have along the way where you end up or how you get the experiences you have along the way way those human experiences are meaningful it's the meaning junkie but well what if killing people is like the thing no no no not that well why not well because because you're not supposed to kill or hurt other people well why well see that's built in already to your system and well the reason we reject organized religions is because they kill people oh and people who are not initiated into organized religions don't kill people that people who are in tiny little groups who have not been touched by world religions and are usually doing their animus self they're perfectly peaceful and non-violent that idea went out a long long time ago and it was destroyed by actually meeting such people who were killing people almost immediately just as in some ways well it's naturalism just less chimps will attack another chimp that encroaches into their territory this is what this is almost the definition of what a territorial animal does so yeah i mean i kind of i kind of i get it i think let's say first of all first of all it's important to understand that that christ even though in the story of christ so we need to to take it seriously in the story of christ he is the god man like he is an incarnation uh and that's the way christians understood it but he still is initiated because he when he goes to see saint john the baptist uh saint john doesn't want to initiate it but christ says this has to happen like you have to i have to actually participate in this pattern you have to initiate me so that for basically for the sake of others you could say and so there is i don't think there's the sense the idea that christ is like just a rebel i think is doesn't hold up in his story there are some aspects of him where he's bucking uh corruption and bucking the things that don't work but he nonetheless he also says that you know he tells the people that they have to um that the Pharisees are sitting in the seat of moses and that they they should follow the Pharisees because they basically are the one that have received the tradition from moses but they just shouldn't do what they're doing because what they're doing is corrupt and and evil and so i i think christ actually does participate in the system but there is he understands also that there's a an issue happening that something is happening i mean he knows that Jerusalem is going to be destroyed and so he he talks about that in in the text and so he knows that this system is going away like which is actually has everything to do with jesus cleansing of the temple this system of sacrifice that's there in in Judaism is is going away like it's going to happen and he's like get ready for it it's going to happen and then what and so he's in he also does modify the tradition in a way that makes it more universal it kind of opens up the the hebraic tradition for the for in a universal way and then modify some of the some of the um some of the rituals in order to kind of encompass everybody you know so to you know remove basically christians remove circumcision you know they change it with baptism all this kind of stuff but it it doesn't i don't think Christianity sees itself as just a departure from what they receive but rather as a kind of especially in the orthodox tradition like a continuation but a universalization of the of the faith and i think that's also i think that's true of orthodoxy catholicism and protestantism porn it's also important to look at the particulars of the traditions and what they're doing so like we need to take that seriously now i'm i am out of time i wanted to at least touch on this i'll see if i pick this up again i don't know but i thought it was a very interesting conversation and yeah let me know what you think leave a comment