https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PyMqNFMGirM

 question and answer of the bridges of meaning discord server. I'm sorry for those of you who have messaged me and said, I can't get on the server because you can't get an invite. Apparently there was some sort of bot attack that Joey had to shut down the invite link that I usually keep on my videos. And at some point the smart people like Joey and Rick and those who make this discord thing work will give us another avenue. And in the meantime, I'm going to practice the, the exclusive strategy of clubhouse and all of you who are out there in the wilds of the internet, who can't get on the bridges of meaning discord server. Well, we're all going to be on the inside and you're on the outside. And I know you really, really want to be part of this. So thank you for those of you who have joined us in the voice chat. I don't usually look at, in fact, I can't quite see the, the, the live stream yet. Okay. There it is. I'll maybe get over to there. So I don't usually watch the live stream on YouTube. So I know that you do have a, uh-oh. So if you ask questions in there, I probably won't, I probably can't see them or answer them. So I'm really just answering questions from the discord server, but I've got a big enough stack here that Rick is already nervous about a backlog. So I'll try and do better. But before I jump in any, any urgent questions from the voice chat, before I take, I start working through the questions for PVK text chat list that has accumulated. I, one of the things I've really been enjoying lately is, I, the, so one of the channels that's also connected with this server is the randos united channel. And there was a really terrific commentary video on the Jordan Peterson pageau video that, that Nate and Luke and Sam and, and Jess, not Jesse, Jess, and let's see, and I'll shoot one. I'm forgetting somebody participated in that was, that was great fun to see. So, so again, part of why I do it this way is part of what happens when a channel grows is that I get overwhelmed in terms of my ability to personally attend to everyone who wants to have a conversation or wants to talk. And so I do this in a way to sort of distribute me and, um, the ideas that I have so that there are always, there's always someone to talk to because truth be told, I'm not that interesting. All of you together are far more interesting than I am. So, all right, so I'm going to start working on the list and scrolling back. Doug screw tape. Once again, a question he asked on February 24, which seems like a long time ago, asked about the along and the at, um, I'm not going to read the whole thing. He quotes from, he quotes in this question, uh, myth became fact. And one of the interesting things about that is that Peterson last week, Jordan Peterson tweeted out a link to CS Lewis's myth became become fact, which I was really excited by. And yeah, so read it. It's in the discord server. I'm not going to read it. I'm not going to talk about it. I'm just going to keep going cause you see how many of these questions I can get through. Grim Grizz. Grim Grizz is a fun guy. I have a conversation with him on my channel and part of the problem is I meet, I meet you people and you're interesting people. It's like, let's talk again, but I want to talk to other people too. So it's difficult. So Grim Grizz asks, what does it mean to you that God has chosen tribes of people as his chosen? You know, that's a, so chosen is usually chosen, anointed they're pretty much synonyms and it's synonyms for a special calling. One might think of it as a hierarchy and so there's always the challenge of the one in the many. And so if you want to deal with human beings because we're networked and because we sort of fractal both inside and, and outside, one of the ways to deal with humanity is in fact to choose. And so in the Bible, God chooses Israel and it's that's written about an Exodus. It's written about in the New Testament book of Hebrews and begins his work through them. And this work is set to go and be transmitted to all, not dissimilarly to a virus. And so, but part of the, part of the strangeness of Christianity is that to be chosen is to be chosen to suffer. To be chosen is to be chosen to suffer on behalf of the rest of the people. I did a really terrific conversation this week with Rafe Kelly, which Rafe has the recording and I don't have the recording. So I wasn't shown up on my channel yet, but Rafe will send me the recording at some point and it'll be on the screen. It'll be on the screen at some point and it'll show up on his channel. And we talked about some of this because the, when you, when you listen to someone like Jonathan Bajot talk about the patterns in the Bible being the patterns of reality, that's what a lot of this is addressing. So this suffering, this artificial pattern, every parent sacrifices for the wellbeing of their child, every good parent. Leaders are supposed to sacrifice for the wellbeing of the masses. This pattern of sacrifice plays out all the time in life. And so this choosing that is done of Israel lays itself out in that pattern. And that gets very clear in the story of Jesus, that Jesus suffers on behalf of the world. And especially something like the gospel of Matthew lines up Jesus and his identity as Israel. And so via, of course, rabbinical Judaism might have a different take on this. I'm no expert on that, but in terms of Christianity, Jesus sort of sets up the meaning, the logos of Israelite suffering in terms of the pattern of the world. And so Jesus dies to save the world. And that's what it means to be chosen. Now this gets into, Luke was just teasing me about Calvinism. This gets into Calvinism because Calvinism of course has the same meaning going about election. And to be chosen is not necessarily the kind of thing that a hedonist would like to have happen to them. Because one of the things that we see in the Bible is those God chooses, he chooses for them to suffer. He chooses for them to suffer on behalf of the world. One of the clearest passages on this is Philippians 2, where Jesus, although being equal with God, did not consider equality with God, something to be exploited, made himself nothing, taking on the nature of a slave and died the most humiliated way. And for this reason, God raises him to the highest place. So this, this movement and this dynamic with respect to choosing and suffering, is in some ways one key insight into the heart of Christianity. So did God adopt the rest of us with Jesus? I would say that God adopts us through Jesus. So Jesus is, Jesus is not only Israel, Jesus is not only new Israel, Jesus is also new Adam. And both of those things come through. And so Jesus is not only new Israel, but also new Adam. And both of those things come through. And so you can see in Romans chapter five, where the Apostle Paul talks about Jesus as new humanity. So yes, that's part of the universalization of the story of the Hebrews that happens in Jesus. Where'd Lady Cain, where the Lady Cain knocked up came from? It says it's his wife. So, you know, hey, he put a ring on it. That's always a, that's always an interesting question. The, that's going to take me way too far afield of the first two questions you asked, because then you get into questions of biology and humanity. And also all sorts of interesting questions with respect to either marrying monkeys or marrying sisters. So that's, that's a ways away. Did the devil also get to pick a tribe of people? There's another question later on that I think I'm going to wait to talk about the devil, because that's really interesting question. So Grim Grizz, are you in the room? Do you want to? I don't see his logo. He's got a nice bright green logo that I can usually spot him easily. So, so sorry to disappoint. I don't know if that helps at all. I answered Mark's question last week, I believe. Yes, I answered Mark's question last week. I answered the boxers or brief questions in the chat. How can it be true that Jesus says his burden is light and his yoke is easy? Not kind. His yoke is easy and his burden is light when he's asking us to pick up our cross. That's a really good question. It gets into this, it gets into this sense of, well, think of it. Here's, here's another way to think of it. Is marriage easy or hard? Anybody who's been married probably knows that marriage can be really hard. It's really hard to make a relationship work over a long period of time. Marriage can also make your life a lot easier, because you're no longer dealing with all this mating stuff. And so in one hand, following Christ is the hardest thing you can do. And Jordan Peterson sort of winces from the thought of it and says that Christians haven't impressed him in terms of their ability to actually follow Jesus. And fair enough. At the same time, many Christians will also tell you that once they became a disciple of Christ, their life got easier because they stopped looking for other masters. They, they now could rest in him. And so there's, there's that duality to it. And you're right to notice, you're right to notice the tension in it. And I don't know that I can, I don't know that I can dissolve the tension. So Aaron, you are in the room. I don't know if you can talk or not. So if you want to unmute and respond or clarify, go right ahead. Well, I'm in a car right now, so I won't do much talking beyond the, I appreciate you answering my question. Though it does seem like it's just a matter of shifting the conflict from one area to another. Yeah, there's always conflict. Life is like that sometimes. Hard things make other things easy, and easy things make other things hard. And I think that comes out in that saying. So, all right. Blaster Master. Aren't the divorce rates of atheists and non-believers lower than that of Christians? There's actually a lot of dispute about this because not only is the question of defining a Christian a difficult thing for Christians, it's a particularly difficult thing for pollsters. If it's self-identified Christians, that's one thing. But then I've seen studies that have showed, well, let's see, if we don't allow people to self-identify as something, let's say a Christian, let's look at their behavior. And so then they do surveys of, do these people attend worship services? How many times a week do these people attend religious things? Do they pray and read their Bible every day? And so some studies I've seen have shown that Christians who are more disciplined in common attributes of Christian living have a lower divorce rate than the general public. I've seen those studies. Then there is the question, too, of how many Christians are marrying because, at least with Christianity, generally speaking, there's the norm that sexuality belongs in marriage and atheists don't necessarily have that norm. So you'll have atheists that are, let's say, not marrying the people that they are having sex with or living different alternative sex lives. And so the actual number of atheists who marry might be quite low. And then you don't know whether or not the spouses of the atheists or Christians are also atheists or Christians. So these kind of things are always hard to measure. And like with a lot of... A little bit of music on the Discord today. These are always hard things to measure. But if you dig into the surveys, you'll find a lot of argument, which shouldn't surprise you. Phil P.J., when Paul Van Der Kley says culture is making it hard for 20s and 30s to start families, what are good examples? Are there churches as countercultures that are making it less hard? Do you have any advice for creating those countercultures? So tomorrow...not tomorrow, but Monday on my channel, I plan to release a video of a conversation we haven't had yet of myself and Joey and Dr. James, who's in Sacramento, and Cassidy and Katherine, who's on the Discord server. We're going to have our first conversation about what I call the generational handshake. And that gets into this entire issue of dating and mating in the world today inside and outside the church. So and I've also been talking to Valerie about doing a Discord randomized randos, some specials specifically on this topic. Not only is this a topic that comes up regularly because a fair number of people in this community are single, but also because I think this is one of the critical issues of our day. So I'm going to sort of sidestep most of these questions. And I don't know if Valerie's here right now, but she might highlight these questions and we can take them up when we do a special session. It might be next week, might be the week after. Do a special session specifically on these kinds of questions. I'll just make a general comment about your question that part of the downside of individualism has been the difficulty of people to not only develop marriages, but also to develop communities where certain values can be reinforced and maintained and achieved. That's part of what human beings do with community. And so churches are fairly general purpose communities along a specific line. And so I would expect, as I've said before, in the way it looks like society is going, marriage is going to be most commonly practiced among the highly religious and the very wealthy. And because marriage traditionally has had a lot of involvement in wealth, but also a degree of involvement with respect to sexuality. So, so Phil, I hope we get to your question when we do a special thing that focuses on those questions. Building on the lengthy convo on marriage, on which it seems to be a general consensus that that it's what we should aspire to and nurture once we have it. How should we take, how should we take the other Paul, the apostolic one, when he speaks of the desire for his readers to be single. And I think I'm going to see we have a whole bunch of questions on this. And so I'm going to kick that one to that to that discord again. We might do it next week. We'll announce it sometime sometime during the week and we'll take on a whole bunch of those questions. How do you feel about the first read this? I didn't know what P a dash Y O was, you know, PA, yo or her PA Joe, Joe. What do you, how do you feel about the PA Joe crew believing basically we've been doing everything wrong in the West since 1054? I don't know. He's using the Internet, so I can't say everything's been bad since 1054. This question was posted by Western Protestant right gang. I don't know that Protestants necessarily should have a feeling of superiority about that because a lot of Protestants adopt the posture that we've been doing everything wrong since the first century. And in some weird ways, the those who would say everything's gone wrong since, you know, the since 1054, even around the time we're in the West, we've been doing everything wrong. Let's say the first 500 years of the church, they're less conservative than Protestants in a weird way because Protestants are always trying to get back to the first century. And first, first with the story, they sort of hopscotch first to the 16th or 17th century and then to the first century because that's what happened in the 16th century. They were trying to get back to the first century. So, but I think so then, you know, some of the liturgical, sacramentalist, historical churches like the Roman Catholics and the Orthodox look at us and say, ah, you're you modernists. You think you're only trying to get back to the first century, but really you're you can't escape the 20th or the 21st century. And I kind of turn around and say, well, you know, I'm going to go back to the first century. And I think, you know, I hope we do this in a friendly way because we can learn from each other because the strength of Protestantism is an attempt to really go back to really, really go back to Christ as best we can. But the strength of these other traditions is that they're trying to get back to the first century. We do see Christ through the centuries too, and we really can't help it. Can we really hopscotch right back to the first century or not? Can we really hopscotch back to the fourth century or the sixth century or the 10th century? And I think that's what we're trying to do. And I think that's what we're trying to do. Can we really hopscotch right back to the first century or not? Can we really hopscotch back to the fourth century or the sixth century or the 10th century or the 11th century? Or, you know, the, you know, a ladder and counsel or, you know, these are these are all difficult, difficult questions. I welcome, I continue to welcome the engagement of my brothers and sisters in Christ who are Orthodox and Roman Catholic. One of the real treats over the last three years has been to perhaps have some of my bigotry and biases challenged by terrific Orthodox and Roman Catholic saints, both living and dead, to hopefully make me a better Protestant. And hopefully along the way we'll all become better Christians. That's my goal. So my I'm I am indebted to Jonathan Peugeot and increasingly his brother, Mattia, even if I can't say his name very well, for the things that I'm learning. And I'm walking through his book on my YouTube channel. And, you know, I read a bunch of few chapters yesterday towards the end of my workday. And I woke up this morning thinking about some of what he had written. And, you know, so what's to me, this book is a really terrific example of exactly this dynamic because, you know, the Peugeot brothers were raised by raised in a a a seriously Christian evangelical French Canadian family. And their evangelicalism shows through in this book in the way they handle scripture, in the way they approach it and the in the issues that they challenge it. And now they're they're trying to use church fathers and other ancient perspectives to address it. But we never escape who we are. So I think it's I've been having a lot of fun in this book. I found the book challenging and I I'm simply delighted that we have a chance to do this. And the same goes for my YouTube channel. You know, Anselman, he's probably oh, there he is. He's an ever present presence in the comments section. You know, I've learned a ton from Anselman and from many, many of you in the comments that you leave. I'm just continually amazed at the brilliance out there. The amount of knowledge that is out there in the world, in the church or with people who are students of philosophies. I've I've learned a tremendous amount in the last three years. And so I, you know, I think this is a terrific tool. I don't know if anybody else wants to jump in on that answer. I'm going to go right ahead. Yes, not. All right. Corey, I first started my journey into exploring Christianity from a secular Peterson perspective inspired by his biblical series. I then progressed to the Peugeot's videos and now I am really enjoying Tom Holland's Dominion. I love these perspectives on Christianity and they have encouraged me to explore further. However, I and as I encounter more Christian perspectives, my stumbling block perhaps is the devil. So something kind of fun about that. As I look into the etymology of the term, I realize some modern notions haven't always been the case. When I read Barclay's Bible study on Mark, the history of the term is mentioned from it originally meaning adversary and could be used in applied to human adversaries. The word devil comes from the Greek term Diablos, which means slanderer. Then in Dominion, I discovered where the notion of Satan being Lucifer and cast out of heaven stems from Isaiah 14. As I explore further, I encounter some Christian perspectives on the devil. I'm a little freaked out and wondered if I can get if I can even get with the Christianity if I can even get with the Christianity thing. Do I need to buy some of the metaphysics about Satan as the cause of current evil in the world to be a Christian? I have no problem with Jesus, but I do have a problem with notions of the devil. What about the devil? That's a great question. I guess as a pastor, my first admonition would be focus on Jesus. Jesus in Christianity is the center of our revelation. Now with respect to the devil, Jesus didn't seem to be skeptical on this point. You've got the temptations. Now, people might question, oh, a lot of times when people question the devil, they're questioning a lot of the representations of the devil that have filtered through to us culturally. If I had to make a sort of twisted ontological argument with respect to the existence of the devil, it would be something in some ways akin to the argument I make with respect to the existence of God and the physicality of the resurrection akin to sort of what Peugeot put to Peterson. If in fact all of these patterns are true, it seems right that the patterns would manifest. If in fact there is spiritual opposition to the creator of the world and his will, what makes us think that that opposition wouldn't itself have a hierarchy? And if it has a hierarchy, what makes us think there wouldn't be a spiritual entity on the top of that hierarchy? So although there's a lot of chaff in the history of representations of the devil, for me it's not a real challenging thing. There's a ton of nuance with respect to it too when you look at serious Christians in this manner. Although you can look at Martin Luther. Martin Luther talked about the devil more than anybody it seems and said a lot of very interesting things about his relating to his encounters with the devil. A lot of the variability let's say about these things to me, I just simply chalk it up as human beings are very flexible and imaginative and that will impact the historiography surrounding the devil. Some of the more interesting questions around this to me actually have to do with the relationship between the Old and the New Testament and the intertestamental period with respect to this subject. On one hand there's an adversary, Job is one of the oldest books in the Old Testament and this adversary, the accuser who seems to be a member of the divine council is a very big factor in the book of Job. Well that's interesting, but you're right that this is a huge topic and there are very many interesting angles to it. But I tend to follow C.S. Lewis's admonition on this which is if you start thinking too much about the devils, they're going to become a distraction. Focus on Jesus and let Jesus handle the devils. So that's a shortcut admonition. Let's see Cory are you in the room? Anybody else want to follow up on this? Unless you want to call me the devil, but I don't have that much power and I'm way too young. Well yeah, I just can't help but think from a modern perspective, anyone alive today, you have to consider at least that such an entity is real. There would be an obvious interest in having you underestimate him as sort of just something social constructionist or that would be great for such a given that such an entity exists that would be great for his goals as the author of evil. Yeah, it always surprises me when people are skeptical about evil. Right. I just wonder, wow, you've had an awfully privileged life if you're, if you have the ability to be skeptical about evil. Congratulations, good for you. I don't know what Pedro thinks is orthodox but me as orthodox I think evil is just lacking in good. Yeah, that's, that's, that's, yeah, the question, the question about evil is a big big conversation. It is. Is it, is it, is it rebellion? Does it have ontology? Is it lacking ontology? It's lacking ontology for me. But then you just also, you just also talked about some skepticism about being skeptical about the devil, because anyway, like I said, this is a big subject, this is a big subject. All right, I'm going to keep going. So as to make sure that Rick is able to sleep at night and not worry about all the questions stacking up. And André wrote a really wonderful message last week which we went into another room to read and it's right there in the questions for PVK if you'd like to read it yourself. Controller 796 again asks, Is this the beginning of a new theological thesis? I'm not sure what he's talking about, so I'm going to keep going. Corvus Ossi says, Please tell us about your dog or past dogs, pics too. Just read that so I haven't had time to post any pics. I like dogs, dogs are cool. So I had a dog in the Dominican Republic, a Rottweiler, she was a great dog. When I moved back to North America and settled down here in Sacramento, we had two Rottweilers and they were wonderful dogs. But on a little urban lot, it's not the greatest experience for big dogs. So after the Rottweilers passed of natural causes, my children were a little antsy to get a dog. And I eventually relented and I came home to our little rescue dog that is a Shih Tzu Maltese mix. That dog has my Rottweilers never bit a living soul. That dog bites everyone. The dog's kind of a jerk. He's got small dog syndrome and he's got skin problems and went blind in one eye. And so now is a one-eyed little furry dog that people look down and say, Oh, he's cute. And they reach down to pet him and get bit. But we still love the little critter. And yeah, dogs are great. We also have a cat right now. My daughter, there's a, we wind up with cats on a fairly regular basis when you have kids because there'll be stray cats in the neighborhood and these stray cats will have kittens and then there'll be a kitten somewhere in your yard. And the kids are like, Oh, a kitten. And it's, and that triggers the whole thing where, okay, well, I'll take care of it. Really? Okay. And now my daughters are actually my daughters right now are really taking, doing the majority of the work with the pets. So we have a dog and a cat right now who don't get along. And yeah, and now my oldest son has a beautiful, beautiful golden retriever named Henry with a, with a wonderful disposition when they, when they visited a few months ago and stayed with us. It was really terrific having a big dog again in the house. But when my little dog goes, well, we'll see. I don't know if I'll get another dog there. I love having them, but they're a lot of work and they're a big expense because you don't have health insurance for the dog. And every time you go to the vet, it's five, $600. So yeah, dogs are great. Love dogs. One of Jordan Peterson's, one of Jordan Peterson's rules and 12 more rules is be grateful in spite of your suffering. I wonder, can we ever truly become grateful in spite of our sufferings without first being honest with our lack of gratitude because of our sufferings? I'm not saying I disagree with the rule. I think it's critical. However, I think it is. I think it is critical in some, if not all cases to first allow yourself to wallow in your sufferings in order to number one, taste the pros and cons of wallowing and to eventually fully experience the benefit of being grateful in spite of the suffering that you've. Now, if you look at my conversation with Christian that I had not very long ago, you can very much understand. You can just kind of hear him reading this question and this question is so him again. Part of why I have focused my efforts on. I would rather build a community than build a personal following. Why? Because the community itself is always stronger and the community can manifest and have a stability that I as an individual can ever have. And I think this is one of the problems in our celebrity culture right now. We have a lot of people building followings and not enough people building communities. We need more community builders because people, people sin, people stumble, people fail, people rise, people fall. And communities are far more enduring. And so my advice to people is don't build fame, don't build celebrity, don't build a following, build a community. So anyway, there's a question coming along here somewhere. Is there utility, if not necessity, in embracing ungrateful spite and the onset of suffering so long as it ultimately gives way to gratitude in spite of the suffering? I would say this bitterness and spite and ingratitude come fairly naturally. Gratitude often takes some effort. And one of the things that I really appreciated about Peterson's release of his conversation with the Times reporter was how many times he re-emphasized in the midst of, and when you listen to his suffering, horrible. How hard, he says, he worked on not becoming bitter. Last week someone jumped in the Discord Q&A and wanted, you know, asked a question about being an incel. And my answer to that person was be on your guard against bitterness. Bitterness is one of the ways to have an understanding of what Christians mean by hell is bitterness. Bitterness is locked from the inside. So I think we will all, I think our natural reaction to pain is an unhealthy response. And so the admonition that the book of James begins with, consider it pure joy when you suffer all sorts of hardships, that takes some effort. And to sort of go back to the community question, it actually I think often requires a healthy community around us to not only learn joy and gratitude even in the midst of suffering, but then to have that supported and encouraged by a community in a healthy, productive way. So that's a good question. Mon Santa. As a follow up to the previous question, I wonder if the nature of gratitude might be important to suss out. Is gratitude fundamentally a subjective experience for the benefit of the one being grateful? Or is gratitude necessarily directed at someone as an appropriate response to a benefit gained? In the latter case, would gratitude then be valid regardless of whether the one being grateful gains any benefit from the gratitude itself? It's a hard question. I think gratitude is amplified when we have someone to be grateful to and express our gratitude towards. Meaning has the same question. To what degree is meaning a feeling or an experience? And to what degree is it ontological? That's a hard question and a lot of these questions are similar to that. In the atheist community, especially the freedom from religion people who tend to put up billboards in Sacramento, a big argument they often make is I don't need God to feel grateful. Fair enough. But I think in a lot of ways, having something enduring and substantial to relate to magnifies the experience. And again, back to the community theme, having a community. So I just last week I preached on Luke 15. And Luke 15 has the lost sheep, the lost coin, and the lost son. And in every case, the response to something good, finding the lost coin, finding the lost sheep, finding the lost son, recovering the lost son, recovering the lost coin, recovering the lost sheep, the expression of gratitude is communal. Celebrate with me. Mourn with those who mourn. Rejoice with those who rejoice. And so in our individualistic culture, which tends to be, you can see this in the, in all of the gender drama we have going on in our culture. I just saw yesterday that Glamour magazine, because I read Glamour every week. I don't actually, it just hit Twitter. But Glamour magazine, Demi Lovato, who is a singer, whose music I don't listen to. I just don't know who she is, but I saw that she, you know, she came out as, what was it, I think it was queer. And now she's at home in this. And the natural instinctive response to this, even almost demand, is the community around me should celebrate this with me. Now, regardless of what you are being asked to celebrate, this desire to be affirmed and celebrated with seems very deep with us. And so I think that should inform what we imagine gratitude to be and even what our emotions are. So we're deeply connected people. We're nodes in a network. And when something good happens, we want all the nodes around us to be happy with us. That's complex, but I think it's the way we are. So. All right, Dave W. About a year and a half ago, you put out a short video where you stress the importance of Christians refraining from public conflict over doctrinal ecclesiastical matters, because of the damage this might do to our common witness to Christ. I don't know if I would say, I would say it's more important how we process our divisions than whether or not we're processing our divisions. We're always going to have divisions. And I don't necessarily want churches to become secret societies where they're discussing these things. There's a there are things that are best discussed in public and things that are best discussed in private. But I haven't wanted to forefront, for example, when Jonathan Peugeot and I talk, Jonathan and Peugeot and you know maybe some of these things will come up with his brother's book with me too. There will be disagreements. Let's let's talk about them productively. And you know Anselman is regularly expressing his, his disappointment or his endorsement of my ideas in the comment section. And I think that's good, because I need to be corrected. And sometimes I read his comment, I think he's right about that. Sometimes I read his comment, I think he's wrong about that. But that's just, you know, my whole relationship with Anselman has pretty much been via the comment section. And, you know, that's, that's fine. But yeah, so we have to figure out these things. Jesus certainly dealt with disagreement all over the place. The Gospels are full of him disagreeing with people around him. Okay, keep reading. You specifically reference the often heated disagreements Christians are having in the comment section of your YouTube channel. My question to you is this, how, if at all, do you think this should be applied to an estuary space such as bridges of meaning? Does serious theological disagreement among Christians damage the witness of non-Christians on bridges of meaning, even if done respectfully? Is disagreement among Christians in an estuary best kept only to subjects other than doctrinal ecclesiastical debates? Or does the encouragement of sincere disagreement on any topic violate the spirit of estuary? The last is certainly not true. So I, for a long time, before social media, I was involved in two different listservs. One was sort of an echo chamber. And anybody who disagreed with the, with the prevailing opinion on a whole variety of subjects, mostly theological and political, was very quickly shouted down. Let's say we all, that's what the spirit of that discord server was about. And most of that, not that discord server, that listserv, most of what that listserv does is complain about other people. I don't follow that listserv very closely because I find it unhelpful. I also find it a little unfair because they're not, nobody in that listserv is necessarily using it to improve themselves, to learn more, to grow more, to become smarter. They're just sort of encouraging each other within their own little echo chamber. The other listserv that I was involved, continue to be involved with, CRC Voices, which is sort of a listserv that involves issues in the Christian Eiform Church, and some Bridgers have sort of stuck over there now and participate quietly or lurk, has quite a bit more disagreement. And you can get fights on that, on that listserv. People get upset, people get angry, but it's more interesting and I think it's more productive. What I would want is actually part of what, when I talked about not, you know, the discord server, not getting, not having centuries long Christian disagreements, monopolizing certain chat rooms. That was for the sake of people who were coming in to ask questions and explore in other areas. Certain disagreements have been around us for thousands of years and I have absolutely no problem. In fact, I think it's a good thing that there are spaces in a discord server for people to get really nerdy about universalism versus eternal conscious torment or the doctrine of the Trinity. And people want to talk about these things. They're important things to talk about. And I think it's good to have a forum where people can work on these issues. Part of this is because we as human beings are very short lived. And even if, you know, the Council of Nicaea came to a decision about the nature of the Trinity and the nature of Christ, you know, not quite, you know, 1700, 1600 years ago. Most of us aren't that old. And so we've got questions and philosophy has changed and cultures have changed. So to have a space to talk about these things is good. I think the idea of an estuary is sort of similar to the idea of a harbor. You want, you want, you want the fresh water coming in. You want your you want openness to the salt water, but you do want some you do want some buffers so that the waves of the ocean don't make conversation impossible. And the moderators at the Bridges of Meaning Discord are fairly light in terms of their moderation. They mostly trust people to find their own way out of their little messes that they make. And people do make little messes. They get upset with each other. And the part of what we've tried to do here is have a culture that enables productive conversation. What do I mean by that? I can say I'm not going to talk to anybody who's Orthodox or Roman Catholic or atheist. I'm only going to talk to Calvinists. Okay, it's not going to be a I'm not going to have a lot of conversation partners. And because we share a lot of agreement over a lot of different things, our conversations will get increasingly nerdy. And our conversations will be quite unproductive in terms of the capacity of the church to actually communicate outside of itself and not to be so insular. So part of the idea of an estuary is to create some boundaries so that conversations can be productive. And part of that productivity is conversations will continue to be interesting to people. The world is a very big place and there's a whole lot of nerdiness and and some of you have acquired some pretty amazing esoteric knowledge about a great many things that most people can't connect to the things that they find relevant in their lives. We should have part of why I put of what I think of with an estuary is that there should be. So if you go to the estuaries along the California coast, and you drive beautiful Highway one, south of Santa Cruz, let's say, especially once you get down by Big Sur, what you will find is lots of little streams and rivers coming out of the mountains going to the sea. And there are a bunch of tidal pools and in those tidal pools, there are all these craggy little puddles and holes and things and inside those things, there'll be lots of wildlife. And that's sort of what I want from an estuary. I want lots of little breakout rooms where people can have a conversation with six to eight people. Even a channel my size, which is not large, you know, just looking at my YouTube stats, 17,000 subs. That is not a big YouTube channel. So even a channel this size in the comment section is often too big to have a productive conversation. Churches have long learned that you can do teaching in a big room, you can do worship in a big room. But if you want to do, excuse me, if you want to do the conversation, you can do a YouTube channel. You can do worship in a big room. But if you want to do, excuse me, if you want to do the kind of interactive work that really helps people grow, you probably need a group of less than a dozen, preferably less than eight people in a time span of anywhere from a half hour to an hour and a half to get into things. Because that way people can apply it to their lives. And so I have absolutely no problem with people nerding out on the Discord server about all sorts of things they're interested in, Christian or non-Christian. What I don't want is a couple of people dominating a space about one particular thing. And that's why we've created all these other rooms and we have this area in the server we call the forum. And so if two people are really auguring down on some specific issue, philosophical or theological or cultural, and it's just back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, and nobody else has much interest in it, it's like why don't you go to this other room and you two can nerd out and talk for the next two hours about this one thing. Enjoy, but leave some other space for other people. And then also once things get down to name calling, well you just believe that because you're a Christian. Well yeah, sure. Or you're a jerk. Well maybe I am a jerk. But these things that sort of silence debate don't necessarily help us make progress. And we're seeing this in the broader culture now, where there's all sorts of ways to shut up your adversary, but having someone walk away in anger from a conversation, it happens, but it's not a good goal. A better goal is having two people talking and someone might say, I'm feeling a little angry right now, I need to take time out, I'll come back when I'm better able to talk. And then maybe you'll have to apologize for your behavior, but this, we all want to make progress on the things that we care about. And the idea of an estuary is, here's a space that you can make progress and hopefully have access to other people who have ideas, interesting takes, education, all of that. So that's the idea. We want, in a sense, we want to have a space where disagreement is welcome, but we want to have a culture where disagreement is productive. I don't know if anybody wants to jump in on that from the voice chat. It's so funny that voice chat is quiet during the sessions and then once we, once we, once we stop streaming to the internet everybody, everybody talks or leaves. All right. What does it mean for the physical physicality of Christ's resurrection to be necessary? And what is the relationship, if any, between that specific necessity, its propositional truth, and the general necessity of a given story to manifest if it's true? It's a hard question. Is Christ's conquest of Rome and colonization of the world following his death in the matter verse not enough of a physical manifestation of the story to satisfy it? It's an interesting question. What's fun about disagreement? Because I can learn from disagreement because I'm just a little limited creature and he's asking really smart, provocative questions that force me to think harder about my professed beliefs. Is it not counterproductive in both story and matter for believers to harp on Christ getting a shiny new body on Easter when that body is the very thing the church is supposed to be? This is a great question. I think my answer is that I really like the way you laid this out, but the conquest of Rome and the colonization of the world does not exhaust the resurrection. Because even though that's something that we can sort of stick a flag in, what we're really, this stuff can get so esoteric very quickly. When we, when we, when Christians profess their belief in the physicality of the resurrection, in some way what they're longing for is in the words of the New Testament that Christ be all in all. That that Jesus finally reigns and sin and death are no more. Because Rome fell and Rome was in some ways perfected by Christianity. Both of those things are true. But that perfection, we all have the sense that it has not fully been realized. And so part, C.S. Lewis, when he talks about the resurrection of Christ, I think it's in his book Miracles. C.S. Lewis notes that many people when they want to argue about the physicality of the resurrection want to talk about what happened in the first five minutes after a historical event. And Lewis points instead to the, and that's where your question, Dingo Dan, sort of follows along with Lewis. The meaning of the physicality of the resurrection essentially says that we have more to hope for from the resurrection than just improved mental mapping of the world. Mental maps in the world are exciting, wonderful, good things. But without them becoming fully incarnate and manifest in physicality, there's a sense in which the mappings are unsatisfactory. For example, let's say I as a pastor have a mental image of what a far better church than Living Stones would be. And someone can sit down and say, Pastor Paul, tell me about the ideal church. And let's say I can sit and talk for an hour or two, which we all know I can. And I can use beautiful, wonderful images that provoke your imaginations and inspire you to want to. Well, that's just it. If I'm really doing my job well, my mental mappings are inspiring you to physically manifest what the mapping produced in your minds. And that's where the resurrection of Christ, although it certainly means Thomas having something to stick his fingers on. The resurrection of Christ is not complete until the spirit of Christ fully realizes its mapping of existence. And so to say, well, the idea of resurrection is really wonderful. And a lot of us are satisfied with that until that idea gets manifest in something. So even let's say a pagan ish secularized Easter where we've got chocolate bunnies and colored eggs, you can say to a child, imagine a three pound milk chocolate bunny. And that child's eyes light up. And you say, there you go. You got it. What do you mean I got it? I just gave you the idea of a three pound chocolate bunny. And that kid is going to say, OK, I want it. I think in a lot of ways, that's what the resurrection of Christ means and why its physicality is so essential. Because you can say to someone, you know, your deceased loved one is not gone. Really? Tell me more. They're there in your heart. What do you mean by that? Well, when you think about your deceased loved one, don't you have fond memories and warm feelings? And again, back to the community theme, when you're together with your family or other people that knew your loved one, when you talk about them, aren't they in some ways right there in the room? Yeah. Say, OK, would you trade all of that for them actually physically being in the room to place your arms around them, to smell them, to hear their voice? So when my father died in 2013, he took a whole bunch of other people who had died before him with him. Because he sort of kept all of those people alive because he could tell stories about them. And then when he left, when he died, whole worlds died with him. And so the resurrection of Christ in the Christian demand of physicality is actually a promise that our desired mappings will one day take on the kind of reality that we enjoy in a chocolate bunny or in the warm embrace of a loved one. Test. Test. Oh, I hear you. So, you know, it's it's it's in some ways sort of like having a crush on a girl and having a real relationship with the girl crushes full of lots of emotion. The real relationship is a real thing with a real girl. So, somebody's got an open mic. Anybody want to follow up on this question? Yeah, I would, Paul. OK. So I put this in the text chat. I think what I tried to say was that if someone makes belief in the historical physical physical resurrection, mammon or some kind of abstracted secret knowledge, which would just be Gnosticism, I think they're completely missing the point. And you can't. Because the whole point is to be Christ to the world. So you're working tester. And so if you I don't know, I get really upset because I think a lot of I mean, this is this is why I get so frustrated with people who want Jordan Peterson to affirm the physical resurrection so much. And I think I was saying this recently to some friends that the reason it frustrates me so much is I think Jordan Peterson is wrestling with what that means. Way more than all of his criticizers are who want him to just say some magic words. And and at the end of the day, I guess the truth is, is I just believe Jordan Peterson more than I believe his criticizers. And so and this is regarding like irregardless or regardless. That's not a word of whether or not the physical resurrection of Christ is true. Like in an objective sense, that's somewhat irrelevant to the point, I think. Well, it sort of it sort of maps on the question of obedience, because what is obedience? Obedience is manifesting in the physical world. The idea of the one you profess to follow. That's obedience. And you're right in that all the all the yakking, all the imagining, all the feeling. In many ways, we have so many phrases that say this action speak louder than words. Because that which gets manifest in the physical world is more real. It's so complicated. It's not more real. I mean, our language is so complicated. It's not more real. I mean, our language, it's it's hard to it's hard to articulate these things. But but again, part part of the difficulty that we have right now is that we're all actually communicating through this electronic face, which warps things to. But yeah, anybody else on this? All right. Oh, boy. We still got lots of questions. We're now in. All right. Corvus. Yeah. I was just going to get to ask, do you think the like I was just like, oh, maybe maybe the the feeling of accomplishment of doing something actual in in the world or like the the the piece associated with it like the the has something to do with like the the shows that that's things are supposed to be manifested. And I think like thinking back, you know, when when we really had to act physically and like actually like, you know, you're in the middle of the the woods, you actually have to do things in order to to live. And I think like when you think about it from that perspective, it like might help you understand why these things are like why it's so important to manifest, you know, the things you think or ideas physically because like it's easier to understand back then how was a matter of actual like surface Yeah, I think one of the differences is, you know, I made this illustration and one of I don't remember where I did it. But if you're looking if you're if you're in the woods alone, and if you're on a city street, in one way, you've got the same amount of information or in a city street, you've got the same amount of information that you've got in a city street. And one in one way you've got the same amount of information coming at you. What's the difference about the woods versus a room full of screens? And I think part of that has exactly what you put your finger on. And I think part of that is the difference between the two. You've got the same amount of information coming at you. What's the difference about the woods versus a room full of screens. And I think part of that has exactly what you put your finger on that the woods demand that you act. And it also highlights how spiritual human beings are, because in a room full of screens, you've probably got a lot of spirit coming at you that you don't necessarily have in the woods. So yeah, it's it's it's you know, we're getting at these dynamics about what we are and about what we are. All right. Corva Saucy. This one has three lobsters. So a lot of people wanted this question, at least four people. Can you talk more about the idea that the world manifests itself through attention? What is some of the science that points in that direction? So a lot of the verveky cognitive science stuff from awakening in the meat, awakening from the meaning crisis, there's a lot of this about attention that I was having a conversation with someone about the news. And the person was saying, oh, news organs of this particular political side are so wrong, because all we're hearing about is and then named a few stories that one side of the political agenda was emphasizing and not the other side. And I mentioned to this person that because, you know, I don't want my Spanish to go away completely, I'll often just flip to Spanish television, which is kind of fun to watch. And if I look if I watch news on Spanish television, guess what all the news there is about almost all the time. It's almost all the time about the kinds of issues that Hispanic Americans in Sacramento, California are interested in. And so they cover very different stories than stories that you get covered either by NPR or ABC or Fox News. And then sometimes I like going on the Internet to read newspapers from other parts of the world. I go and I see what's in the Listín de Audio in the Dominican Republic and see what they're talking about or go to India Times and see what they're talking about in India, because they were talking in English, at least in the India Times. So there's attention creates your world. And as Peterson says often, when I made this illustration often to when I walk into my office or into a room, my value hierarchy will determine where my attention goes first. Now, some of these things are common. Let's say let's say you walk into a room and someone is beating a dog. I would say almost all Americans will immediately focus on someone beating a dog because this is this is this is an immoral, outrageous thing to beat an animal and cause pain to an animal in our culture. I told the story about driving down this highway in the Dominican Republic with a truck full of pastors and a dog runs out in the street and I hit the dog. And I wanted to stop and find out whose dog it was and somehow make amends for my killing the dog. And the pastors looked at me like I had three heads. Why would I do such a thing? Well, attention creates our world. And it doesn't mean that there isn't a dog in the room. Or let's say I walk into church one day and there's a woman with a hijab. Well, everyone's paying attention to the woman with a hijab. Or I walk. Here's another example. I was gone for vacation. And so I had one of my friends from a neighboring church preach for me. And a young man walks into church with a bow and arrow in the back of the church. And he's like, I could barely preach because I kept looking at this guy with the bow and arrow thinking, what is he doing with the bow and arrow? And I didn't know who it was. So then I asked around and I found out who it was. And then if I had been preaching that day, I would have seen his name is Mike. I would have seen Mike walk into the church with a bow and arrow. And I would have just thought Mike has a bow and arrow. I wouldn't have paid any attention to it because I knew Mike and I knew things about him. And I figured he's a young guy who knows why he has the bow and arrow. But he's not a danger. And I'm not worried he's going to point the arrow at me and shoot me. But the guest pastor had no idea. So this is where attention creates our world and our world is manifest by it. So when the Hispanics see a news story, they see it through the eyes of a Hispanic American. When someone else sees a news story, they see it through their eyes. Our value hierarchies create the world that we see. And the science about that is it's all this cognitive science stuff that John Vervecki talks about. And it's the same stuff that Jordan Peterson talks about. And that's why, you know, when you look at Jordan Peterson's decision between a world of objects and a world of action, values are readily manifest not only in which objects do we pay most attention to, but what do we do next? And that's where actions are in fact more value sensitive than just objects, even though objects are too. I don't know if that helps. Is there more of a specific question that let's see if Corvus is in the room. Is there something more you wanted to get at? No, I think that points me in the right direction. I think I was overinterpreting the Peterson-Pageot thing a little bit. Yeah, I think that's what Jonathan was pointing to. And that's what Peterson was trying to point Sam Harris to in their conversations, because you talk to Sam Harris and you almost get the sense that if everyone walks into a room, they will all see the same thing. Now, let's imagine. Okay, so here's here's everyone is coming into a room where there is a grade school play about to happen. That room is filled mostly with parents and family members and relatives of everyone who is going to see the stage. Now, in one sense, what happens on the stage will be the same for everyone in the room. But every single one of those people in the audience is going to be paying paying special attention to their child in the play. And so when if you were to walk out of that room and have people fill out a questionnaire about what they saw, you'd get some similarity in the answers. You get a lot of difference in the answers because they're all looking at different kids. And now, if everyone in that school is from more or less the same cultural, I had this I had this recently where I did a commentary on this book. And I also, you know, I I ramble and I go down rabbit trail. So I had I was made I made a comment about The Bachelor, the show of The Bachelor. And the day after I released that video, my phone rang and it was a number that wasn't in my book. And I often don't answer those numbers. But if I'm not doing anything and I'm taking a little break and a number comes up, I'll answer the phone. So I answer the phone. Hello, did you make a video? And he named the name of the video. And he said, that picture of that man and those women, what was that from? I said, that's from The Bachelor. What is The Bachelor? The Bachelor is a television show. Oh, are you a Christian pastor? Yes. How do you feel about polygamy? Why do you ask? Well, that picture made me think of polygamy. And after I looked at the picture, I thought, yeah, I could see where he gets that from. That picture made him think about polygamy. He saw that picture of The Bachelor with the one guy and the 32 women and everybody is dressed to the nines. And the thing that this person thought, now this person is an immigrant to the United States. I inferred that from his accent and from the questions he was asking and from the kinds of questions he followed up asking with respect to me as a Christian minister and polygamy. And so he came from another part of the world. So when he saw that picture from the ABC show, The Bachelor, the first thing he thought of was here's one man with a lot of beautiful wives. That's not an irrational thing to think of when you look at that picture. But almost nobody who lives in American culture who knows anything about The Bachelor would think of that when they saw that picture. And that's how attention, that's how the world manifests itself in the attention. We look at that picture and think some crazy reality TV show that is as desperately perpetuating monogamy myths and heteronormity, even while it's in this cross pressured cultural setting, this guy looks at the picture and thinks, oh, he sure has a lot of wives. So that's that's the way the world works. All right. L.F. Bazani. One of your videos you talked about spending time thinking about how to reach out to the woke. I've been getting pretty cynical about there being hope, especially after Neil. Neil Shenvy getting canceled the platform this week by Veritas. Any thoughts? Do you see a silver lining? I'm missing. The. The temptations of the woke in some ways are the same temptations as the anti woke. You take this one dot, you allow this one dynamic to dominate your world. Neil, you know, they decided to not, you know, let Neil debate this guy. And it's just sort of funny when these things happen, because if both people want to talk, what you can't you can't find some YouTuber who would volunteer to moderate, you know, Neil Shenvy's been on unbelievable at least twice. And he had a debate with someone on unbelievable with Justin Briarly. Justin Briarly was going to do that. I mean, Justin Briarly doesn't need Veritas to platform a disagreement between to platform a discussion between two people. So, yeah, the the incident certainly is telling about a variety of things. And I just noticed that that Glenn Lowry basically put out a call on Twitter and I retweeted it saying, you know, I'd love to debate you people come and talk to me. And I I'd love to see them, you know, have a good discussion with Glenn Lowry. Glenn Lowry is a smart guy. You might say I've had some people say, well, Glenn Lowry, because they remember some of the stuff that Glenn Lowry did earlier back in the Reagan years. Well, Glenn Lowry is a conservative says, well, OK, then talk to talk to John McWhorter. John McWhorter isn't. So I think this gets back into the conversation of the resurrection. If you want, if you see a pattern in the world that you think is unhelpful, do your best to not be a non-player character. Don't manifest the pattern. Manifest the opposite of the pattern. What does that mean? If if the woke are are canceling people, then talk to people who have been canceled or find another platform. Don't get reactive. Don't let this is this is what I see often. People lose their agency. If you're highly reactive, you have given away your agency to someone else. You have given your way your agency to the opposition because you have basically allowed them to control what you're saying next. Rick and I were just watching some YouTube's this morning before we started doing this about the whole super straight phenomenon. And so now we have these people from the other side making videos. They're just aghast at the super straights and on and on and on. And I'm thinking, how easy are you to troll? And as I mentioned this week, too, I think on Twitter, if you wear your buttons on the outside, someone will push them. If you really want to be a formidable person, work hard on not being easily triggered and not being because the most predictable thing is to find someone who is all about a certain issue. And all you have to do is you know the magic words to say to have them pop and off they'll pop in a very reliable way. And if you can't anticipate what they're going to say, you have a degree of mastery over them. So step out of the drama, try to be less reactive, keep your reactions on the insides if you can, and figure out new ways to engage people that derail the normal unproductive spirals that have happened. And people that actually met. I mean, the real thing. So think about Jordan Peterson's Kathy Newman interview. The thing that made that so powerful was Peterson could engage her in ways that broke the program. That's what made that powerful. And people don't like having the program broken, especially if they are invested in the program. And right now, with a lot of this back and forth in the culture war, both sides are invested in the program because both sides understand if I can double down and reinforce my base, whether it be woke or anti woke, they'll support me on Patreon. They'll watch me on YouTube. They'll book offers will come my way. Positions will come my way in my own siloed organization. There is a lot of money to be made in a culture war, just like there's a lot of money to be made in a physical war. And if you're going to go make the money, you're going to go make the money, but you are going to be a chump of that war. So my admonition would be once you see the pattern of the war, figure out how to disrupt it. And is there hope? Yeah, I have hope. Short term, you never know. Things could get really bad. Long term, I'm a Christian. I believe in the resurrection. I believe that I believe that Christ will be all in all. I believe that the things that we suffer will not be here forever. So if you're if you're lacking on hope, I would admonish someone to seek Christ and their hope in him and the physicality of the resurrection, which is manifesting itself. And one day Christ will be all in all. And someone might say, well, that's just a story you tell yourself to make yourself feel better. All right. Well, do you watch Netflix to make yourself feel better? If I'm wrong, I'm wrong, but I will be joyfully wrong loving my enemies. Isn't that the kind of wrong we want to see all around us rather than angrily, bitterly wrong burning down the buildings of the opposition? That's not any kind of wrong I want to live with. So that's that's my take. Cody, Paul, you recently tweeted this. Woke ism is the child of Christian European philosophy trying to absolve itself of a variety of sins. Yep, that's true. I believe that this is a thoroughly Christian and European spat. A lot of it is. Yeah. Sneetches are still arguing about the numbers of stars. Can you expand on this a bit as I find a really I find it a really interesting thesis. If you go to Africa or Asia, you're not going to find a lot of woke. You might find people who are upset about maybe British colonial rule over their nation at some point or French colonial rule or Belgian colonial rule, et cetera, et cetera. All that might be around. But the particular manifestation that we have running through our culture in sort of this postmodern critical theory way. So that's all the brainchild of European philosophy. And that's all downstream from Christianity. So the woke, you know, this whole thing about well, are Marxists Christians. Well, I think there's obvious tension between the philosophy of Karl Marx and Christianity. But I don't know that you would have the dynamic without Christianity. And this is the major thesis of of Tom Holland and his book Dominion. And this is this is what Nietzsche was pointing to. It's it's in Christianity that somehow the victim gain status. You don't find that in Rome or Greece. You don't find that in other cultures too quickly. So in Christianity, the victim gain status and Nietzsche looks at this and says, oh, this is a bad move. OK. But, you know, I was talking to again to Rick before this and noting how, as Peterson says, people see opportunities and obstacles. Once people see the opportunity of using victim status to gain status over their rival, they're going to use it. That's because they're people. You you give someone an advantage towards getting what they want. And most of what we want has to do with with social status with each other because our world is so filled with human beings. You give people a way to gain social status. They'll use it. So now the super straight are trolling the the woke. And it's just spy versus spy. Back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. And once someone sort of gets an argument that seems to be gaining traction, the other side are going to try all kinds of different arguments to blunt that argument and take away its power. And so this is what we do. And the amazing thing is that we've got all of these people out there yelling about whiteness and Eurocentrism when the philosophies that they are bringing into the forum come from white people. It's just a historical reality. And the fact that, well, either they don't see it or they don't want to admit it. And you're not going to be able to tell the difference. So you can use that argument if someone's got all your this is all whiteness. Okay. As opposed to Derrida. Was he lacking whiteness with Jacques Derrida lacking whiteness was Foucault lacking whiteness was Karl Marx lacking whiteness. This stuff just gets silly quickly. And that silliness may frustrate you. But that silliness should actually give you hope because generally speaking, over the long term, silliness gets exposed. And once it's sort of lost its momentary advantage in a culture, it'll get replaced by other silliness and other momentary advantage. None of that is to say that there aren't real historical injustices and that oppression is somehow fictitious. No. And this is my frustration with the whole the whole argument about around race right now. I'm not you know, I'm not skeptical that in the United States, it's easier in many places. It's easier to be white than it is to be black or Asian or Hispanic. I think that's obvious. I don't know why people have to be so defensive. They can't admit it. But as Chloe Valdry, who is a African-American woman on Twitter, noted privilege is always segmented into different areas. You know, just because I'm white doesn't mean I have a unlimited amount of money and possibilities in my life. There are certain advantages that being white in this culture have. There are certain disadvantages that being white in this culture has. And when I go to different cultures, like when I lived in the Dominican Republic, in some ways my blue eyes and my white skin afforded me tremendous cultural advantage, but also sometimes tremendous cultural disadvantage. Human societies are complex like that. And, you know, again, you look at when people were, you know, yelling about Jordan Peterson being a misogynist. I think if you just listen to him, he's not that. It's just a silly accusation. People are going to make silly accusations. If you get upset at every silly accusation, you're just always going to be upset because there's no end to silly accusations. Look at them and just think that's a silly accusation. You're not going to talk it out of the person. Let it go. Hopefully in time, they'll abandon it, probably for other silly accusations. So just because you see everybody climbing on the crazy train doesn't mean you have to, too. I don't know. Let's see if Brody's in the room. I don't see him. So, yeah. And that's why on one hand, I think it's important to talk about the cultural, the culture war stuff, but don't let the culture war stuff dominate your life on one side or the other. It's a bad game. There are much more interesting, profound, and truer things to deal with in your life than fighting, fighting over all of the things that we tend to like to fight over now. Do it if you need to, if you want to, but don't let it become your life. Paul, in this week's stream, your discussion of Chairman Mao made me wonder if there are degrees of punishment in the afterlife. People often imagine hell as Dante portrayed, but I can't think of anywhere in the Bible that talks about levels of severity. That's a good question. There are definitely, the Bible seems to definitely talk about levels of reward. Great will your reward be? And so I think people have sort of extrapolated on levels of severity of punishment, and there's, you know, currently, Luke, if you ask Luke, he'll point you to a George McDonald sermon that addresses whether or not this type of punitive behavior is something that God will do. These are interesting questions, biblically. So, I don't know. I don't know. To me, it seems like, well, if there's levels of reward, it doesn't seem outrageous to imagine there's levels of punishment. But, you know, when it comes to this kind of issue, let God be God and keep your own side of the street clean. And, Richard, the idea of fearing the Lord is one that I've struggled with. Does Jordan do it? The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge. The Bible talks about the fear of the Lord, quite a bit. Part of what happens with words is that the lexical range of words in one language doesn't necessarily map perfectly onto the lexical range of words in another language. So fear, in this sense, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, really has more of a sense of reverence, awe. But I wouldn't take fear out of that completely. There are times, I'm trying to think of the Bible story, where someone asks the other, don't you fear God? And, yeah, should you fear, I don't know, should you fear the cop with a radar detector? Now, you shouldn't be terrified, you don't drive on the highway, but you should probably keep him in mind when you're speeding. So does Jordan do it? When you look at how he talks to Peugeot, yeah, in a rather unusual way. And he made that manifest in one of the Australian lectures about God more directly, too. And he sort of uses it to point at Christians and say, you don't fear him enough. Fair enough, that's probably true, too. So, but Jordan, and this is where I think Peugeot's admonition to Jordan. So think about it this way. Let's say Jordan was a psychologist, let's say a brilliant psychologist, who read all kinds of books, who saw all kinds of people in a private practice, but never had a license to practice psychology, to practice, to be a therapist. Well, how would that shape him? Well, part of how we work in human society is we work in networks. And so in order to become a practicing therapist, you need to basically work under a licensed therapist for a certain number of hours. You need to have taken a certain number of courses. You need to. And what all of that does is, is, is weave you into an established community of knowledge and practice. And that will shape your thinking, your behavior, all of that. So Jordan not being involved in a church basically means his fear of the Lord is in some ways disconnected from the deep, implicit community and what that community offers from a church space. We talked a little bit about attention and the world laying itself out based on attention. If you are, as I am, deeply involved in church communities, you pick up that culture. Jordan, by not being around there, has to try to figure out what the Bible is saying about the fear of the Lord. Sort of like someone who hangs a shingle outside of an office door and says, I am a therapist, but has never been to school and has never been under a licensed therapist getting licensing and has never been in a situation where other therapists will say, this is the school and practice and community of therapy. Now, you might be able to pay the guy $100 for an hour and walk in the door and get a lot of good things from that therapist that's never been to school and is unlicensed and all of those things. But that therapist has not been woven into a community that has been working together on many of these ideas for good or for ill in the case of the church for 2000 years. There's a significant deficiency in there. Now, again, someone might say my therapist isn't licensed, my therapist isn't educated, my therapist never did, never went through the practice of gaining a license by working under another licensed therapist. There's never been any apostolic succession around this person. There's never been any formal education or the university around this person. I'm very happy with what I've gained and the insights of my life that I've gained from this person. Again, maybe that person has read lots of books and maybe that person has watched lots of things and maybe that person has derived a fair amount of wisdom from life and is very helpful for a particular person. But there are going to be blind sides with respect to the broader community and some of the wisdom that that community, not only wisdom but downsides to blind sides, that that community has developed over years. That's what you don't get by staying away from the church. You can make it up. But you're, you're, you know, it's sort of like the person that has only learned how to hit a baseball in batting cages. That person might be really good at hitting that baseball because they have lived for years in batting cages. Send them out there on a baseball field. Okay, but everybody wants, maybe they'll be the designated hitter in the American League. But you're not going to put them at any other position in the field because they don't know how to field because they spent all their commit they spent their all their time in the batting cage. And that's part of the problem that Jordan has. And for someone who has been in the church. Sometimes when I listen to him trying to talk about Christians or the church. Sometimes he has points. He's a very smart, very well read man who's got a lot of wisdom. But other times, he just doesn't know what he's talking about because how could he sort of like, okay, you've spent five years developing your swing in a batting cage, and you can't catch a ball in center field. Of course, he spent five years in a batting cage. You never into center field. That's part of what Jordan Peterson is dealing with. And so when Peugeot says, some of what you're ailing from is because you're not in a community. Peugeot is right. All right, Ben K. Am I going to get through? Long questions here. Two questions from Ben. Recently finished Brett Sockles book on transubstantiation. It was very helpful in getting new frameworks for understanding the sacraments. On infant baptism, I'm trying to understand it if the sign and signified framework is one that can help differentiate the infant baptism approach from adult believer baptism. I was baptized as an infant in the Lutheran Church was confirmed, but I don't feel like I really believed until I was in college. I was baptized again. I was baptized again. Little did I know the anti-baptist movement was a relatively young one in the history of the church at the time. Now with young children, I'm second guessing what baptism really signifies. Before I thought it was a public declaration of one's faith. With infant baptism, I'm starting to see how it's God's providence for inviting children to the church. I think you answered your question in the question. I think you said it very, very well. How would you explain the role purpose of infant baptism? Very closely to what you just did. When, so when, so my first child was born in the day of the first baptism. I was born in the day of the first baptism. I was born in the day of the first baptism. When, so when, so my first child was born in the Dominican Republic. After my child was born, my child, we received a passport for my child, a red passport from the Dominican Republic. My child, by virtue of being born in the Dominican Republic, was a full Dominican citizen. My wife and I went to the American Embassy and sat down with them. And had to show pictures of my newborn baby and to prove that he was our baby. And yeah, doctor's sign and all this kind of stuff. It wasn't too hard. But why? Because not only was my son, by virtue of being born in Dominican, on Dominican soil, a Dominican citizen. By virtue of being born to two American citizens, my son is also an American citizen. And so got a blue passport for the United States. In the Christian Reformed Church, we only baptize children of Communicate members of the church. Why? When they bring their children for baptism, they and the church community promise to raise that child within the community. Because what does the child know? The child doesn't know anything. Is that child part of our community? Yes. And you said it exactly here. Believer baptism tends to be a profession of faith. This is what I believe. I'm submitting myself to baptism. Infant baptism is a sacrament in that it is God speaking, this child belongs to me and to the community. Now, many traditions like my own also practice adult profession of faith because the idea is when that child reaches a certain age, they should affirm what was spoken for them, not only by their parents, but to them by God in infant baptism. Not all children do. That causes dissonance. And of course, in the ongoing battle between infant baptism and believer baptism, believer Baptists will say, aha! And it's like, oh, really? Everyone that you baptize stays in the church? So I think you articulated quite well a lot of the doctrine behind infant baptism. One more question. In Brett's book, I couldn't help notice that much of the ecumenical dialogues occur within the upper tiers of church hierarchy. Most of the councils and meetings he referenced where Catholic and Anglican and other denominations reached agreements would only include the top of the top within each church theologically. That's right. Have you ever seen any organization, organized ecumenical initiatives directed to the laity? In my experience, I've seen far more division among this group than I have among the clergy. Maybe it's just a function of numbers. But I find these perceived differences and denominations are often so hard for people to get over, myself included, especially when we don't understand what those real and perceived differences may or may not be. Ecumenical dialogue seems to be the byproduct of your channel. It does. Even your followers don't seem to be the average joes of the church. That's probably by virtue of the nature of my content. Any materials or initiatives you've seen done well that targets the laity more broadly? I think, again, you make another excellent comment. We're practicing ecumenicity daily in our conversations. And I think that's a good thing. And I think your points about what ecumenical work has become are also true. Now, there's another side of this, which is it used to be the case to one degree or another, especially before the printing press, but even after that, the chief avenue of discipleship, catechesis, Christian formation happened through the office bears and the officers of the church. People learned about Jesus in Sunday school, in church services, in sermons, etc., etc. Once the printing press comes along, now suddenly people are learning from other sources. They're reading books from other traditions, reading books from other sources, from other people. comes along, now suddenly people are learning from other sources. They're reading books from other traditions, not a whole lot. Now with the internet, the amount of influence that church hierarchies and structures have over their people has been disrupted by radio, television, internet. People will listen, people will have, people will be far more influenced by political commentators, by celebrity pastors, by bloggers. So this week Beth Moore announced she was leaving the Southern Baptist Convention and Lifeway Press. Most of you probably don't know who Beth Moore is, some of you do. Who has more power and influence? Beth Moore or your average preacher in a Southern Baptist church? It's not a fair fight. Churches used to have, churches used to be very effective platforms, and we're used to that word, very powerful and effective platforms in terms of molding and shaping the minds and hearts and lives and behaviors of their people, historically. Churches are now relatively small platforms in comparison to enormous numbers of platforms, including YouTube. I mean I'm playing the same game. Here I am on YouTube and you people are listening to me. What is that about? I don't know, but here we are and churches are wrestling to deal with it. So Bishop Aaron has taken to the tubes. You know Brett Sockold, the conversation, you know I'm going to have another conversation with Brett and Cale because I thought that was a, I think we have some chemistry between us to do some things. So I'm hoping that the reduction of the power of these fractured platforms of the church in competition with other platforms will mean more of a grassroots ecumenism as we begin to sort through what does Christianity mean? Where are the boundaries? Where are the lines? That's a good question. Oh the end is in sight. Echo, in reference to your recent videos on Brett, his view seems to be that we have an opportunity to transcend what we are in the sense of overcoming, repressing our biological drives, but if your purpose is to transcend what you are, does that not imply that you are not what you are? That's exactly right. I am not what you are. I am an assassin robot. Okay, why am I going to talk to you? You're a terminator. For example, if you must transcend biological processes, does not that infer that there is a part of you that is itself transcending, transcendent of biology? That's right. I imagine this response would be what we must overcome biological drives in order to prevent our self-caused extinction and in this sense the transcending biological drives is actually still serving as a part of the reproductive biological process, the continuation of the genome through time, but then why has biology given us a choice to make? If we must transcend it to preserve it, why are we given an option? Why are we then given the tools by biology but then in his opinion still have the option whether or not to use them and what does this mean in any kind or degree regarding the animals and humans and their telos? That's exactly right. There's all of these tensions within Brett's system there and these have been known and seen for a long time in a lot of these conversations and I'm just, you know, so that's why I'd love to see and of course John Vervecki knows a lot more about this stuff than I do and so when you listen to him, I mean he sees the tensions and yet this is what makes the conversation interesting but I get frustrated listening to Brett when Brett's a really smart guy. Why can't you see this? I mean this is his stock answer to, this is his salvation narrative to the world. Transcend your assassin robot programming. Okay, then if that is so easy and obvious, why are we still assassin robots? Oh we're not because we're in a place rich with food and affluence. Okay, so if you take away the food and affluence then we revert back to our assassin robot programming. Right, but I won't says Brett. I had one of my wife's aunts, she was a character, so I was, you know, I was in seminary and college and then seminary and we'd go over to my mother-in-law's house for Sunday dinner and her sister was there and she used to love to brag to us. That's back in the 80s when crack cocaine was a, you know, really big thing in the news and she would sit there and tell us, she'd say, you know, they say if you just get one hit of crack cocaine that you're addicted. Well, I'm pretty strong-willed and I'm pretty sure if I had crack cocaine I wouldn't have it again. I just found that argument hilarious because number one, this was a fundamentalist Baptist and she was about as fundamentalist and Baptist and straight-laced as you would imagine. She was also enormously frugal I'll say because she loved going to restaurants and ordering a cup of hot water and bringing her own tea bag so that because they give her water for free and she'd go and sit in the restaurant and then she didn't have to tip either and I was thinking I'm sure they love to see you coming and, you know, part of me, of course, the trollish part of me wanted to somehow score some crack cocaine and say, okay, Auntie, here's your chance, but of course she'd never take crack cocaine. She was, she wouldn't even touch alcohol or cigarettes. She was a fundamentalist Baptist. So, you know, there's this sense to Brett Weinstein that if I was to put, you know, I would never put you in a gas chamber. Wait a minute, Brett, you just kept telling us that all of these good ideas and generous morals are because we have life good and if we have life bad we revert back to assassin robots, but not you. So, okay, don't, you know, at least Aunt Ruth I could get a, I just said her name, I could get a, you know, I could get a rock of crack cocaine and say smoke up Ruth, we'll see if you want more. I'm not about to torture Brett's family beyond what they've been tortured and, you know, see if he's right. It just, it's, and especially when he's, we're comparing him to Jordan Peterson who says, you know, when you go through Auschwitz you shouldn't walk through there with a smug look and say, I'm better than all of this. You should go through there with some sobriety and say, I'm probably capable of this. I respect Peterson's position more. Oh, I can finish. Okay, so next week we're going to do, so this Monday I'll release a video on the generational handshake, handoff, handshake, whatever, and next week we'll focus on questions and answers about them and we'll see how many of the participants in my little panel can be there and I'll talk to Valerie about organizing that. We'll see what we do. So, okay, what is the relationship between conscience and belief? It's interesting listening to Jordan talk about conscience so much right now. That's one of the things, and we all get our little hobby horses, we're all talking about something now and this little time span emphasizing something. So, in a lot of Jordan's conversations right now, conscience, conscience, conscience. What is conscience? To what degree is conscience a manifestation of a communal ethos formed in the people of the community through their childhood and over their lifetime? In other words, if you, I've been reading, I've been reading a biography of Jonathan Edwards lately because I'm on a George Marsden kick. So, Jonathan Edwards and I both were raised by conservative Calvinist communities but with a few centuries between us. In what ways would his conscience be different from mine? I remember we had a friend of mine had a couple of roommates. One was from India and one was from Pakistan and they both had grown up in Nigeria because they worked for the oil business. And so, my friend who grew up Christian once caught the Muslim nashing on hot dogs out of the fridge and my friend said, you know what those things are made of, don't you? You know, how tender was my Pakistani friend's conscience with respect to hot dogs and pork? It's interesting watching Peterson double down on conscience. And on one hand, that really fits well with his overall project. On the other hand, that really fits well with his overall project. On the other hand, conscience opens up a tremendous amount of questions about formation. And so, I would say our conscience is shaped by the belief structures of our community in many ways. I don't have, I am not conscience stricken about the same things that Jonathan Edwards might be conscience stricken about. There will be areas of overlap between myself and Jonathan Edwards. Conscience is a funny, funny thing. It's and on one hand, I'm really happy Peterson is paying attention to it and I hope he keeps talking about it, but I'd like to see him develop his discussion on conscience because again, coming from a clinical psychologist, someone who's done all the sort of work and reflection that Jordan Peterson has done, this question of conscience is a very interesting one, but it's also prone to a certain simplicity, which is both its strength and its weakness. And then we have the question of the secret, sacred self where, well, God talks to me through my conscience. I'm sure he does. What do we mean by that? Can we up the resolution on that conversation? So yeah, last question. Woohoo! Got one minute. Hi Paul, hope you're well. I feel well, thanks. Sounds like we have a very young question asker in the room. How important is it in your opinion that an individual member's beliefs line up with their denominational confessions? For example, is it imperative that a person who is part of a Calvinist church believe all that's included in Tulip? Should they wrestle themselves into intellectual submission? Get church shopping? 100% asking for a friend? Thanks. Yeah Robert, I've had a conversation with you. In the Christian Reformed Church, when you become a member, in the liturgy of membership, I'll call it that, although our denomination doesn't call it that, it's the form in the back of the church, but it's the person who's going to be the member. And that's the person who's going to be the member. And that's the person who's going to be the member. And that's the person who's going to be the member. So, in the liturgy of membership, I'll call it that, although our denomination doesn't call it that, it's the form in the back of the Psalter hymnal. You answer some questions. One of the questions is, do you submit to the teaching of the church? Okay, that's a pretty broad thing that you say yes to. And then when we get into questions, so right now in the Christian Reformed Church, even though we've had two synods that have been cancelled because of COVID, Synod 2022 in the CRC is going to be a big deal because coming to the Synod is a report on human sexuality that basically says the Heideberg Catechism teaches that marriage is really, that the traditional view of human sexuality in the Western Church is the stated view of the Christian Reformed Church. And all office bearers of the Christian Reformed Church subscribe to the Heideberg Catechism, the Canons of Dort, the Belgian Confession, and the Athenation Creed, the Nicene Creed, and the Apostles Creed. So, and then you're supposed to have warm feelings for our world belongs to God and the Belhar Confession, essentially. At Synod, you'll find sometimes conversations about, hey, wait a minute, when someone joins the Christian Reformed Church, they subscribe to these statements. And yes and no. Because what most people promised when they made vows at their profession of faith or joining the church were that they would submit to the teaching and discipline of the church. And so what that sets up is this big discussion in the Christian Reformed Church about what exactly, where exactly are the boundary lines. And so when it comes to something like the big fight we're having over same-sex marriage, so a high-profile blogger has been reading the high-profile book of a professor at Calvin College and messaging me, what exactly does your denomination believe? Doesn't your denomination believe in penal substitutionary atonement? And I'd say, well, read the Heideberg Catechism, see what you think. There's always a certain amount of, there are two standard wiggle rooms in this, three actually. One is the difference level between an office bearer and a member of a church. And some people in the denomination will say, oh, that's a big step between those. Others will say, not so much. This comes up often with respect to infant baptism. Often in Christian Reformed Churches, there might be someone who joins a Christian Reformed Church but doesn't want to bring their children forward for infant baptism. And often in Christian Reformed Churches, they'll be allowed to be a member of the Christian Reformed Church but they won't serve in office because when you do become an elder or deacon in a Christian Reformed Church, you formally subscribe to these doctrines. But I've seen a lot of people sign that form of subscription, now it's called covenant of office bears, that form of subscription, now it's called covenant of office bears. And I don't know how much they know about what's in the canons of Dort or the Belgian Confession or the Heideberg Catechism. I don't know. I don't know that they know. I don't know that the church always really wants to ask. So there's a lot that goes on in this at the local level. And there are some who want to really tighten things up and some who want to really loosen things up and some who want to tighten things up for some things and loosen things up for others. I think this is almost always the way it is in terms of our relationship with a lot of these confessional documents. For about eight years in the Christian Reformed Church, before I ever started this YouTube thing on my blog, in Facebook groups of the denomination, with colleagues, I've been saying to the Christian Reformed Church, we need to have a confessional conversation. And that didn't do much but freak both sides out. Because whenever the people over to the right heard conversation, they just heard a lot of people say, we need to have a conversation about blank. They said, no, we don't have a con, we don't need a conversation. We already know what we believe. And the people on the left, when they heard the word confessional, they freaked out because they said, are you about to make subscription, you're you about to make subscription to traditional marriage a confessional issue in the Christian Reformed Church? And that's in fact what this study report coming to Senate is doing. And that has a lot of people really nervous on those who want the CRC to move closer to deciding about same sex marriage. And in a, it appeared in the banner not too many months ago, that one that Neeland Avenue in Grand Rapids, Michigan ordained a woman deacon who is also in a legal same sex marriage, ordained her as a deacon. And that, that hit that issue too because the question is, well, what does a church do with someone who, let's say they're in a same sex marriage, should they be let into, should they be served communion? They're obviously welcome to listen to the sermon and sing and do all those things, but are they allowed into formal membership in the church? If they are a formal member, are they allowed into office bearing? So all of these issues are very much at play. And in some ways, the way it works in the Christian Reformed Church is sort of a mixture between written law and the law of what is tolerated. And those things are always sort of sussed out because my whole life long, I've heard people make noises that one could say violate, let's say the cannons of Dorr, and that seems to be tolerated in the church. So there's always, there's always, there are always those differences. Now, when it comes to figuring out what church you want to belong to, these issues matter. But a lot depends, you know, we talked to Sam about this. So Sam is a biblical Unitarian who for most of his life, because there aren't a lot of biblical Unitarian churches out there, and perhaps even the ones out there, he doesn't want to, doesn't necessarily want to bring his family to. So a lot of his life he's been worshiping in Trinitarian churches. And, you know, so he and his wife show up and everybody, you know, the church is happy because, oh look, you know, especially if they're a small church, somebody wants to actually be with us. And, oh, and wow, Sam plays the guitar and, you know, supports the church financially and knows a lot about the Bible and has a lovely family and everybody's all excited. And then a conversation happens and Sam says, oh, by the way, that Trinity thing, I'm not down for it. And the pastor gets a look like a deer in a headlights. And then the pastor says, well, have you ever read the Nicene Creed? And then Sam starts going into exhaustive detail about all of the issues around Nicene and how many of the issues around the issue of the around Nicene and how many other church father type things. The pastor very quickly realizes that his seminary class on this, if he had one, was decades ago and, oh no, I've got a lot of reading to do and I'm still probably not going to catch up with Sam. What do I do? So you ask a good question that I can't really answer, but at the same time I answer it every day in terms of my local church life. Because I've got people at Living Stones who are not formal members, who are very active. I've got other people who are on the membership roles at Living Stones who are not terribly active. And I know I've got people all over the map in terms of what they believe about all sorts of things, including same sex marriage, including politics in America, including, you know, if you're a pastor and you know a little bit of doctrine, you can play with your members by asking them questions that you know they'll give the wrong answer to. But then are you going to be a jerk and say, ah, wrong answer? Well, that's probably not going to help them believe the right answer if they think their pastor's a jerk. So it's all a complicated business. I don't know what more to say to you, Robert. You're in the room and you want to follow up or someone else wants to follow up on this. In some ways, probably to a lesser degree, everyone's got a little bit of Sam's trouble because confessional issues are important, but often our confessional documents are quite old. New church splits tend to happen over issues that are of the day. And, you know, same sex marriage is going to be, is an issue that is just redefining the church map. And that's going to continue. And we're going to have to work our way through it. Just like the church has, and you might say, oh, this is horrible. If you read church history, you'll notice that this has been a constant throughout the history of the church, that issues come up that force the church to self-define. And that's why my reading of Alistair McGrath's book, Heresy, is that orthodoxy and heterodoxy in some sense co-create. It's not unlike what happens in our body's immune system. None of us had antibodies to this novel COVID-19 virus. Now the virus is here. We're all forced to, our bodies to develop immunities, pharmaceuticals to develop vaccines, social situations to wear a mask or no mask, social distance or not social distance, old fashioned herd immunity, new fashioned, is it a natural virus or is it a manmade virus? I mean, it just goes on and on and on and on. And the church is living in that world too. So I think it's him. So, you know, when I watched Jordan Peterson talk to Jonathan Pigeot, the back of my head, I think, Lord have mercy on the priest or pastor that gets that animal in his church. Jordan Peterson comes in and I don't know if he was baptized in the, you know, the Church of Canada, but all right, Jordan Peterson as a catechumen. Buckle up there, priest. It's just like having Sam walk in and say, I really love this church. My family's really blessed by it, but I can't subscribe to the Trinity. What should and shouldn't I do in this church? Now, me, if the part of me is relieved Sam doesn't live in Sacramento, then I'd have to deal with it. Part of me would love for Sam to live in Sacramento because I like Sam and, you know, we've developed something of a friendship and, you know, would I want Sam attending a biblical Unitarian church or would I like him attending a Trinitarian church? Is there a risk that Sam's going to make a Trinitarian church a little bit wobbly on the Trinity? There might be some risk there, but I think the Trinity is pretty deeply dug in in the church's DNA. So I'd rather have Sam in a Trinitarian church than him in a biblical Unitarian church and, you know, probably wouldn't, you know, I'd wrestle with my council and with my elders about, okay, what to do with Sam? Should he participate in the Lord's Supper? What is our theology of the Lord's Supper? Because all of these things force the church to do its work, to say, okay, what is the body of Christ? Today, what are our boundaries? How do we regard the Bible? How do we listen to our ancestors in the faith? What must we do to engage with these questions and not simply let them be content in the dusty books on our shelves? So I think, Robert, that any church you go to, motivate them to be involved in confessional conversations about the things that matter. In Christian Reformed churches, you can file a gravamen, which basically means that you can say to the church council, these are the things that I believe in that are aligned with you, and these are the things that I don't. And that way your conscience is clear. Most councils in the Christian Reformed church wouldn't know what to do with a gravamen if they looked at it, because most people have implicit gravamens, and they're just not making a stink about it until someone does, like with the same-sex marriage thing. So my apologies for going over time. I don't know if anybody else wants to chime in on this. All right, no chimers. So next week we will talk about love, and we will talk about marriage, and we will talk about all of these frustrated young men and young women that are looking for love, but aren't hot enough or lucky enough to get a slot on The Bachelor where you will be tortured by network TV, which is to me what the show The Bachelor is. You take the best-looking people in America and you torture them with love. All right, so Rick, you can end transmission. Thank you for joining us today.