https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_dGovhMw1Yk

 A little pause before we actually get online. Okay, we're good. All right, sorry for the delay. Let's open with a word of prayer. Lord, we thank you for this new day and we thank you for the chance to study the book of Romans and we ask that you would give us wisdom and open the book to us and open the eyes of our heart. So give us your peace in the name of Jesus. Amen. Okay, so we're gonna dive into the book of Romans today and we're going to begin. Let's see if there's a glitch. We're gonna begin with the beginning of the book. So in front of you, you have this document with, as we've always done it before, with three... Romans...I don't know what's going on...with... with four versions of Romans 1. The salutation. So, well, let me ask you, what's a salutation when you start a letter? At the 11 o'clock service, we're going to be looking at the salutation. We'll be looking at pretty much half of the book of 2 Thessalonians, but the book of 2 Thessalonians starts with a salutation which is about this big. This salutation is...really runs seven verses. Why? Any ideas? Okay, yeah, he is introducing himself. He's never visited the Church of Rome. He's never been there. Now they probably have an idea about who he is because he is probably one of the more famous Christian teachers that has been going around founding churches. We believe that as we talked about in the book of Acts, when there's a persecution, where Stephen dies, the Christians who are Jews and believe in Jesus as Messiah and that he rose from the dead have been spanning out throughout the Roman Empire. One of the things that we saw in the book of Acts also is that when Paul goes to Corinth, he meets Priscilla and Aquila, and they have come from, let's see, they have come from Rome and they've made their way all the way to Rome from, or all the way to Corinth from Rome because Claudius has expelled the Jews who were fighting over a certain Crestus, that's what Livy says, from Rome. And so whereas we see Paul planting churches and all of these cities in the region, it's quite likely that Christians have been going out and they've been talking to other Jews about what's, about Jesus and the resurrection and all those kinds of things. So what we have here then in Romans is Paul writing to this church and this isn't a letter like we find with 2 Thessalonians where this is a follow-up letter engaging almost the same issues that he engaged in 1 Thessalonians just a matter of weeks or months, months probably, after he left Thessalonica, after Silas and Timothy had been in Thessalonica. Here is Paul introducing himself to the group of believers who have gathered at Rome and we spent a few weeks talking about the resonance of this word Rome for what people would have understood. Okay and what I've done on this page which has been my usual practice for, oh no I've gone and done it again, I see what's going on, a little better control now, all the way to the book of end of X and the beginning of Romans 1. I have four different versions of the text. I don't know Rick, is the surface working? Can you pull up that screen? The surface isn't working and you can't pull up that screen. Let me try this again. It's sideways for you. All right well those watching online aren't going to be able to see it like everybody in the room can see it because I have it on paper in the room. Okay let's just look at the first line. Over on the one hand side we have it says NA 26 that means Nestle-Oland, let me do this Rick, maybe this will help. That means Nestle-Oland that's a a text of the Greek Bible, version 26. There are subsequent versions but this is the this is the copy I own. LEB stands for the Lexham English Bible and that's a translation of the Bible that comes with my Bible software and it's hooked into a bunch of the tools of the Bible software and I actually find it kind of a nice version to use for study. The NIV is the new international version. There's a little bit of confusion with the NIV because they've been updating the translation for since the mid 70s when it was written and then when they did a major update they called it the TNIV and the TNIV didn't sell real well so then they did another update of it called the NIV and the difficulty there is that if you pull up an NIV and we have copies from the late 70s here in the church we have a later edition copy and there was the TNIV that was out and then subsequent translation so that's kind of a mess but the copy that I have in front of you is the latest version of the new international version the NIV. The one beyond that is the new living translation and I've talked about that before I don't know if I'll keep using that because of some of the other texts that I have. The new living translation is not really a translation and it's not that new. If you remember back in the 70s there was a version of the Bible that came out called the living Bible and the living Bible was a paraphrase and I before I've mentioned some of the difference between a paraphrase and a translation. Let's say if you have the Greek that's the text and even the NA 26 that you have in front of you is already a compilation of lots of different texts because they didn't have the printing press lots of different texts put together and an editor believes this is our best approximation at what the original looked like so that is the Greek text you have in front of you. Then you get to a translation and within a translation there are all these gradients and the gradients are well do we sort of try to translate word for word or phrase to phrase. One of the things that you immediately see when you look at a Greek text and a translation is that Greek word order is not the same. What that means is you can't just translating isn't just taking a bunch of Greek words turning them into English words and having a meaningful text. Language doesn't really work that way plus you have the fact that words continue to evolve in terms of their meaning and one of my favorite examples of this is in the King James version of a passage in Matthew the King James version will say in my father's house there are many mansions and when we hear that when we hear mansion what do we think of? A big house. In the 16th century when they made that translation a mansion was basically an overnight resting place and so the original hearers of that text when it was translated into English heard with the word mansion an overnight resting place. Contemporary Americans hear huge houses like the guy from Monopoly lives in and so English continues to change and this is part of the reason that modern translations continue to come out and change the text. Then you go all the way over here to a paraphrase where which says well we're going to look at the Greek text and we're going to try to render it in intelligible English but we're not too worried about trying to get things sort of word-for-word as best they can. So the Lexham the Lexham English Bible is way over here on the one side of translation which is word-for-word and the NIV is all the way over here on the other side of translation and the New Living Translation which really isn't a translation that's way over here on the paraphrase side. Now I'm also going to be using today three texts that are translations and paraphrases from contemporary individuals. So I was talking with some people online we were talking about translations and I'm going to be using three texts from and I'm going to keep doing this because I think these texts highlight things. One guy is named David Bentley Hart who is an orthodox scholar who has recently put out a translation of the New Testament which he's tried to make it shockingly literal okay. There's NT Wright who is a New Testament scholar out of the UK who has his own translation of the New Testament which would probably be more in the realm of someplace in the middle here in terms of translation. So David Bentley Hart will be over here on one side and NT Wright will be sort of here in the middle and then we're going to use Eugene Petersen's The Message which many of you are familiar with. That's way over here on the paraphrase side and the reason we're looking at all of these texts is because what we're trying to figure out how to make the letter that Paul wrote to Romans intelligible to us. Now as we've noted with the question about what is Rome, intelligibility is a rather personal thing because I can say something to Morrie. Let's say if I were a water engineer and I said something to Morrie about water and hydrology it would be intelligible to Morrie and not to the rest of you because I don't think any of the rest of you are hydrologists but Morrie is. If I start talking about some of the things that I know about psychology and therapy Edie might find that very intelligible and Morrie might not find it as intelligible. So this question of intelligibility is pretty difficult and so that's why we look at all these different texts and we read them and we try to understand what does this text say. Alright so let's go to the text. Right away in comparing the LEB and the NIV and the New Living Translation you see variations right off the bat. The LEB first. Paul a slave of Christ Jesus called to be an apostle set apart for the gospel of God. The NIV. Paul a servant of Christ Jesus called to be an apostle and set apart for the gospel of God. The NLT. This is a letter from Paul. See can you see the difference between paraphrase and translation right there? The text has no this is the letter that's assumed by the context but the NLT isn't going to assume that others know that so this is the letter from Paul. A slave of Christ Jesus chosen by God to be an apostle and sent out. See there's no sent out that's simply assumed by the word apostle because the word apostle means sent out. Now what English word instead of a what English word might we substitute in for apostle? That's perhaps more common. Ambassador. Ambassador is a good one why? What is built into the word ambassador? They're sent out and they're representative of something and they have authority. Another word might be missionary. A missionary is sent out on a mission but when we hear apostle we tend to think more authority because of the way that apostle has been used in the English language and so this is that this is the difficulty of translation and trying to figure out you know what what things mean. I'm gonna reboot this just to see if Rick this will this will help Rick get this because I'm sure people watching would love to see what I'm drawing. So what's another one of the word choices the word differences between those four translations that you see? Gospel and good news. Okay why would one translation render it gospel and the other good news? Okay they're letters. This word gospel is what we sometimes call a loan word. Any idea what I would mean by a loan word? If I loan you money well I've given you something that I haven't given it to you. In language a loan word is a word that someone else takes from another language. Can you think of any any loan words that that you might imagine we have? Well actually so many words English has become such a dominant language in the world today. English is actually giving loan words to other language languages for example automobile look look at Spanish it's almost the same. Computer. Why would words like automobile or computer or CPU or things like that why would those things be why would those things be loan words? Exactly there isn't too much in the other language that would match. Can you think of some loan words that for us here in California we don't even think of as loan words? Think about food. Taco exactly. Why is taco a loan word? It's Mexican taco burrito enchilada. How about pad thai? Pad thai is a loan word. Let's see if we can get some things coming up here. Now these translations that I'm pulling up now well what what other words do you notice different differently in the different in the different translations? Servant and slave. What's going on with that? We have a very different connotation of slave than the Romans did. In contemporary America when we say slave what do we think of? That's exactly a word. Slave. We think of the definition of the word We are Africans taken from Africa and pressed into service in the American south doing cotton picking, tobacco farming, domestic health, this. That is our meaning of the word slave. That is not what the Romans considered. So then when you get these contemporary translations well what do they have? They have they say slave and what they what they do then is let me see if I can pull that out When you see slave we think that image. A servant and a slave in the Roman Empire were pretty much the same thing. The vast majority of almost all the servants were slaves. Why? What do we think about? What was the competitor for slavery in early America that in many ways part of the war fought over? If you were in the south and you were a slave well you didn't have any autonomy, you were someone's property. If you were in the north you could be doing the exact same work in the north but what would you receive? A paycheck. Now in the south well you'd have to feed the slave, you'd have to clothe the slave, you'd have to house the slave. In the north you wouldn't necessarily house them, you wouldn't necessarily feed them, you wouldn't necessarily clothe them, you gave them a paycheck. Now in the Roman Empire they had money, they had coinage but they didn't quite they had wages in some ways but the context is different. What is the sense, what is this the different sense of the word between slave and free or between slave and servant for us? Being free. Okay so part of the difficulty we have here is that dulos, this word that Paul is using basically means slave but the question is how can we render that word in English so that contemporary people can figure out what's going on? Right and so that's when we read well slave that sounds quite a bit different. Now let's take a look at a couple of these other the one on this side is David Bentley Hart, this side is M.T. Wright. Paul a slave of the anointed one Jesus called an apostle having been set apart for God's good tidings and Paul a slave of King Jesus called to be an apostle set apart for God's good news. Then you can go to Eugene Peterson. Eugene Peterson takes verse one and verse seven and puts them together. You can see the difference of a paraphrase and that actually makes a lot of sense. Paul a devoted slave of Jesus Christ. Notice that in Greek text there's no word devoted. Eugene Peterson puts that in for emphasis. Why? Why? Right so slave sounds like someone who has no choice. Servant sounds like someone is what's going on Rick? Oh that'll probably do it. All right that should do it. Thanks Rick. So slave sounds like someone who has no choice. Paul has been roped into service against his will because that's the usual thing for a slave. Servant sounds like someone who is receiving pay for services rendered. What's that? What Eugene Peterson adds in here is another dimension which again was noted in the Roman world. Let's say you in many cases in the Roman world well how did you become a slave in the Roman world? There are usually two ways. Right conquered or indebted and many people became slaves via concoction. And many people became slaves via conquest because the enemy army comes in. They basically everybody knows they have won the battle and so they say to the city you have a choice. You can become our slaves or we'll kill you and most people say okay I guess I'll do slavery. So then you would go into a slave market you know estimates of the number of slaves that let's say Julius Caesar took from his campaign in Gaul over a million okay. Now almost half of the Roman Empire are slaves. You had incredible wealth disparity in the Roman Empire. Half the population are slaves. Now a slave could own things. A slave could be very wealthy. A slave could be very powerful and if you were a beloved slave of a powerful person you probably had a very good life and so some people were devoted slaves to their masters. They loved their masters and their masters loved them and that was simply their lifestyle. So as long as their master lived they had a great life. So what Eugene Peterson is doing here is taking these words slave and servant and trying to enhance the category in our mind to help us understand who Paul is. All right let's go back to the other text. Paul a slave of Christ Jesus called to be an apostle set apart for the gospel of God which he promised previously through his prophets in the holy scriptures. The gospel he promised beforehand through his prophets and holy scriptures. Okay why does the NIV repeat gospel? Look at what the NLT does. God promised this good news long ago through his prophets in the holy scriptures. What's going on there? Oh that's now we're back in Acts. Why would they repeat it? Well emphasis, example. Why would they repeat it? Well, the emphasis. Okay. Okay. Let's look at the other text. Which he promised Paul, a slave of the anointed one Jesus, called an apostle, having set apart for God's good tidings, which he promised in advance through his prophets in sacred writings. Paul, a slave of Christ of King Jesus, called to be an apostle, set apart from the good news, which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the sacred writings. Look at how they're getting at sacred writings. Why do the translations often say scriptures? Eugene Peterson. Notice how, well, basically, if you look in some of the translations, there is, this is part of the same sentence. Between verse one and verse two, it's one sentence in Greek. This is part of the issue that Greek sentences can be very long. That doesn't work so well in our English translation, and so we tend to chop it up. Part of the downside of chopping up these sentences means you're going to have to have different verbs. The way a sentence works is you've got a subject and you've got a predicate. Well, that's a little simple. So you've got a subject and then you've got a verb and then you've got something that has happened because of the verb. That's usually the action in a sentence. What happens in English is when you chop these Greek sentences up, you add a lot of verbal ideas, which tends to muddle the force of the long Greek sentences. Now, this is what some of these translators are trying to work with. So what Eugene Peterson has done is taken verse one and verse seven and put them together. So you have a short salutation, and then he's taken all of the content of the salutation and trying to put it in something intelligible. The sacred writings contain preliminary reports by the prophets on God's Son. That's a lot different, isn't it? Which he promised in advance through his prophets in sacred writing, which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the sacred writings. Verse three, concerning his son, born from David's seed, according to the flesh, marked out by resurrection of the dead as God's Son in power, according to a spirit of holiness, Jesus the anointed our Lord. OK, take a look at I'm looking at that longer sheet of David Bentley Hart. Look for the first period. Where do you find it? What does that tell you? It's like the Greek verse verses one through seven in Greek are one sentence. Now, when you're learning English composition, when you're a kid. You learn that, well, sentences have one thought and a paragraph has a few thoughts, maybe three, four or five sentences, maybe a little bit more depending on the genre. But a paragraph should sort of have one idea, too. And so we use all of this space to sort of render different things. Now, they've changed this program. Now, it's not bad enough that they're changing programs. No, no, no, no, no. I want a new whiteboard. OK, I'll erase then. So what we have here is in English, you have one sentence and the one sentence is supposed to convey one thought. In Greek, basically, verses one through seven are one sentence. In other words, Paul is trying to sort of convey one thought, but there's a lot of little sub thoughts in the sentence that are supposed to get built into that one sentence. This is part of the reason translation is so difficult because, well, what do we want to render? Do we want to render the words of Paul or the thought of Paul? And what Paul is trying to put inside of this message is one thought with lots of different sub thoughts. OK, so David Bentley Hart is trying to render all of this as one thing. Paul, a slave of the anointed one, Jesus, called an apostle, having set apart for God's good tiding, which he provided in advance through his prophets and sacred writings concerning his son, born of David's seed, according to the flesh, marked out by resurrection of the dead as God's son in power, according to a spirit of holiness, Jesus, the anointed our Lord, through whom we have received and for his name's sake, a mission for consent to faith among all the Gentiles among whom you too are included, who are called Jesus, the anointed one to all in Rome, who are beloved of God and called to be holy, grace and peace to you from God, our father, Lord Jesus anointed. You write that in an English class and your paper is going to be full of red marks. And so but what he is doing in Greek is he has all of these clauses that are in a sense sub clauses of the main idea. What's the main idea of verses one through seven? I think we're going to get into the good news in the book because that's what the book is going to be about. What is this good news? What is the purpose of the first sentence? It's a blessing. I have to go all the way down to verse seven to get to the point of the first sentence. Grace to you and peace from God, our father and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Well, we'll have to get into that in a minute. But does that sound familiar to you? Why does it sound familiar? You hear it every Sunday. You hear it every Sunday. Why do we open worship services with that phrase? What is what what do we call preaching in the church? Called the word of God. It's God's word to us. It's God's letter to us. Why now we don't use oil in the Christian Reformed Church. We have this word called ordination. Someone is ordained to bring the word of God to the people. This is all built into the church and it's all comes all the way back to hear these very first elements of the church. There's this line of continuity all the way back. And why, especially in our tradition, do we preach from the Bible? What am I doing on a Sunday morning? I'm bringing the Bible, God's word to the people. That's the entire thing that we do in church. OK. See, now the message, a lot of times people look at the message and say it's weird. It is weird. It's very weird. But you'll see that David Bentley Hart over here on one side where he tries to render the Greek sentence into English. Versus Eugene Peterson, who is trying to render the message. Why would he call the book the message? That's what the gospel is. The gospel, good news, is a message of, well, a good news would be your army, your, well, let's think about America during the Second World War. People knew that the United States was sending tons of troops, tons of planes, tons of material, all of that stuff to England. Why would the United States be sending all of that stuff to England? What was going to happen at some point during the Second World War from England? England was going to be the base. It was an unsinkable aircraft carrier, which is essentially how the United States used it to continue to bomb Nazi Germany. And from that, they would launch an invasion. And everybody knew the invasion was coming because you don't put all of that, you don't mass all of those tanks, all that munition, all those troops in England if you're not going to use them. Hitler knew it was coming. They didn't know where. They didn't know when. But everybody knew it was coming. And so then when D-Day comes, word gets back to America, good news, the troops have landed, was good news in those nations that were being occupied. It was good news. It was also frightening news because if you had a son that you knew was in England with the army. Then maybe you're waiting, you're holding your breath and you're waiting for something. You're waiting for probably a letter to come back and then you get a letter and it's good news. My son landed on Normandy and he's OK. And then when the war is over and the Allies won, it's good news. This is the message. And this is how the church talked about the gospel. Why? What was the good news that the church talked about in the gospel? OK, saved by grace. That's a little bit abstract. Paul has it right here. And notice how Paul puts it right in here. Marked out by the resurrection of the dead as God's son in power according to the spirit of holiness. Who's marked out by the resurrection of the dead? Jesus. OK, so what's the bad news about this world? It's a mess. The bad news about this world is that this world is in rebellion. When did this rebellion begin? Adam and Eve in the garden, this world is in rebellion and part of this rebellion. What does God say to the man and the woman to say to Adam and Eve about the fruit of the tree? Don't touch or eat this fruit because the day you will eat it, you will surely die. So the world since that time has been living in rebellion and Paul will go on to say the wages of sin is death. So what we see with Jesus is that, well, if the wages of sin is death, how is resurrection good news? Death is defeated. Death is on the run. Now, a D-Day, the troops have landed. They've got a beachhead. They're moving their armies up. Now, it would take a while yet for those armies to get all the way inland, but it has begun. That's the good news. All right. So all in one sentence, well, let's look at NT Wrights. Let's see where NT Wrights first period is. OK, where does NT Wrights stop his first sentence? End of verse four with that exclamation point because the exclamation point in English means that's the end of a sentence. Now, why don't so we had the Lexham English Bible. Let's look at the NIV and the New Living Translation. Why don't those books dare to do what David Bentley Hart and NT Wright are doing? It's hard to understand. So the NIV, well, this gets into to a degree. Someone comes to me, say, Pastor, I want to read the Bible. What translation should I use? I get this question a lot. And I have to think about all of these issues. I could say, oh, here, read David Bentley Hart's. He tries to make it as close to the Greek as possible. Now, if you Google David Bentley Hart and NT Wright review of David Bentley Hart's translation of the New Testament, NT Wright, it wasn't a big fan of David Bentley Hart's translation of the New Testament. He says, ah, and NT Wright has his translation of the New Testament. The NIV is a translation made by committee. OK, how would a translation made by committee differ from a translation made by an individual? That's exactly right. So when you read a translation like the NIV, it's a product of a committee. And if you've ever worked, what's that? Five minutes. OK, thank you. It's a product of a committee. If you've ever worked with a committee, you know a committee involves consensus. Now, one of my professors at Calvin Seminary was a member of the first NIV translating committee. His name was John Steck. And the NIV came out in the mid 70s. And it was immediately popular in the Christian Reformed Church because the Christian Reformed Church was instrumental in the creation of that translation. Because there was the Revised Standard Version that was done in the 19th, in the middle of the 20th century. And a lot of people thought, weren't terribly happy with it because, again, someone asked me, pastor, I want to start reading the Bible. What translation should I use? I often recommend the NIV because the NIV sort of splits the difference between all of these issues. It's, well, you've got David Bentley Hart trying to render the Greek as such. You've got Eugene Peterson with a full-throated paraphrase. And then you've got these translations in the middle. And the NIV is pretty much right there in the middle. And so I say, start with the NIV. And a lot of people say, yeah, but and they'll get into it. And it's like, look, I'm a pastor. This person has never read the Bible. I want it to be intelligible. As broad as possible, they're going to get a sense of this book through this translation. I'm not going to put David Bentley Hart's translation in because it's just going to confuse them. A lot of people really like the New Living Translation. And that's fine. But they're going to get things that are quite, that are already pre-chewed, as you will get from Eugene Peterson. So the NIV puts them kind of in the middle. I say, OK, go with that. Well, once you get a little bit deeper, now I can throw some other books at you and say, take the NIV and take the King James or the American Standard or the Revised Standard Version, put them next to each other. And whenever you see a difference that's significant, circle it. Because when you see those differences, it means the translator or the committee are trying hard to render an idea that is strange to us in our language. So all right. So we're going to continue on. We're going to hopefully next week finish up this salutation. And maybe I'll diagram it out for you to help you understand all of the dependent clauses. And then we'll, I mean, I was talking to Nina last week and Nina's like, what we really need are like, you know, you should really teach us about Bible translations and how to read the Bible. That's exactly what Sunday school is for. I don't do a lot of this stuff in the worship service. Why? Got to focus on the message. Got to focus on the message. Here in Sunday school, we can kind of take it apart. We can kind of see, OK, what is this book in front of me? How does it work? What are these ideas? That's why we're going to go through Second Thessalonians in two weeks at the 11 o'clock worship service. We're going to be in Romans for a long time. Trust me. This is a ton here. OK, let's close in prayer. Lord, you reveal yourself to us through a book. And it's. Your spirit moves through this book for us. But it's still a book and it's full of language. And as we grow in you, Lord, we should learn to understand how a book works, how a book works in our lives, how language works, what are all the technological differences between. What Paul did with a scribe. In the middle of the first century and us reading it now at the beginning of the twenty first century. All this, Lord, we pray will help us to grow in you, in knowledge from beginning to end. So, Lord, be with us and guide us and may your spirit work through the letters, the authors, the translators, all of the history between that book and us. So give us your peace. This we pray in the name of Jesus. Amen.