https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sJe57X6jjH8

 Hi, this is Paul. Dune is obviously the big movie out right now. Damien Walter, who's been on the channel, has done a couple of videos about it. I really liked his Dune 2 Star Wars killer video. He's talked about Frank Herbert. He's gone into this quite a bit and Damien's a guy who knows enough about enough things to really go into something like this. Well, let's start with where he started his latest video. Ritual of hunting. And through that mythos... Let's start at the beginning. I want you to tell me if you have ever had this experience. You are in a darkened cinema auditorium and the fanfare plays. And I know that the 20th Century Fox fanfare is going to be the studio, not the Star Wars franchise. But I think on some subliminal level, when I try and watch the Disney Star Wars movies, it is the lack of the fanfare that just indicates to me that there's something slightly wrong with this experience. But that's not the whole experience I want you to tell me about. But I do want you to tell me, leave me a comment, send me a message on any of the platforms where you can find me. If you've had this experience, you listen to the fanfare, you follow the entire hero's journey, be it of a young man from a desert world or indeed another young man from a desert world or whoever the central protagonist of this story is. And for two hours you follow them to the peak of their progression on that spiritual journey described for us by Joseph Campbell. And you feel filled with transcendent emotion, the true experience of cinema. And I'm sure you've had that experience. And that's not the experience that I want you to tell me about if you've had this experience. The experience is then you get up from your seat, you ditch the empty popcorn into the bin, hopefully, if you're a responsible cinema goer, and you push through the double fire escape doors and you enter a shopping centre, a shopping mall for most of us. One of those... I love how he opened that. He sort of builds up to it. Now, I did a conversation with someone who does another guy who has a channel that does movie things and it's in the membership section. He wanted it in the membership section, not out on the full section. And I talked about how I watch many channels do it. And at this point Damien was sort of playing this loop, playing this loop of dune images. And once you see it go through once, you see it go through again, you realise, okay, that there's something about these... these movie images that are mesmerising. They sort of take you. And I like how he opened this because, oh, there's the fanfare, da da da da, da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da. The fanfare and then you're in the movie and you're having this experience and you're just like you're in... and then you... the movie's over and you get up and you walk out of the theatre. And I was listening to Friday Morning Nameless, listening to Alan and Neil. Great. Chad says I don't... The Friday Morning Fragments with Alan and Neil, Episode 6. Really a lot of good stuff in it. Oh, and Chad also had the other flotillas which actually had my sister's channel in there. The other flotillas I also thought, you know, a digital gnosis, that's sort of a parallel flotilla, Chad, so if you want to track them. Anyway, so I'm watching this and, well, because Dune came out, because I read Dune when I was in high school, college, I think it was high school or college, I don't remember, I think probably high school, and then I read a number of the sequels of Dune and, of course, the first book was the best and then the sequels got successively less interesting and I want to talk about that. I want to talk about that especially with respect to... so Damien contrasts Dune with Star Wars and that's a really apt contrast given the Jungian ideas deep beneath them, sort of, that came up through the surface and Dune too is the Star Wars killer. Damien goes into that and then I found this other video. Algo started serving me up the other video. I was in the middle of the video and I was like, oh, I'm going to go into the video and then I found this other video. Algo started serving me up this channel, Jess of the Shire, that I had never heard anything about and, of course, because I love Tolkien and Lord of the Rings and the video that I got served up was Why Do We Love Dune? I watched a little bit of that and then Tolkien's Problems with Dune. This video has been... and, of course, it's got paid promotions in there and she's a lovely young woman and she's talking about Tolkien and a lot of the backstory. It's an excellent video. It's only 28 minutes. I very much recommend it and she also went into sort of the Frank Herbert Tolkien thing. So Mr. Lanier, who was behind the Chilton Automotive manuals that I used to use to fix the cheap cars that I'd buy for myself, sent Tolkien a copy of Dune and, well, he responded, I received your book Dune just before I went abroad for a short while, hence the delay in acknowledging it. I don't think I shall ever have time to read it until I get my next holiday. I'm very much pressed and I am deep in my own world from which it is difficult to pull out. I've had to write many weeks of work on the troubles caused by ace book piracy of the Lord of the Rings and therefore behind with one of my contracts. There's one thing about the books which puzzles me though, your label would suggest it was meant to be sent to my post. It was eventually delivered, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Anyway, Tolkien eventually does get the book and he reads it and his answer to that is 1966. In fact, I dislike Dune with some intensity and in that unfortunate case it is much the best and fairer of another offer to keep silent and refuse to comment. Why would you like, so eventually two people sent him the book, so would you like me to return the book to you or just pass it on to somebody else? It's no surprise of course that Tolkien was not a Dune fan. Tolkien seemed to be in many ways the quintessential curmudgeon with respect to a lot of things, getting annoyed with Lewis and I'm sure there are many reasons that he hated Dune. Now, what she does in this video I think is really quite excellent because she sort of walks through the fact that Herbert was not a religious believer and of course Tolkien was. Tolkien sets up his fantasy for a eucatastrophe so you have this grand conclusion at the end of it whereas Dune is, well maybe if you're cheering for Paul Atreides or Moir Dibb that he is going to finally arise and sort of fulfill the hero's journey in the first book which he does, it's really interesting to sort of play these two books against each other. So a few little clips. I subbed to her channel. I loved it. I'm a fan of Dune. Please sub to her channel. I loved it. Tolkien's Middle Earth sprung up from a basis of language. Tolkien was first and foremost a philologist and he created Middle Earth as a way to lend shape and history to the languages that he was inventing. Herbert however was a journalist by trade. He knew a little bit about everything. Politics, religion, philosophy, psychology, religion, and most importantly ecology. That isn't to say just environmental ecology though. Herbert said, I think there are such things as psychological ecology, religious ecology, economic ecology, etc. And none of them can exist in a vacuum. They're all interrelated. And I think this is part of what gives Dune, part of what I like about Dune. I liked, I really enjoyed Dune when I first read it. And a number of years ago when I was driving my kids to school, I would often play audiobooks that I would think that they would enjoy. And they had never heard of Dune. Of course they were neck deep in Star Wars. But I played Dune for my kids on the way to school for a season. And they really enjoyed it. I didn't get past the first book but they remember it and now of course some decent movie adaptations have now arrived. But this sense of Dune where you do have the religious and the ecological and the economic and they're all sort of interlaced in the story and well she'll continue here. Thus, the world of Dune emerges from this ecology and Herbert's belief that ecology is all about understanding and accepting consequences. And when you look at it, Dune is all about these consequences. Technology becomes too advanced? Well that means that it begins to overwhelm humanity. The logical response to that is that humanity is going to fight back. They're going to have a holy war and destroy all thinking technology. The consequence of that is the world that we see in Dune. One that has cycled back, pushed back through all this technology to go back to a feudal pseudo medieval state. Herbert's fervent pursuit of... And that's right. And you find Herbert using all of these things and wrapping this together for this world. And again this is another example of, I think, Damian Walker. If you go back and you look at the Rebel Wisdom conversation between Jonathan Pujo and Damian Walker, this space in which fantasy and science fiction sort of come together. We only know ourselves by knowing our past and we tend to project that into the future and I think Dune does that quite well. She also nicely goes into Tolkien's idea of recovery. Good fairy stories have the capacity to take things that have become dull and pedestrian and to reset them. To recover them. The strangeness of the fairy realm, the glamour of the unreal takes things like trees and friendship and honor and sunshine and shakes the dust off of them. It recovers these ideas in a new setting and allows us to see them for the wondrous, beautiful things that they truly are. He makes love seem like something carved into destiny and time, something spinning and spectacular. He shows us what a gift, forgiveness, honor, and redemption are. He takes mundane things like trees and stars and shows us, once again, how truly magical they can be. And that's Tolkien, of course. And the magic of the elves. There's a buoyancy to Tolkien. So reading Herbert again, I really enjoy Dune and I plan to, once I get through Dune, I plan to take a look again at some of the sequels because, as with many things that I read when I was younger, I was not up to appreciating them at the time. And now reading Dune again, I hear and see so much more. Herbert seems almost cynical about things. There is very much adrenaline and drama and excitement in the narrative, but it's not in, it's not, is Tolkien escapist or is Tolkien redemptive? And so this idea of recovery is in there. And Herbert, it's drama, it's a good tale, it's a great read, there's a lot to think about, but the vision of the world and the view of the world is very much darker. And, you know, this is, Dune is no Star Trek where we've sort of transcended all of these, all of these base things, you know, and Dune is, and of course it's coming, it's coming at the same time as Star Trek, but the world of Star Trek versus the world of Dune, very different visions for how the universe is going to look. She picks up on this that, so Tolkien, Tolkien being a religious believer, the point she just made about this was escape. And by all means, watch her, watch her whole video and if you like this stuff. Yeah. I finished Contrapoints and then I watched this. And so, wow, what a contrast between this and Contrapoints. And, and don't get me wrong, the Contrapoints essay on Twilight was tremendous. It was, it was a tremendous piece of work for three hours, but as I'm watching Contrapoints, I'm getting a sense of cleverness. I get a much different sense watching this young woman. Anyway. Oh, I lost my mouse. Here we go. Tolkien despises the grimness with which they predict our history. To judge by some of these tales, humanity will still be as lustful, vengeful and greedy as ever. And the ideals of their idealists hardly reach farther than the splendid notion of building more towns of the same sort on other planets. It is indeed an age of improved means to deteriorated ends. Tolkien saw his works as an escape from these concerns. It's not surprising then that he so disliked Herbert's works. From the outset, they do present a world that is as lustful, vengeful and greedy as ever. And yet when you dig a little bit deeper into Dune's themes, I think it becomes pretty clear that advancement is not necessarily good and that technology should not progress without regards for morality. I mean, so- And of course, given Tolkien's undercurrent about technology, you can understand that. But Tolkien is of course buoyed by an eschatology that believes that in the end, good will be done, the woods will be restored, the elves will return and the kingdom will come. Now, another point here that I thought she was really helpful with was religion. This gleam is rooted in Tolkien's devout Catholicism. The happy endings of his tales are not just a comfort for the afflicted, they are a promise. Tolkien truly believed that at the end times, God would come and make things right, and this faith, this optimism, fuels Middle-earth and the Lord of the Rings. Indeed, Tolkien's faith is stamped onto every atom of the Lord of the Rings. And yet, Tolkien's faith is so strong that it's hard to believe that he's actually a true Christian. And yet, Tolkien's faith is so strong that it's hard to believe that he's actually a true Christian. Indeed, Tolkien's faith is stamped onto every atom of the Lord of the Rings. From its beautiful creation story, which parallels many Catholic teachings, to the Christ analogies that can be made for many of the main characters, Middle-earth and its philosophy and its morality are informed entirely by Tolkien's beliefs. He believed in a firm line between good and evil, and the battle between the two shaped his story Herbert, however, was not religious. His family, especially his aunts, were Catholic, and he studied and included in his works some tenets of Zen Buddhism, but it's likely that in terms of his actual personal belief, he was agnostic for the entirety of his life. This worldview comes through very strongly in his works, where religion can be seen primarily as a tool. This doesn't mean that Herbert disavows the power of religion, though. Rather, the strength of religion and its ability to change people is one of Dune's most major themes. When Paul and Jessica arrive on Arrakis, the Fremen natives immediately begin to wonder if he may be their Lisan al-Ghaib, the prophet they have long awaited that was supposed to come from another world. We come to learn, though, that this belief in Lisan al-Ghaib was not organic, it didn't come about naturally. It was planted there by the Bene Gesserit witches as a failsafe, so that if any of their sisters and their children were stranded on the planet of Arrakis, the locals would take them in and protect them, thinking that they are their prophet. Religion is also used in the context of ecology, of trying to save the desert planet of Arrakis and return it to being a water-rich paradise. The father of the planetary ecologist Liet Kynes advises his son, Though he did not personally believe in any religion, Herbert did believe in religion. He knew it was a central part of human ecology. And he looks at everything with this cynical eye, knowing that the machinations of politics are entirely human-made, knowing that if a knowing that if a messiah figure came along, he would be human, and knowing the dangers that would come with that. Unsurprisingly, there is no eucatastrophic conclusion for Dune. There is no happy ending. Rather, there is a fugue. The same musical themes that have been at the base of humanity forever carrying onward. Despite what may sometimes look like destiny, what may sometimes look like fate, human beings have to come to accept that they will always be at war with their universe. Not working towards an end goal, but simply working forward. The ecologist Liet Kynes, who was once a huge proponent for progress and advancement, learns, as the planet of Arrakis swallows him whole, that all of these plans and schemes may have been futile. As his planet killed him, it occurred to Kynes that his father and all the other scientists were wrong, that the most persistent principles of the universe were accident and error. And I thought, again, she did a beautiful job, and it was a nice way of just showing the contrast between the two worlds. It also struck me as I was thinking back, and again, I hope to, I have to get through Dune and to get into some of the sequels. I don't know how far I'll get into the sequels. I just found Carl Eri's book about, found another Carlos Eri's book that fascinated me, and I'm doing a bit of work on the history of Jerusalem, which is itself a very fascinating thing. These biographies of cities like Chordeaux's on New York, New Amsterdam, on Old Amsterdam, and so now there's two biographies of Jerusalem I'm dipping into. It struck me as I was thinking back on my young self reading Dune for the first time. And of course, my name is Paul, and the main character's name is Paul, and it's like, oh, thinking for a bit about the hero's journey and about the seduction that the hero's journey can have. And it's a very fascinating book, and it reminded me again of my conversation with Dr. Jim about James Bond. There is very much in all of us, especially in we men, not we men, but those of us who are men, a desire for heroism. My friend Rod talks about just this part of the desire to, it's tremendously attractive in women to have a need to be rescued, saved, needed, or wanted. Women also have a need to be needed, and so on and so forth. I'm sure there'll be some interesting comments with respect to that comment. But Rod says it so much more elegantly. And I think about this with respect to both contrapoints. I was thinking, I haven't made a video about this because I just haven't made that many videos lately, but I was thinking about home math and contrapoints. Home math's video just, these videos just continue to come out about, in a sense, well, you complaining women, it's all your fault you messed up the traditional system of how men and women can find romance, so now everything's broken because of you. Okay, but men do love challenges of fixing things. They do love to be the hero and play the hero and get to walk in and rise to the challenge and win the girl. And of course, Dune and Star Wars both have that Joseph Campbell hero's journey, Metameth, the entire thing. But then why are, again, A New Hope, the first Star Wars movie that came out, and the first book, Dune, that came out, they're sort of the quintessential hero's myth. But then they have difficulty with the world. Of course, Tolkien takes a much more Christian approach in terms of the big arc of the world. You have heroes within the story, of course, you have Gandalf and Aragorn and Frodo, and you have other minor heroes and subplots going through Tolkien. But for Tolkien, the world is the story. And for Herbert, the world is a fixed set of ecologies that there might be some interesting stories within them, but finally, the world has no story. And it strikes me that so often I think about Glory Days, the song, the song Glory Days about the guy who peaks in high school. He's had his hero's journey, and he's done it at 19. And so for the rest of his life, he's working a crap job, probably married his high school sweetheart that maybe divorced her or maybe sticking with it. But the best of his life was at 19. And now he just sits around talking about Glory Days. So yeah, I'm looking forward to seeing the sequel, Dune II, the conclusion of the Dune story. I very much enjoyed the first movie. Although, again, reading the book and watching the movie, I had also a lot of thoughts about movie adaptations and why they're so, so difficult, especially with respect to the Bible. I know a number of you wrote me and said, oh, give the Chosen a chance. It's like, I just have a difficult time seeing any Christian movie adaptation. And sorry, it's just me. I don't mean anything against the Chosen if you enjoy it. God bless you. But this movie adaptation is good, but I don't have the same kind of... I have fascination with respect to movies and book adaptations, but not the same kind of ownership, I think, for obvious reasons. So yeah, I'll be interested. Of course, Grim Grizz brings up the Sadukar Grim. So Dune is in the air, and I'll be curious to hear what many of you have to say. So leave a comment.