https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HKC6YQf3ILo

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to do something on my channel I haven't done before. Part of why I got into YouTube happened years before I ever got into YouTube or ever heard anything about Jordan Peterson. In my own denomination, I was asking for something which I called confessional conversations. Part of what happened in the Reformation period was there was a newfound need in Europe to talk through the details of our faith. Now, this was mostly done in propositional formats, but what happened during the Protestant Reformation was that churches spun out all kinds of confessional documents, the Belgic Confession, the Heidelberg Catechism. These are all documents out of the Reformation period where people were trying to figure out what they believed and explain what they believed in the light of Christian teaching. I was frustrated in my denomination, and I think my denomination is by no means alone in this, at our failure to have what I felt were productive conversations where people could share their thoughts, but also explore what others believed. And most of the time with conversations like I imagine, people wouldn't necessarily be changing their mind at the end of the conversation, but at the end of the conversation, I think we would know more and we could deal with each other in a more Christian way. Now, the conversation I'm about to share, I'm not in. I sort of set it up, or I had a hand in setting it up, but Sam and Brett did something here that I think more people need to see. Now, those of you who are Christians will probably be interested and will benefit from a really fine exploration of Trinitarian and sacramental theology that both of these individuals were pursuing. Now, it's important that neither of these individuals come from my particular tradition in the Church. Dr. Brett Sockel has been on my channel twice. He's a Roman Catholic theologian. And Sam is a biblical Unitarian. Now, that's a very small movement, but Sam has been a lay person amidst evangelicals. And I might as well just dive right in. Basically, after listening to this conversation, I wanted to post it on my channel. It's also on Sam's channel and the link to the original conversation will be below. But I wanted more people to see this because in my opinion, what these two demonstrated was how people can speak to one another even within some pretty set theological lines within Christianity and do it well. Now, I first met Sam because I was making Jordan Peterson videos and Sam contacted me like many others. And with Sam, he was a non-Trinitarian. Now, I had been speaking to all sorts of other people, but I knew that in talking to Sam, I could get in trouble for some things. Now, we actually had a first conversation and Sam's sound level was so low. I mean, if a video, if the sound is so low in a video that I won't even play it on my channel, you know it's got to be pretty bad. So we didn't air that first video and part of me was a little happy because I was a little nervous about it. But Sam, well, I told him we'd do it again. And so then we did it again. And so Sam and I had our second in-depth conversation and the sound was better and I posted it. And while I had had atheists and all manner of religious people, especially some of the Christians, really reacted to Sam. Now, I found this, I had the same reaction and I found the reaction interesting because in a sense it gets into this idea of principalities that here we had had an issue that for many Christians is something that we rarely ever discussed like the Trinity. We paid attention to it with talking perhaps about the Church of Latter-day Saints, the Jehovah's Witnesses of certain other churches, but mostly ancient controversies. And here in Sam I met a young man who went to a very small church that was no longer existing and for much of his young adult and adult life had gone to evangelical churches and then it had the awkward position of having integrity and going to the pastor and say, By the way, I know you'd like me to play in the worship band and really become a full member of the church, but by the way, I don't believe in the Trinity. And of course that sent a whole bunch of pastors sort of, what do I do with you? Because even in the United States, what little church discipline mechanisms there are, the Trinity is a pretty strong tripwire and this has been set for 1500 years at least. So this is a really big deal. And so a lot of us didn't quite know what to do with Sam. But one conversation led to another. He became a regular on the Rando's channel. He was a regular on the Discord server, the Bridges of Meaning, helped get the Chicago meetup going. And, you know, many of us began to know and trust and like Sam. And so there was a friendship there and there were relationships of trust. And this is why being a Christian isn't just being a bag of certain beliefs. You think about John Vervecky's four P's of knowing. There's the perspectival, the procedural, the propositional, and the perspectival. I always forget one of them. But so now suddenly we know and we trust and we like Sam and Sam's our friend. But Sam's not budging on any of this. And often even someone like myself, I'll start to talk to Sam and very quickly realize that in many ways he's better read on these issues than I am. Because you cover these issues when you're learning about Jesus and the Heideberg Catechism. You go a little bit deeper when you go into seminary. You get sort of up to speed on what, say, the Mormons believe or the Jehovah's Witnesses believe. But then you run into a guy like Sam and you realize, well, he's read Athanasius. He's read a bunch of church fathers. Because of the fact that they are sort of an outlier, they know all these issues better than most Trinitarians. Because you just simply three in one. Jesus is God. The Spirit is God. The Father is God. Jesus Christ is one person, two natures. And even if you don't really understand how all this stuff works, you subscribe to it and you pledge allegiance to it. And this is part of being your tribe. And so you hold on to it. And when you read the Bible, you tend to read it with those eyes. And every now and then some other passages will sort of stick out. But then when you talk to Sam, you realize, and he's doing it on video, you realize, I've got to really step carefully around this. Because if someone really wanted to come after me and I step over a line here in the Trinity, I mean, this is something that, yeah, they can, someone can come after me for this. And all the stuff I talk about about Jordan Peterson, all that, that's sort of over there. But we're dealing with the Trinity here. This is high-stakes stuff. So Sam sort of became, you know, there's plenty of non-Christians and plenty of people in the Discord community from all over the place. Sam sort of became our resident heretic. And well, how to think about Sam? These issues just sort of were in the background, but the Discord server is not a church and there's lots of people and friendships develop. And then, of course, I met Brett. And I don't exactly know how this whole thing came about. I received the book in the mail and an email saying, let's have a conversation and transubstantiation. Well, now I'm going to get in trouble from the other side because I'm a Calvinist and transubstantiation was sort of a naughty word. And Brett had sent me an email, said, oh, let's schedule a conversation. I better read the book. So I start reading the book and I start getting into the first chapter and I begin to realize I start underlining things and everything. I begin to realize, oh my goodness, this book is very much what I've been looking at and studying with John Vervecky and with, you know, Plato and all of these issues. And I'm reading this book and I had started, I had been down that road before because I had said sort of the usual things that I had learned in seminary about what I thought transubstantiation was. And then Mary and a few others in the channel said, hey, wait a minute. Why don't you look at what Bishop Barron has to say about transubstantiation? And I listened to Bishop Barron and I began to think, this doesn't sound a whole lot different from what I believe. And so then I start reading Brett's book and I start to be able to understand this at a whole new level that I hadn't before. And so then I was a little bit nervous doing my conversation with him because I know people say, well, you're a theologian. I'm not a theologian. I'm a pastor. Pastors know some theology, but we're not academics. We're not theologians. We're not specialists in this kind of stuff. We have perhaps just enough information to be dangerous. And so, you know, when I talk to a guy like Brett, I, you know, I'm out of my league in some ways. And on my channel, I'm often having conversations that are out of my league. So a little bit nervous talking to Brett, but, you know, very quickly getting to know him. And, you know, the same thing talking to John Vervecky. I mean, he's an academic and I'm a pastor. And with many of you who I talk to, I'm going to talk to a lot of PhDs and I don't have a PhD. And I feel some lack of PhD insecurity complex sometimes because of that. Just like I have friends of mine who are pastors and they don't have an MDiv, so they feel a little insecure. So, but then I have this conversation with Brett and it's a wonderful conversation. I really like talking to Brett. The conversation flows well. And, you know, Brett was first like two hours. I don't know, but we get going and he's like, yeah, we can do more. And then he's like, when would we do another one? And then we did another one. And after I talked to Brett, I thought, I want Brett and Sam to talk to each other. I know Sam had tried to set up a conversation with Nathan Jacobs and I had had a long conversation with Nathan Jacobs about the Trinity and about person and I learned a ton from Nathan. But Nathan's been busy with stuff. And so Nathan wasn't available. So I thought. So then I first asked Sam, I said, Sam, would you be interested in talking to Brett? Sam's like, oh, yeah. So then I sent a message to Brett and said, would you be interested in talking to Sam? And Brett said, I like Brett a lot. He's like, okay. And so they talked. And what happened was really beautiful. And they went for almost two hours. And I learned a lot about Sam that I didn't know. Like Sam's mother was Roman Catholic. And the ideas that Sam had from his mother about what transubstantiation meant were very much like the ideas that I had had. And got corrected watching the Bishop Barron movie and video and learned a lot about transubstantiation from Brett. And so then these two talked. And the openness, the degree of security. I mean, in order to have a conversation like this, you really need to be sure of yourself and secure. Because from a secure place you can be open and explore with quite a bit more freedom. And both Sam and Brett had an abundance of goodwill and good faith. They had enough common language. They both have read enough of the same things that they could have a good conversation with each other. They had enough of a shared frame of reference. A lot of times people will say, Paul, you should talk to so and so and so and so and so and so. And I think the best conversations happen when there's enough commonality between the people that they can use shortcuts. But also both of these guys know, partly with Brett, he's unusual for a lot of academics that I talk to. Because Brett spends his time doing diaconal training. So he's always talking to laypeople. So often like a pastor, he's having to translate this into terms that layfolks can understand. And that really gives Brett a real advantage. And one of the other things I discovered in this video is Brett was very open about the fact. He says, you know, I'm doing all this work in this area, but I'm not really up to speed on Trinitarian stuff. And just as a pastor, hearing that was such a relief because I often feel that way. And on my channel, people want to talk to me about all kinds of things. So just last week, a Swede about trolls and giants and a Finn about Norse mythology and all these ideas coming out of Finland. I mean, it's just so broad. I often I just have to listen because I don't know much and I learn so much and I make so many mistakes. But, you know, if there's a if there's a space to to be honest about what we do and don't know, if there's a curiosity to explore. And what happened in this conversation? It's a long conversation. So at one point I listened to the first hour and then I got another chance. I listened to the second hour. I didn't want to recommend it until I had listened to the whole thing, which is a problem that I have sometimes. I listen to the first five minutes. I say, oh, I love this and I recommend it. Then I listen to the rest of it. It's like, ooh. But but this conversation, I listened to it from start to finish and the whole thing was outstanding. And I thought, I want more people to listen to this conversation. I want more people to enjoy this because these two individuals are exemplifying what how I want the church to deal with what it needs to deal with. Same sex marriage, pluralism, you know, many of that. I mean, if there's anything, if there's a if there's a if there's an area of theology, which is World War One, Trent's warfare like in potential, it's Trinitarian theology. But the more work I do, you know, working on Jordan Peterson stuff and doing the kind of videos I do, a lot of what I'm bumping into is theology of God and theology of God is deals with Trinity. What is the relationship between Jesus Christ and God the Father and the Holy Spirit? And what does father and son mean? And I've been bumping into these kinds of issues a lot, not only in the videos that I make, but in going through the Gospel of John and my adult Sunday school class before the lockdown. And so what I saw these two doing, I thought, I want everyone to to do like this. And I know we can't always. And and I know it's difficult. But what these two modeled in this conversation to me is exactly what I think the church needs to be about. And so when I saw it, I hadn't there have been a few other conversations that some in the randos and some people that I've spoken with have have talked to me about and that I've seen on YouTube. And I thought they're on the randos channel or they're on Karen's channel and they're on these are there. You know, I want them to be on my channel, but I've never done that because I'm afraid of once I start doing that, I my channel is already too broad for its own health as a YouTube channel, but I couldn't hold back with this conversation. So what I'm doing is I'm just recording this video and I'm putting this other conversation on the back end of it. And I'm going to post it as such. Now, there's a bunch of places in this conversation that I sort of wanted to stick my big beak in and and get involved. Like, well, what is Protestantism? And and maybe the three of us will do a talk because they just did it so well. And again. And I just finished preaching about Easter and. Easter always gets me thinking about the life of the age to come and the resurrection of the dead and. My when I think about the life of the age to come, I think about sitting down and having a conversation with Augustine and and are really just sitting and listen to listening to Augustine talk with some of the Eastern fathers and Peter Kreeft, Kreeft, Kreeft, likes making bit Mike likes writing books about, you know, having Plato talk with, you know, he likes doing these these dialogue books. And they don't always work. But and, you know, I here's the thing. So I'm a Calvinist. OK. And some of you might think I'm an insufficient Calvinist for others. I'm too much of a Calvinist, but whatever Calvinist I am that I am, you know, I think about the life of the age to come. And I think about God engineering the best kinds of conversations we can imagine. Now, I just. I just I'm planning on doing revisiting the Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris. Debate slice, slash conversations and because it's fun going back over them a couple of years later after everything more that I've learned, because it's so often when I listen to these things after after working on this stuff for so long, it feels like when I looked at them the first time, I was looking at them with blurry eyes. And now I see them much more clearly and I understand them much better. And when I think you know, I hear people talking about, well, what would life in the age to come? Wouldn't we get bored? Wouldn't we get bored? And when I watch The Good Life and The Good Place and I think it's not enough imagination. And when I think about the life of the age to come, I think about conversations like these. And I know there's there's often a strand that can be a little freer in eschatology because it's not quite so set. There's a lot of, oh, when when we when we get there, we'll know everything. I don't think so, because I think part of the joy will be in discovery. And when I listen to Brett and when I listen to Sam and again, this is so tricky because how to Brett spends a long time. How do Sam? How how what labels can I put on you? How can I how can I know what you think? And I want to be fair to you and I I want to respect you, but I want to know. And when I think about the life of the age to come and conversations in the age to come, this conversation, I think, gives me a glimpse. It's like a sample. If Jesus miracles were samples of the life of the age to come, water to wine, multiplication of loaves and fishes, walking on water. If you read C.S. Lewis's miracles and miracles of the new creation, I think this is what we're in for. And what I saw in this conversation was the kinds of conversations that we can have when our sin and our insecurities and our fears don't get in the way. But but it's not just, you know, quivering masses of acceptability and just and just being on the surface. They they dealt with things. And if if ecumenical conversations can be like this one, count me in. But it goes beyond ecumenical. It goes to the kinds of conversations that I've always wanted to have that hopefully I've been having some on this channel. But maybe that is what this channel is for to to to model the kinds of conversations that I think we need to have. Now, this is perhaps an overly long introduction, but I don't care. This is YouTube. You watch four hours of Joe Rogan. This will be a long one. And some of you will clap and some of you will see it multiple times. But I might this conversation made my heart sing because. Who of us and I think Brett talks about this so well and in my conversations, all these conversations will be linked below. But. You know, when I taught what was talking to Brett, I learned a lot from him about, you know, the church fathers. Well, we have to we have to use analogy because that's the only way we can sort of understand. But all of our analogies are poor. So, you know, who of us can fathom? Who of us can fathom how God is? He's holy, holy, holy. At the same time, in order to relate to him and be in relationship with him, we have to have these these analogies. And I really thought this conversation was interesting in terms of ideas of process and development of theology in the in the early councils. And and I think Brett was right in terms of Protestants and Catholics. But there's a tension there that we're always working with. And again, I thought both of them were faithful and loyal to this tension. So to me, this conversation was a work of art. And, you know, Sam's got 64 subscribers. He should probably have more. But I didn't want this conversation just sort of drifting out and not being noticed. So here I'm going to stick my big beak in at the beginning, but I'm just going to let it play. And maybe the three of us will have a conversation or maybe I'll do a video commentary on their conversation. But it's already a long video, so I'll shut up now and and let you have at it. So this is an unusual thing. I don't know if I'll do it again. But this is a conversation that more people need to see. And all of us learn need to learn to do one. All right. Hello, everyone. This is Sam. And I'm here with Brett Saucold. Did I say that correctly? Sorry. Yeah, Saucold. And so you are a Catholic theologian. You live in Regina, Saskatchewan. And if I understand correctly, your current position is sort of like deaconate education. Is that right? So I'm the archdiocesan theologian. And a big part of my day to day work is that I run our deacon formation program for the archdiocese. So we're not a big enough center that we have a theology faculty or a seminary. The closest seminary is in Edmonton, which is like a 10 and a half hour drive or something. Canada is a big place. Yeah, Canada is big. So if you're a deacon, we send our priests to Edmonton or like our seminarians who are going to be priests. But deacons are guys with families and day jobs typically who do their formation on evenings and weekends. So you can't be going to Edmonton for evenings and weekends. So a big part of my task here is to run our deaconate formation program. But I do like dozens of other things. Once you have a theologian on staff, you realize it takes a couple of years. And then like, oh, the theologian can do this too. And so you get you get different things thrown your way. But but yeah, deaconate formation is is is the reason there's a line for me in the budget. Yes. Yes. Cool. And so you've recently written a book called Transubstantiation. I don't have a paper copy. Yes. Thank you. I have a I have a Kindle copy. OK. And it is, I would say, really good and kind of for me, it was mind blowing, I would say. I so my my mom, I'm a I'm a Unitarian and grew up Unitarian, but my mom grew up Catholic and became Protestant around the time she started dating my dad. And so I have a lot of Catholic family. I've been to Catholic masses and first communions and funerals and weddings and all that sort of stuff. And I always understood transubstantiation or the Catholic teaching on the Eucharist to be well, literal or physical or even perhaps chemical, you might even say. Right. Right. In terms of of the transformation. And and my mom did too. Right. And that's what she and she grew up in in the church. And so that's what when she stopped believing that that's what she thought it was that she was, you know, leaving aside. So right. Right. Here you say that that the original understanding and articulation from Thomas Aquinas and sort of that medieval time was not that was like, oh, right. So go ahead. Yeah. So just a comment on vocabulary. Right. So whether it's literal or physical depends on what you mean by literal or physical. Right. Real depends on what you mean by real. He's saying Christ isn't really present. And and so I want I want to qualify. Right. So literal or physical presence is is from a theological point of view, undefined terms. It's just never the language the church is used to define. And so you could say Christ is literally present and have an orthodox intention or a misapprehension. You can say right. That's clear and have an orthodox intention or some misapprehension. So I some people hear my own mother keep saying. But I was sure he was really present. I'm like, no, Mom, he is. He is really. But physically and literally are not the categories that the church has used. And they can convey a misunderstanding you use chemically. Right. If they give you the impression that if you looked under a microscope, you would see something other than the physical elements of bread and wine. Or sometimes you hear this stuff. Right. God would like convert it back or disguise it to you like prevent your prying eyes from from discerning what's really going on. Then you then you have a misapprehension of what you know what you mean by literally or physically. But what the church has said is really, truly and substantially. And that's and when when we talk about transubstantiation, the key term is substantially. Right. And so I go into a lot of detail about what that means. And the thing about substance in Thomas Aquinas is that it's not a physical reality. Substance is what is present to the mind, not what is present to the senses. But what is present to the mind is actually more real in a certain way, because what is present to the senses can shift. Like I can get a haircut or or I mean, I can I can I can go through an accident where I'm radically disfigured and unrecognizable from a physical point of view or almost unrecognizable. I mean, you might have the dentist look at the molds of my teeth or something. But my my core thing that makes me me that is given by God that is present to the intellect that apprehends it through some interaction with the physical. That's more real than the physical, which can which can shift and change. So. Right. Right. And it's not. But at the same time, it's not just saying it's all in your head. Right. It's it's it's real to the intellect, if not the senses. But that's not saying that it's imaginary or just in your head. Yeah. So that would actually I think the other really key term for the Catholic tradition, which is really, right. This is really present. I think that if you go digging at how the churches use that term real, you can basically translate it as. God is the actor. So it's even though the substance is what's present to the intellect, it doesn't mean that we are making Christ present by thinking about it directly. It's not an act of the community agreeing to call this thing what we call it and then acting accordingly, which is which is actually not nothing. Right. That's what we do with a national flag. Right. Right. Or like Thanksgiving. Right. Like, yeah. What makes a Thanksgiving turkey is a Thanksgiving turkey because it's on the you eat it on the Thursday in November and you're there with your family, et cetera. And so you're eating a Thanksgiving turkey. But you can't look under a microscope and say this is Thanksgiving. Right. Right. So it's the human meaning making capacity is not nothing. But when Catholics have said Christ is really present, we're saying it's more than that. It's God's meaning making activity. God determining the reality of this that makes this presence in that sense real. So, yes, substance is present to the mind, but it doesn't mean we're making things up. Right. Right. Just like if I recognize you, I'm recognizing it's happening in my mind that I'm recognizing you. But I'm recognizing something that's external to my mind that is that is real in itself and not just real because it's up here. Right. Right. Right. Right. OK. Well, that I think was a really good introduction and important to get clarified kind of right off the bat. But you also said that you had some some questions for me to just better understand where I'm coming from. Yeah. Yeah. So so you kind of asked me in our initial exchanges and maybe we should give some props to Paul Vanderclay. Yes. You're you're a watcher of his YouTube channel. And I did a couple of interviews with Paul on the book. So that's kind of how we met. You got in touch with Paul who said, hey, Sam wants to get in touch with you. And and the kind of the key question is, OK, you're a Unitarian. And and I don't know a lot about Unitarian, but you had asked me like what kind of ecumenical dialogue is possible between Trinitarian Christians and non-Trinitarian Christians. And I didn't really know. And so my question for you are kind of along that line. So I'm not an ex Trinitarian theology is not my particular expertise. I have to know something about it as a Catholic theologian. But I do have particular expertise in ecumenical dialogue. And the question, I think, for a theologian interested in dialogue when presented with Unitarian is what category do we put this person or group in? Because if I dialogue with a Muslim or Jewish person, I'm doing interfaith dialogue. If I dialogue with Lutheran or Calvinist, I'm doing ecumenical dialogue. I'm dialoguing with another person who I acknowledge as a Christian. Right. And part of the thing that we say we acknowledge when we're doing ecumenical dialogue with Lutherans or Calvinists or Anglicans or the Eastern Orthodox or anybody. Well, not anybody. Any of those groups, we say, well, they believe in the Trinity. Right. That's one of the key. Right. They believe in the incarnation. They believe in the Trinity. We have the first seven councils often of the church we refer to where this kind of stuff was hammered out. And so then we don't really know where to put a Unitarian. Like, are you something like and I don't mean for you to answer this right now. I mean, this is the question in our head. Something like a Jehovah's Witness or a Mormon, which is which uses Christian scriptures, but we don't call them Christian, but they call themselves Christian. Like, how does that fit? And so the only nothing seemed to fit really well. And the best thing I could latch on to from my own experience of the of the Christian tradition is during the first seven councils in the early church, there there were groups of Eastern Christians, so like the Assyrian Church, that did not sign on to the Council of Chalcedon. Right. Kind of the finalization of our doctrine of Christ as fully human and fully divine and then the implications that has for the Trinity. And we still call them Christians. And in fact, we reached remarkable breakthroughs in mutual understanding in the last hundred years with them after after like centuries and centuries of sort of mutual estrangement. Right. On like 1500 years worth of estrangement. Yeah, like way more than Protestants and Catholics. Right. So that's my jumping off point is like dialogue with the Unitarian might be possible. If it's something like that, if it's something like. So the question that an ecumenist always wants to ask and here's where I get to my questions for you is, can you say you don't believe in the Trinity. I want to know when you say that, what do you mean to affirm and what do you mean to deny? Because I can just say, oh, they don't believe in Trinity. So I have I have no truck with that. That's not Christianity. But the Trinity is actually a really complicated thing. And there's a pretty good chance you affirm some things that I affirm and and other things that you don't affirm. I might at least want to make sure that my own people aren't misunderstanding it because it might be a confusing thing. Right. So anyways, that's kind of that's the question I put to you is like when you say you don't believe in the Trinity, what are you affirming and denying? Because that's a really tight, short little statement that must have a massive sort of background behind it that needs unpacking. Right. Yes. Well, first off, I want to say that one of the things I really enjoyed about your book and your talks with Paul and the other things that I interacted with you is that you have a very patient and under you know, curious. Approach to these topics. So so that's one of the reasons why I was I was excited to talk to you. It's not always easy to find even people that will go as far as you just did in the last couple minutes. So like with regards to say, you know, like the Coptic Orthodox Church or the Armenians or the Nestorians, right, who were who would sign on to Nicaea and Constantinople, but not Calcedon. Right. They would still call themselves Trinitarians. They would just say that the particular details or language of the Council of Chalcedon didn't get the incarnation right. But they would still self identify as as Trinitarians. Right. So so this is why I'm even perhaps a little bit further from that. And I would expect but it was the closest jumping off point I could write. So from your perspective, I'm probably cool a lot closer to you than Mormons or Jehovah's Witness, but maybe not even quite as close as say the Nestorian Church of the Easter or something like that. Okay. So Unitarianism really has its birth or we would say rebirth as a theology in the Reformation. Right. Sort of the radical end of the Anabaptist wing of the Reformation started to not believe in the Trinity anymore in the early 1500s and really not that long after things got rolling. And so so there there's liberal Unitarianism, which is sort of like Unitarian Universalism, which most people are familiar with and whether or not you classify that as a Christian religion, they might not even classify themselves as a Christian religion anymore. Really? Right. There. It's sort of like a post religious religion or something like that. Right. Right. We have a group in Regina. I actually I actually went and gave a talk there once while we while our society was debating what to do about assisted suicide when our Supreme Court struck down the law prohibiting it. So I gave the Catholic, you know, fervorino against assisted suicide to to this group, many of whom were in favor of assisted suicide, but who also are committed in principle to listening to people who don't necessarily share their commitments. So, yes, they're an interesting and they also got all my Star Trek jokes. They're lovely people. I've had interactions with the Unitarian Universalist. They're perfectly friendly. So I'm but that's not you. That's not me. So we represent sort of like the conservative wing of Unitarianism that really kind of we're not even like one denomination. Unitarian Universalism is a denomination. Like biblical Unitarianism, as we often call ourselves, is more like a confederation of lots of different groups who seem to come to similar conclusions on these matters, often pretty independently. So like there's some biblical Unitarians who came out of Baptist stuff, some who, you know, came out of sort of more, I don't know, charismatic backgrounds or this that or the other thing, where some pastor will like read his violin like, yeah, the trinity just doesn't make sense anymore. I think it's kind of like this. And then the Internet has made it a lot easier for us to find ourselves. And there really is sort of like a growing self awareness of each other emerging mainly because of the Internet that is sort of enabling the growth of what we what's often called biblical Unitarianism or Christian Unitarianism sometimes. So, so we point back to early church fathers that would normally be classified as heretical church fathers from the early couple centuries who seem to believe what we believe. And we claim that our Christology, our alternative Christology is really the original sort of biblical and apostolic teaching and that things sort of got off track and then died away and then in the Protestant Reformation finally came back is really sort of our our self understanding. So that's sort of like history, but that I didn't describe any of the content of the doctrine. So, right. Go ahead. Well, yeah, it gives me a couple questions. I mean, one thing that strikes me is if people are coming up with this independently. There's probably a handful of scriptural passages that are sort of group together as sort of central for your understanding. And, and, and then some people are going to discover some church fathers who read things that way, sort of after the fact. I mean, you might have some people who read these church fathers and say, oh, they had it right. But it sounds more like some people just reading their Bible and then they're like, oh, some other Christians, both living today and living 1800, 1900 years ago, seem to read it the way that makes sense to me. Right. Right. And so because that's happening convergently a lot there does seem to be, and we would also point that a lot of sort of like higher criticism and sort of like the kind of the historical Jesus camp and stuff like that, sort of like the Bart airman's of the world actually seem to say that the earliest Christology looks more like what we believe, even though we believed this before Bart airman and sort of a lot of his peers sort of stumbled upon it like Larry Hurtado also seems to be another sort of one of the he recently passed away. One of those sort of early church historian sort of people who seems to say actually you know this the earliest versions of you know Christology seem to look more like this and then we're like, well, we've been saying that since like you know 1550. And stuff like that. So that's sort of where we're coming from. So to give you an overview of what we think is with the Unitarianism is a word that is was intentionally crafted in contrast to Trinitarianism. Right Unitarianism is in the biblical word. It's not even like a word that you can find in the Church Fathers. And so we believe that just God the Father is the one person who is God and all of God is essentially got the father. And that he's the only eternal all powerful being. So we will say then that Jesus is the son of God. We will affirm the virgin birth and the miracles and his death and his birth and his death and his birth and his birth and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his death and his resurrection. But we will say that he was just a man. That he didn't have a divine nature or he wasn't one of the co-eternal persons of the Godhead or something like that. That he had a very special relationship to God. That he revealed God and that he was empowered by God to do miracles and all those sorts of things. And that he was chosen ahead of time before the foundations of the world. And we would say he pre-exists only in God's foreknowledge. God knew about him ahead of time. But that wasn't a personal active form of pre-existence. He really didn't exist in the real sense until he was conceived. And so and then now he's exalted. He's at the right hand of God. You know all authorities are being submitted to him and then he'll return again. So the basic gist of the narrative starting at the conception is really very similar. And we have the same, we don't have a special scripture book like Mormons do nor do we have some secret sanctified translation that's hardly a translation at all like Jehovah's Witnesses do. We'll use the same Bible, same translation, same Greek text and stuff that mainstream Orthodox Christians will use. Right, right. Would you say that your Christology would be something like what like when I teach an intro, you know, Doctrine of God course or Christology course, you would talk about adoptionist. Yes, basically. Okay, we would say we wouldn't like lean into adoptionism because we don't think that there was like a hardcore wing of adoptionism which was like God just looked down and saw Jesus who was living so good and decided to make him his only begotten son. Right, that would be, we wouldn't say that like we would say you know God did intend for all of this to happen and it was all part of his plan. He didn't just notice Jesus and decide to adopt him like some of the early adoptionists said. Okay, so the more moderate wing of the adoptionists would be us basically. Okay. They also have the name Dynamic Monarchians is another one of their names in the original church period and that's who we claim to be sort of in kinship with through the ages. And so then here's, here's something that I think strikes me as really core for, well, a Catholic but I would say probably any mainstream Trinitarian. What do you say about the worship of Jesus? Yeah, this is a good question. So, this is where I'll be a little bit careful because, well, like part of like what I said about modern biblical Unitarianism is we're a loose confederation so we have some of some disagreements internally based off of some of these things. But the way that I understand it is that Jesus is to be worshiped. Okay. And that he is worthy to be bowed down to. You can have a personal relationship with him and stuff like that because God has exalted him to a place where he is deserving of such. And like some passages that we might use to kind of support that idea like at the end of first Chronicles, there's a passage where David is passing the, the, the throne to Solomon. And in sort of that, that process, all of the assembly of Israel bows down to God and to the King, right, sort of simultaneously. Okay. And bow down is the same word, right, as worship. And so we would say that, that Jesus is worthy of worship in the sense that he is God's like right hand man and sits on the throne of David eternally as the Messiah and Christ. But there would be, and correct me if I'm wrong, a distinction between the worship offered to God and the worship offered to Jesus. Probably yes, I make that distinction that like the worship that's given to Christ is still, it's sort of ripples up to God the Father in the highest sense. Sort of like in Philippians two, which is ironically a verse that often gets quoted against us, where every knee bows to Jesus every tongue confesses that he is Lord to the glory of God the Father. Right. Like everyone is bowing to Jesus recognizing his rulership, but God is sort of in a sense kind of the power above the throne itself. And so even the glory received by Jesus is worthy to him, but it's still kind of ripples up. Right, right. I like one thing that I've said to help explain this to Catholic people before is that the way we think of Jesus is not unlike the way that Catholics think of Mary. I was starting to wonder about that. I mean, it sounds to me like there's a closer relationship. Like we draw a pretty hard line between creature and creator, and we would say Mary is never worshiped as God. And so we like we'll have careful distinctions to say like you might venerate, but that's not worship. Or in Latin we say, Dulia is due to the saints and Latria is due to God alone. And Mary gets hyperdulia, which is like she's the greatest of the saints, but it's categorically different than what's offered to God. And so I'm sensing some parallel between the Catholic approach to Mary and your approach to Jesus. But but also I feel like we well and maybe there's differences in your camp, but it feels like we draw a pretty hard line between like we won't even use the same word. Right. Or worship, you know, between Mary and God. And that line seems, at least in your particular case, not quite as hard. Right. It's not quite as hard. We might be willing to cross that. And so the like the scandalous thing to us that we're willing to accept is that God has made exalted a man to be worthy of worship alongside himself. Right. Like, you know, the sort of the Catholic side is the scandals that God becomes man. Right. And and like that he would come down to us. Right. And like, you know, that might sound ridiculous, but that's that's what we're saying. Whereas we're saying almost the opposite. Right. The scandal for us is that that a man gets exalted to be on the throne with God. Right. And that that is shocking in a certain sense and a little bit unexpected. But also there are Old Testament passages that seem to allude to that happening like Daniel seven or or someone 10 and stuff like that. Where where someone like the son of man or David's Lord gets put on the throne next to but still not he's not usurping God and still God is in a sense above him. But seemingly brought into the throne room of God is a man and everything else, all the angels, all other powers are now subject to the man. Right. Right. I got two two more questions on this. Go for it. First is first is the Holy Spirit question mark. Oh, good question. So we think that the Holy Spirit is not like a person. Right. We would say that it we normally say it's like the it's the spirit of God at work in the world or something like that. We wouldn't give it independent personship. It's not like a second God or something like that. It's like a power of God or an attribute of God that God uses to work in the world. So it may be in like there's Old Testament passages that talk about the spirit of God or sometimes the angel of God, which almost seems to be like a proxy. Right. It would be something. It would be something like that. Like the Holy Spirit gets personified. Right. And it's like this. It's the one who gives scriptural revelation. Right. Like when when prophets receive words of the Lord, it comes to them through the Holy Spirit. And now in the Christian age after Pentecost, the Holy Spirit has been poured out on all flesh. Right. And all Christians get indwelt by the Holy Spirit. And it's sort of like this internal connection to God. And it's fine to talk about it in a personified way. And the Bible itself does that. But sometimes it's talked about in an impersonal way. So it's sort of like this quasi not quite personal activity or energy of God at work in the world. It's the spirit of God is really the way that we like to say it. So it's not a member of the Godhead. It's not worshiped because you can't it's not like the sort of thing that could be worshiped. It's just a way of talking. Right. Yeah. Right. See, one of the things that I'd be curious about, but I'm not equipped to do this, you know, do this work with you right now. This isn't my area. But when I teach it, you know, I read about it just before I teach it. So I'm an expert for a week. Because I don't write on it and, you know, it's not generally my area of study, then it doesn't stick. But one of the things that we we do in in an intro Trinity class is we sort of deconstruct the word person because the way the word person comes to be used in the early Christological debates in the Trinitarian theology actually leads in some strange convoluted route to the word person we use today in English. Yes. But it's not the same thing. And so we try to qualify it by saying it's something what what what we're saying in the in the ancient Trinitarian theology. It's not perfect, but the closest we might get in contemporary English would be something like relation. Yeah, I would even say entity. Right. Like might be the word for hypostasis that that kind of like an individual thing, but it doesn't need to have, you know, self-awareness and stuff like that, like the English person. Which I mean, when we hear person and we just translate straight from our everyday experience of persons, we end up with basically tri-theism. No. Rather than Trinitarian theology. But if I was more equipped, I, you know, I might have more. But it strikes me that that might be a place for engagement with someone who actually really knows that stuff to see how how you guys think about it. My last my last thing on this before we move on to our other questions is it just strikes me that as a Catholic theologian. That this is much more likely to be a Protestant phenomena, like I'm not aware at all of Catholics, you know, reading the scriptures this way and then being like, oh, this early Christological heresy actually makes a lot of sense to me. I mean, using the language we would use. And it seems it seems at least in part because Catholics have a pretty clear and comfortable. We're comfortable with the idea of doctrinal development in the in the early church. And so when we say we see something like an adoptionist Christology in the early church, I mean, we wouldn't deny for a second that it's there, you know, and that you have real historical antecedents. But we would be like, but it was found unsatisfying for a reason at the time. And and it and when I teach early Christology, I mean, basically the pattern is something like, OK, this Jesus's relationship to God is a bit mysterious and scripture can be read in more than one way. And we have early church fathers reading it and fighting with each other about it. And then someone makes a proposal that that accounts for some of the data, but but necessarily then chooses to ignore other bits of the data. And then when the rest of the tradition is faced with that, they say, well, yeah, they got this thing right. But then because they went in that direction, they necessarily missed this thing. And there's this sort of careful winnowing back and forth until actually after calcedon. Really, the final question is how many minutes. Yeah, not Fissos. And then what's what's the Greek word for will? Right. Well, I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. So you have a monophysitism one nature that's earlier and that gets sort of winnowed out. But then the final question is even after calcedon and it's how many wills does Jesus have. Right. And monotheletism says he has one will, the divine will. And that's that's ruled out of court. Right. In fact, Jesus does have a human will and a divine will. Ends up being the orthodox position. But anyways, that just shows how fine grained this gets. Yeah. But there's this sort of like someone makes a pitch that accounts for some of the data and misses other parts of the data. So then the tradition sort of self corrects. But sometimes there's this sort of overshoot and it's almost like a pendulum that sort of slowly comes to rest sort of even well after calcedon. But Catholics in general are just comfortable with with this sense of development of doctrine and and trusting that the spirit is with the church in that discernment. And so when we look at an early adoptionist Christology, we're like, yeah, that was that was part of the sorting out process. And it didn't take. And, you know, here we are where we are. Whereas it seems much more likely that at least some Protestants would read scripture and find a given reading of it compelling and then go back to the early church and say, hey, that guy read it like I do. He must have had something. And it just seems that the possibility of the Unitarianism you described looks from Catholic eyes like a Protestant phenomena. Yeah. Yeah. And I would say that's very much true. Like a common ingredient of all of the different kind of strains that have come together in biblical Unitarianism is the idea that like earlier is better. Right. This sort of rejection of the idea of development, rejection of the idea of the church magisterium or something, having some sort of authority on this matter. And that the earlier the closer you can get to the New Testament teaching, the closer you can get to the original apostolic age, the better sort of. And then everything is downhill from there. And it's always this uphill battle to get back to first origins. Right. And this is a common thing in some parts of Protestantism. And in the Protestant Reformation, there was sort of like the the magisterial wing like Calvin and Luther, who still had a lot of respect for Augustine and still had a lot of respect for the patristic age. And they were like, man, we need to shed back but maybe just shed off the Middle Ages to get back to like the patristic period. Right. And then there was the radical reformation, which was like the Anabaptists in them. We're like, we need to go all the way back to the Book of Acts. Right. And so you get the Anabaptists who are living in sort of communes together sharing all their goods because in the Book of Acts, they shared all things in common. We're going to do that. Right. And then you get sort of the doctrinal version of that, which is Unitarianism is like, trendy is not in the Bible, never says that. What they believe originally, let's do our best to reconstruct this thing. Let's look at the earliest church fathers and try and do our best to make sense of the New Testament data. Well, here we are Unitarianism, some some version of quasi adoptionism again. So you and I are basically like arch enemies. Well, well, the thing is, is if we know where we disagree, then it makes it easier to talk. Yeah, exactly. But I mean, but our but the methods of our respective traditions are really quite opposed. I mean, if we if we start moving towards the book, I mean, one of the things that strikes me is, you know, a mainstream Trinitarian Protestant will say to me, oh, trans-saciation is not in the Bible. And I'll say, well, yeah, neither is the Trinity. And for me, all the worse for the Trinity. Yeah, yeah. For you, you're like, good. OK. But but the way that rhetoric, that rhetorical move works or is supposed to work against a normal Trinitarian Protestant is, look, there are questions that scripture raises. And and it is quite possible to read it in more than one direction. You know, if you want to privilege one set of texts over another set of texts or or if you have this philosophical set of lenses going in rather than this other philosophical set of lenses. And so certain questions are raised for the Christian community by the witness of the scriptures that need to get sorted out over time. And the biggest one actually is the identity of Jesus. And so the single biggest question, the one that gets dealt with with the most energy and the earliest in the sense is the question of Jesus's identity and relationship to the Father, which leads to the doctrine of the Trinity. But we are also faced with questions about what does what does Jesus's claim, you know, this is my body. How are we to understand that? And as I show in the book, right, that question doesn't become pressing for the church in the early time because the basic philosophical categories weren't didn't make that question problematic. But forward 900 years and the cat, the philosophical categories start to shift. Now that question becomes problematic for the Christian community. They're forced to answer it in a more careful, articulate, sort of systematic way. And and the end result of that after like 200 plus years is the doctrine of transassentiation. But what I say to a Protestant is the basic pattern of the scriptural data forces a question on the Christian community that has to be answered with reference to philosophical categories and making sure we're reading all the data and not abandoning certain elements in favor of others and checking our biases and all that kind of stuff. And so the process that gets you Trinity is the same process that gets you transassentiation. Catholics are very comfortable with that process, you know, continuing. As you said, the magisterial Protestants were good with that. You know, the first seven councils were good with the process continuing to that point. And the Unitarian says, I'm not sure about this whole process. That seems arbitrary. Yeah. Maybe we can make common cause against the mainstream Protestant. At least we're consistent. Right. You guys are stuck in between and I'm not sure if that's a stable place you can land. That's funny. One thing that I think is interesting and that your book made me think about a lot is sort of how the metaphysics underneath theology sometimes changes and sometimes it can change pretty abruptly and pretty seismically. And that the same words carry through, but suddenly the words have taken on different meanings. Right. It can slip people's notice that that has what happened. And so you end up with using the same words as a couple centuries ago or a millennium ago or more. But your thought world is so different that it is really saying and communicating something very different in your new context. And a thing that I notice is that the earlier the version of Trinitarianism that I'm interacting with, the less problem I have agreeing with some parts of it. So like when I talk with 21st century evangelical Trinitarians, like I had a debate recently with such a person, Chris Date. And like, man, we look miles apart. Right. It looks just completely irreconcilable. And then when I go back and I read further back, like Augustine, I'm like, man, I understand a lot more of what you're saying in the congruence, a lot more with Augustine than this 21st century Trinitarian. And when I go back and I read Athanasius, I'm like, actually, and Athanasius is even better in my opinion than Augustine and stuff like that. Although I like the Aryans a little bit better than the Athanasians. I would, yes. Although I will qualify I'm not exactly an Aryan either. They're a little bit different. In my opinion, you Aryans and Trinitarians are so close, you just had minor disagreements, which is a bombshell I know because some people think Aryanism is the opposite of Trinitarianism. For me, it's like, it's just pretty close. But like the further back in time I go, the better I can understand it and the less problem I have with it. And sometimes I wonder if like you sort of made the point that Lutheran, especially Calvin, in reacting against sort of the version of transubstantiation that actually mutated away from its original sort of Thomistic understanding, Calvin in reacting against it actually in a way sort of unrealizingly corrected it. And sometimes, or maybe I don't mean to put words. Corrects the misinterpretations of it. Corrects the misinterpreter, right. He notices the shift in metaphysics. But he doesn't realize, he knows something's off, right. Something is not jiving. So he ends up correcting back to the earlier version without realizing it. And sometimes I wonder if we Unitarians have something to teach you Trinitarians, because we have done something sort of similar in that I think that the modern version of the Trinity has a lot more problems and complications with it because it's sort of like a over-literalized version of the original doctrine. And so that's interesting. So when you said that, it kind of pinged something in me that like, why do I as a traditional Catholic Trinitarian believing theologian, why would I have a conversation with the Unitarian? Part of the reason why I'm just inclined to such dialogue, almost temperamentally, but intellectually as well is that I find that when you have a discussion with a person of goodwill, even if you end up, you know, radically disagreeing with them, they force you to clarify what you actually think. And it seems to me that in general, we know so little about what we're talking about when we talk about the doctrine of the Trinity, that being challenged on it might force us to consider what's going on. And I think there have been movements sort of semi-regularly in the history of theology of trying to come to terms with how the categories have shifted or sometimes it's the undue influence of one thinker. That's a standard kind of move where, you know, well, I mean, a really common one is Augustine and original sin, right? So you'll have, I mean, the East is quite critical very often of Augustine on original sin, but even Western thinkers will be like, maybe we got off track here and we could find some more gold in the original scriptural witness if we took these inherited lenses off for a bit. That doesn't mean we don't think Augustine had anything to teach us, but maybe we're just not able to see things clearly with all the sort of residue of history built up. And so for the Catholic, there's a fine line, because on the one hand, there's certain what looks to Protestants like residue of history, which is like dogmatically required of us, right? But that doesn't mean that we don't think that that actually happens, right? So sometimes we think the church does the discernment and led by the Holy Spirit. This thing, which is built up for different historical reasons or whatever, gets nailed down. But not everything gets nailed down. And so we can still say, yeah, it's worth hearing what someone who doesn't have those lenses, but who's trying to read scripture honestly can say. And I think a Unitarian could probably at least help a modern, let's say your average Trinitarian Christian today recognize that not everything they think they know about the Trinity is what the church has always taught. Right. Because it's really easy for those. And this is what happens with transubstantiation, right? People think they know what it means. And then it gets challenged from within the tradition, right? Someone like Calvin says, this can't be right. That doesn't. So for Calvin, it's very explicit. He's like, that doesn't look like Augustine to me. Now for Thomas, Thomas wants to look like Augustine. He references him all the time. He's a great student of Augustine. He adds some interesting nuance to some of Augustine's things that I think are helpful. But Aquinas would be scandalized to find out that 300 years later, someone would think he didn't look like Augustine. And so Calvin says, well, this doesn't look like Augustine to me. Let's get back to Augustine. And what he ends up getting is much more like Aquinas than he himself could have recognized. Because Aquinas's articulation had become unrecognizable because of the historical developments. And in particular, what I go through in the book is there's a really key thing. Sometimes it's harder to trace, right? These things are really slippery. There's a real key move here in late medieval philosophy, really, where substance, which we talked about at the very beginning, which means that which is present to the intellect for Thomas, by the time of the Reformation, substance has become one more accident. It is now that which is present to the senses, which is how you and I use the word today. Right. I mean, if I'm a detective on a crime scene. This is plastic substance, right? Yeah, there's a plastic substance. There was a white, you know, powdery substance at the crime scene, right? We mean something very physical by that term, which is what it had come to mean by the time of the Reformation. And so it was unable to do the job that Aquinas had enlisted it for in the first place. And then people like Luther and Calvin both had to find other ways of saying the same things. So one of the big things I try to show in my book is Aquinas and Luther and Calvin have roughly the same intention. If you wanted to set up like some boundary categories, everyone wants to say, God is the actor here. Christ is really present to his people. And they also want to say, this is not a magic trick. This is not some clandestine chemical transformation. Everybody wants to say those things. As a Catholic, I'm going to say Luther, when he screws up, gets closer. And this is surprising to Catholics who don't know this, because we think all Protestants just think it's a symbol. Total mischaracterization of Protestantism. It's true of some Protestants, but to tar Luther with that brush makes no sense. When Luther goes off the rails, he gets too close to the physicalist clandestine chemical kind of transformation and loses the handle a bit on the sacramental end of the spectrum. And when Calvin loses the handle, he holds on to the sacramental symbolic sort of pole and loses the handle on the reel. And so what I propose, I didn't know when I started writing the book I was going to do this. By the end of the book, my proposal, which is quite bold, I think, is that Thomas could help Lutherans and Calvinists understand each other. Because Thomas manages to hit this balance in a way that holds the center where Calvin is tempted to fall off to one side and Luther is tempted to fall off to the other. And one of the interesting things historically is that this question is the first divide in the Reformation camp is on real presence. It's not Calvin because he's a second generation reformer. Luther and Zwingli split on this. The Swiss and the German camps can't hold together because Luther says Christ is really present in the Eucharist and Zwingli says no, it's just a symbol that's oversimplified but makes the point. And then they can't hold common witness together and the fracturing of Protestantism starts almost immediately after Protestantism becomes a thing and continues to this day. And Christ's real presence in the Eucharist was the very first question on which Protestants divided. And I say, look, Thomas can help you guys. Irony of ironies, but yeah. Yeah, right. It feels almost too bold when I wrote it. But then I was like, I felt like it was almost, by the time I was done the book, like it was undeniable. I don't know how it affected you. I thought so. So part of, I'll explain some of my motivations for really wanting to talk to you. So Unitarians are almost always more Zwingli than Zwingli. Super, super on the symbol end. And honestly, my church really didn't take communion very seriously or the Lord's Supper very seriously growing up. We did it once a month, once a quarter. And like, honestly, if it hadn't been commanded in the Bible to do it, we wouldn't have known, we wouldn't have done it. And even when we were doing it, we didn't exactly know why. We just knew that we were supposed to. And like, it's a symbol, right? It's a symbolic remembrance. OK, well, why are you eating it and drinking it? Like, you know, you don't need to eat and drink it to pick up on a symbolism. So part of me is that I feel like I've been moving in a more real direction on understanding of the sacraments. And part of it is that same Unitarian, that same radical reformation motive. Well, how did the original apostles understand this? How did the early church understand this? If we're going to go back to the original understanding on all of these things, let's not leave the Lord's Supper behind. And that I think that a lot of Unitarians have inherited mere Zwinglianism without really knowing why it is that they came to think that way. And without going through the process and asking the question on this doctrine the same way we have done on other doctrines. And I think that you have a lot to teach us in that regard. So part of my goal is to help encourage some other Unitarians to rethink this, because this is something that I almost never hear any of them really talk about or take seriously. And it's worth noting that in the 1500s, this was the topic. Right. This was the center thing between within Protestantism and between Catholics and Protestants. And it was a big deal. And it wasn't just silly that it was a big deal. Because to us, us being sort of, and I can even lump in a lot of evangelicals under this, is that to, you know, to kind of modern Zwinglian, modern just, it's just a symbol. It's like, it seems ridiculous to fight over this. It's like, isn't this obvious guys? It's a symbol. Get over it. And like I was reading again, John six and the other relevant passages in the Bible today. And I don't know how you get mere mere symbolism out of John six if you take it seriously. Right. So so that is really one of the reasons why I'm eager to talk to you is I feel like I have a lot to learn from you. And I am sort of gently elbowing some of my other Unitarians to pay attention. So okay, so this is delightful because I would never have guessed. I mean, the thing about writing a book is you just send it out there and you don't know what's going to happen with it. Right. The idea that my book might help Unitarians help other Unitarians recover a more sacramental imagination and a more realistic approach to the Eucharist. That's like that's like the cherry on top. Like that's fantastic. We can thank Paul VanderKlay too for serving as the intermediary. So how about how do you define the word sacramental? Because I know a lot of Protestants will just hear the word sacramental and say that's one of those magical Catholic words that we don't use. So what does sacramental mean? Right. Yeah. So there's this deep sense in the Catholic imagination that creation itself is revelatory. Right. So that you know there's what is the we love this line from Gerard Manley Hopkins. I'm not going to get it right. But Gerard Manley Hopkins is a Jesuit poet who who who has this great sense of God's grandeur being everything being imbued in God's grandeur and seeing God present in any lists. You know that the the fish and the trees and the there's oh shoot what's the line? Praise be to God for dappled things. I think it's the anyways you can we can find the poem later. But it's this real Catholic sense that that creation is imbued with God's glory. And so something like the baptism in the Jordan it would be it would be typical Catholic sensibility to say that water is was always meant for that. And that when Jesus goes down into that water he he hallows all water for that purpose henceforward. You know and that when we eat together as the body of Christ at the Eucharist we're doing something that that was supposed to be the way things were from the beginning. Right. That meals starting in the Garden of Eden would be communion with God and with one another. It's not arbitrary to eat together like this is this is a thing that has always brought humans together and that's because that's the way God made us. Right. And it's the way he made the world. And so there's a sense in which there's a sacramental valence to everything. And then in a in a broken world. We miss it. We miss it. We we don't apprehend creation the way it was created. And so we need reminding. We need to. And God gives us. So in the one sense that the world is sacramental and our engagement with the sacramental because everything speaks of the glory and the beauty of God. But on the other hand in response to our our brokenness or a strength from God. God in Christ designates specific physical elements water oil bread wine. Words activities rituals that that are where we will find you know Christ God in Christ. And I mean one of the things is there won't there's there won't be sacraments in heaven because they would it will have been fulfilled. You know sacraments are kind of necessary in this interim between the fall and and and the final glory. They wouldn't sacraments wouldn't have been necessary in the garden before the fall either because everything that they give us was already present to us through through sort of the ideal normal means. So that is this sense that of the goodness of creation and God's presence and accessibility through creation. But then also a sense that in our fallen state. We don't access that the way we're meant to. And so God gives us these particular gifts in the in in the seven sacraments in particular. Although Catholics don't limit their imagination to this to just the seven they have a special status. But we do all kinds of things that we call sacramental whether that means lighting candles or praying with beads or washing feet on Holy Thursday or I mean there's there's literally hundreds of Catholic practices. That engage with this sense of God being present to us through ritual nature physical artifacts anything like that. Yeah. Some ways some ways that I think that have kind of helped wake me up to sort of this idea is thinking about what are some secular equivalents of sacraments that we don't think are silly at all. Right. Right. Like like one I think it was like a college graduation or something like that. Right. Where you wear a big funny gown and then you like march around and you get given a sheet of paper and like it's this big fancy day and you're doing it with a whole bunch of people at the same time. And afterwards you're a college graduate. Right. It's like words don't always have the effect on our soul that we expect them to. We can't just propositional eyes down into ourselves to change ourselves in all the ways that we always want or expect. I can't just say Sam stop being hungry or something like that. You know like or I can't Sam be a better person. Right. You know Sam stop stop being jealous of this that or that. Right. Like we can't we can't reach into ourselves and change ourselves in that sort of way. And then there are these big moments where there are big changes in our life like a wedding is a perfect example. Right. And this is this is actually one of those things where there's the secular sacrament and it's still an official church sacrament. Like when when you get married you need to change your identity. You need to change the way you think about yourself. You need to change the way you act and you change the way you're oriented to your spouse. You change the way you're oriented to your family her family you know all those things. Right. And so like how do we try and get that change deep into you. Right. Like how do we get into you that you're married. We go through all of this pomp and circumstance and the the trappings of the occasion awakens something in you that helped cause that change to happen. Right. Right. In a way that just you talking couldn't do it. Right. And Aquinas actually Aquinas starts in the third part of the assume I think it's question 60 or so before he gets to specific sacraments when he's talking about sacraments in general he basically says if God is going to communicate with humans he has to do it through the ways that humans interpret the world. Right. Right. Which is a lot I think lines up a lot with what you say right. This is the kind of thing humans are this is how they encounter reality. This is how they are changed. This is how they grow. Right. And so if God is going to encounter us. That's how he's going to do it. And the the the preeminent sacrament in that sense is the incarnation. Right. That that that if God is going to get to us he has to come to our level and interact with us as the kinds of things we are. I mean you know Thomas will say you know God could have done things differently. If if he wanted to you know we don't limit God's if God wanted to save us by snapping God's fingers God could. In some sense. But Thomas says but it's fitting that God proceeded. Well first of all we know that God proceeded the way God did proceed because we have the witness of of scripture and the church and whatever else. And so granted what we know about how God did proceed which we wouldn't have guessed on our own. We can look at the logic of it and see how it's fitting. And and so sacraments and the incarnation itself are to Thomas are fitting ways for God to approach us given what we know about the kinds of things we are. Right. Right. Right. Like another example that I think is funny like so imagine two friends are really good friends and they sort of like want to celebrate their like they want to make their felt their friendship real. Right. They feel like their friendship is so important to them that they need to do something to like either demonstrate that or just you know acknowledge that. And so they get like matching tattoos or something like that. Right. Like I feel like that's sort of like a a secular example of like the sacramental urge or something like that. Like oh we need to do we need to go through some action preferably that's really permanent and changes us to like sort of fully realize what we both are acknowledging is happening or something like that. Right. Right. Like it's like bringing it I don't know from the imagination. It's like trying to act it out in a way that makes it as real in the world as it seems to be mentally or something like. Right. Well I thought of two examples while you're talking. The one is I thought you might use this example before you said matching tattoos is that is the practice of like slitting the palm of your hand. Right. So you're both bleeding and then shaking hands with these open wounds on your palms. Right. I mean people are obviously trying to do something very profound when they do that. Like there's there's an end which got me thinking like okay that's a little there's something that feels a little wrong. I mean there there's the human striving but there's also something that seems seems a little off about cutting yourself. Right. And which made me think of the next example which is hazing. Right. So sports teams in the military or whatever. Or fraternities. Yeah. Fraternities. People want to ritualize this in a in a let's say in a very impactful way. Yes. But the human and this is where we get into right. Our sinful condition means that our attempts at deep meaning making can go off the rails. Yes. And can become destructive exploitative etc. And so one of the things that I think sacraments do within a Christian context is they they they should give us lenses for seeing false sacraments. Yes. So so like college hazing gone wrong is like a sinful fallen broken version of the sacramental urge or the sacramental instinct which in itself is good and is supposed to point us to God. But if we make our fraternity membership something more important than it's like a it's like an idolatrous sacrament. Right. Right. And there's a very specific sacrament that it's analogous to or falsely analogous to. Right. It's an initiation. It's confirmation essentially. Yeah. Right. It's like a confirmation. And but it's it's a confirmation gone wrong. You know. And so it's and even way too much drinking way too much drinking of wine. Yeah. I mean while we even put you know the three sacraments of initiation like baptism confirmation Eucharist if you receive them as an adult in the Catholic Church you get them all at once. And you can see a sort of frat party with hazing as this sort of like yeah like terrible parody of an Easter vigil. Right. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Something that no 19 year old college could probably ever put together. But yeah it's it's there. That's that's a very interesting thing. I think that helps make this more real to people who are like what are you guys talking about. So so if so connecting this back to the Eucharist. So for most people they'll say well either it's symbolic or it's borderline physicalist cannibalistic. And they don't see or understand or even have a framework to talk about a third option. Right. And also I should say you might want to point out that you're not saying it's not symbolic but you're not saying it's you're just saying it's not just or simply symbolic. Yeah. And yeah this is a this is a problem Catholics get themselves into because we want to deny that it's merely symbolic by which we mean what we talked about beginning it's only happening in your head. Right. Like a like a national flag or something. The community meaning making right. That's that's what Thomas will say is that that is well okay I'm paraphrasing a bit he won't say exactly this but he says something like human meaning making is the arena into which God acts. Human meaning making is is we shouldn't dismiss it as not part of the sacrament human meaning making is what we do and it's where God says he's going to show up. But the point is that God is the one doing the meaning making here which means it hits reality at a deeper level than what you and I do if we agree to get matching tattoos or honor the same national flag and sing the same national anthem or whatever else we might do as humans to make something meaningful. God is doing something in the in the arena of human meaning making. So it is symbolic but it's but it's more than symbolic. And that right that the the the danger for the contemporary person but it was already the danger for the ninth century person. It wasn't a danger so much in the early church when the metaphysics didn't lend themselves to this. But when the metaphysics start to shift away from Platonism in Western Europe the temptation becomes if I want to say this is really real which is clearly what's going on in the witness of the church to this point and in the scriptures then I need to say it's physical because the really real is the physical. And and that's that's it's that impulse that leads to transistation because one group says to be really real it's got to be physical and they start saying things to sound like cannibalism. And then the other group says that can't be right because that's not how the fathers talk and that's not particularly Augustine that that's not how Augustine talks so that can't be right but they're caught in the same trap. They think to be really real is to be physical and so they say I guess it's not really real. Yeah. And so this thing which for 900 years everyone thought was really real now becomes either real but misconstrued as physical or not real. Right. And and the goal of transistation is sort of to put Humpty Dumpty back together again. It's to give us new language to say this is really really real and it's not physical because there is a reality if you if you would just attend to how you think about things in general, which is what substance is a category for doing right sugar is a substance. Milk, salt, wood, I mean these are substances. If you think about how you think about those things, you will realize that you think that they have a deeper reality than their physical reality. And if you recognize that, then you can have some thing to latch on to for thinking about how how the Eucharist is Christ real presence without it being a physical transformation. That's maybe in short, the work transistation is trying to do and I argue in the book, I think it does it very successful. It becomes the sort of touchdown for touchstone for Catholic reflection on this because it succeeds. But it also undergoes its own transformation later when the when the word substance stops functioning the way it was supposed to, and so needs to be recovered. So transistation works really well if you're understanding it correctly, but it itself can be misunderstood and then needs to be looked at again with with fresh lenses. Right, right. That that that makes good sense. So like aluminum, right. Aluminum is a substance that and lease our modern parlance. But like, you know, if I said show me what aluminum is. Well, you could say I could show you things that are aluminum. I could find you a soda can I could find you a the body of a pickup truck or you know, whatever it was. And I could say all these things are aluminum. Well, what's the where is aluminum itself, right. And we realize it's like a math, a scientific mathematical abstraction that we use to make sense of what we're seeing. And we're calling it true in some deep sense. I'm not saying that that I'm not saying aluminum doesn't exist. But you know it's it's a it's an element on the periodic table and stuff like that. But at the end of the day, we don't ever interact with aluminum in it in its essence. Right. We interact with soda cans and and pickup trucks and stuff like that. And actually, so there's that I don't I don't go into a ton of detail on this in the book, but I mentioned it a little bit in like the 40s. There was a big Catholic I don't brew haha around transubstantiation because someone said, Look, substance is no longer a meaningful context for us because now we know actually we can encounter aluminum not just in cans and pickup truck, but we know about molecules and atoms. And because we know that there is such thing as aluminum atoms, we will say that that is is aluminum, per se that is aluminum in itself. And so we need to reimagine transubstantiation as a kind of molecular move. And so what gets transubstantiated every single molecule. And now this this attempt failed because other people said, Look, bread is not a molecule. You can't get a molecule of bread, right? Within bread or wine, you can get molecules of carbon or well, let's say atoms of carbon, but you can get a molecule of alcohol, for instance, in the wine. But they said, But that's, that's not it. You don't have an intelligible reality of bread and wine at the atomic or molecular level. And so You've all we've done with our modern understanding of the deepest roots of the physical. Well, we don't even have the deepest roots, but where we've gotten with molecules and atoms. Just pushes it back further, but it doesn't actually answer the question. What is bread in itself that that is still to put it in in philosophical terms, that's still a metaphysical question, not a physical question. And anyone who tries to answer a metaphysical question as a physical question is just making a category mistake. Right. Right. But it's a category mistake people made when thinking about transubstantiation and contemporary like chemistry. Right. Right. Like even two aluminum atoms, right? Like an aluminum atom in this soda can aluminum atom in that soda can. They'll, they'll actually be a little bit different. Right. Like aluminum is the thing that we give that has X number of protons. Sorry for not remembering out there on the internet, the number of protons and aluminum. Right. And X number of neutrons, although then there could be different isotopes. Right. And then the electrons sometimes will have a charge and sometimes, you know, all the electrons will be in different positions for all these different aluminum atoms out there in the universe. So none of them two are the same. Right. So the even the category of aluminum atom is something that we are bringing metaphysically to these atoms to recognize the pattern that manifests itself that atoms that have such and such things in common that we'll call aluminum share properties and that that we can use that pattern recognition in our own mental metamaterials. To start, you know, interacting with the world with that knowledge, but aluminum itself is still something mental. That I'm not saying it's like merely mental, but that is exactly the sort of thing. Like when you think about it, aluminum is a mental category. Well, that's not the only thing that's going to be a mental category. And then all of a sudden that distinction, you start messing with that a little bit, even with modern science, but it's still something that's going to be a mental category. So that's the thing that's going to be a mental category. And then the other thing that's going to be a mental category is that aluminum is a mental category. And then all of a sudden that distinction, you start messing with that a little bit, even with modern science. And then you start understanding what's going on here when we're talking about transubstantiation a lot better. Right. And I think a Thomistic metaphysics would say that God has given intelligibility to creation and us calling aluminum aluminum is us recognizing an intelligibility that is inherent in aluminum. And it's precisely that that we're doing when we recognize bread as bread or wine as wine. And there's something real and intelligible that makes bread bread. And that is the substance. It's what's present to the intelligence. It is the intelligibility of the substance. And that is the substance. It's what's present to the intelligence. It is the intelligibility. And so God can say with God's word, this is my body and alter at the deepest level the intelligibility of what is being spoken about in a way that you and I can. And so Thomas's primary analogy for transubstantiation is the doctrine of creation where God with his word makes things to be what they are. Yeah. Yeah. All right. I think I think that's very good. So transitioning a little bit. So what do we think is going on in the Eucharist? Why? What? What can what can we say about? Why is it? Why is it bread and wine? Why are we supposed to do this regularly in the context of a church? Why? Why did Christ instantiate this institution and stuff like that? What are we supposed to make of it and and kind of getting in the details of the sacramentality of the Eucharist in particular? Right. Well, that's a big question. Someone should write a book. I mean, which is not to say my book does it because my book is a very narrow slice. Right. Mine is not a systematic theology of the Eucharist. It's a study of one subset of that kind of thing. Right. So to zoom out, I mean, one one of the key things is Jesus. We look at what Jesus does. We're recording this on Monday, Thursday. Catholics typically nowadays say Holy Thursday. The institution of the Eucharist. This is this is the scriptural locus where we start. And the thing to recognize is Jesus isn't arbitrarily taking bread and wine. He's taking a couple of loaded symbols from within his own Jewish heritage. Right. So you could spend a lot of time and someone like Brent Petray, for instance, who's written a book called Jesus and the Jewish Roots of the Eucharist. Does this kind of work? Jonathan Pujo, who's a common guest for Paul Vanderkley, does some of this work in a video I was just listening to of his of looking at bread and wine and sacrifice and the various sort of categories through the Old Testament that Jesus is fashioning into the Eucharist on Holy Thursday. So you could look at Melchizedek. You can look at Tain and Abel. This is what Pujo was talking about in the thing I just listened to where you have a sacrifice of a lamb and a sacrifice of grain. And somehow the Eucharist is actually both of those things. It's a reintegration of that sacrifice that didn't go well, or at least half of it didn't go well. You can look at the manna in the desert. You can look at the bread of the presence that was in the temple. You can look at. And of course, Passover's satyrs, right? Yesterday, last night was Passover. And right, that's perhaps the most relevant even connection. Yeah, so the Exodus 12 is the reading in our church tonight for Holy Thursday, where the Passover happens historically. But at the same time as God is giving the instructions for what you need to do to get through this night alive, right? Put the blood of the lamb in the doorpost and bake your bread fast and herd your loins because you're getting on the road. At the same time that those instructions are being given, the religious instruction for the commemoration of that event is being given simultaneous to the saving action itself, which is exactly what happens at the Last Supper for Christians, right? That's a really cool idea. Yeah. Yeah, he's interpreting the saving action that's about to happen. And if he doesn't, by the way, if Jesus doesn't tell us at the Last Supper what's happening on the cross, it's more bewildering. I mean, the apostles were bewildered by the cross, but then when they could reflect on it later, they had categories from their own Jewish heritage about sacrifice and covenants and all that kind of stuff that they could apply to it, which he gives them at the Last Supper, right? So, yes, the bread and wine are not arbitrary. They are within a whole cultural religious context that we could study in great depth. And others have done it better than me. And that's why it's important to say that it's not un-symbolic, right? We're not negating the symbolic. Right. It is hugely symbolic, richly symbolic, but it's not just symbolic. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Because symbols you don't need to participate in. So, and this is something I was thinking about, like, eating and drinking, like, you know, that's something that you need to continuously do to be sustained, right? Like, just in normal life, right? We need to eat food. We need to drink liquids or else we die. And this is an ongoing need. And, like, Jesus is pointing out, like, to the deeper meaning of food and drink, that something even more important than staying alive is the food and drink that leads to eternal life, right? That's part of the way that he kicks off that passage in John 6, is that, you know, I'm giving you the bread and the wine that will lead to eternal life. You know, that food that I made you, that miracle where I fed the thousands was, you know, that was just regular food. Why are you guys coming to me back for that? That's not the good stuff. The good stuff is yet to come. Right. And it's this continual process. And Jonathan Peugeot talks about this, like, even the symbolism of eating is taking something that's outside yourself, bringing it inside to yourself, and it becomes part of you now, right? You are what you eat. Right. Right. And so all of that is coming together in that the sacrament of the Eucharist is something that we ongoingly do that both symbolizes and even more than symbolizes, actualizes, are becoming more and more like Christ in our lives in the here and now. And it's not something we do individually. It's something we do as a community and through the church. Right. It's all of that. I mean, Augustine has this great line where he says, I think he says he was it was in a dream or a vision where Christ says to him, eat me, but my food is so strong that instead of you turning me into your body, which is what normally happens when you eat food, I'm going to turn you into my body when you eat. Right. So, so there's this sense that this is where the body of Christ is bad. And to feed a body is to actually make it right like, like I have seven kids and a huge amount of my budget is dedicated to feeding them. If I don't, I won't have seven kids. Right. And I think like, if you grew up in a culture where you're, you're regularly hungry, or you live in a desert where you're regularly thirsty. You have an awareness of the depth of the symbolism of eating and drinking that is lost on on. Yes. Most of us. I've never been really hungry in my life. Like, you know what I mean? Like, I remember doing the 30 hour famine in high school. And like, yeah, you get pretty hungry around like the six, eight, 10 hour mark. And then you get past that and you can actually power through, you know, from about the 18 hour mark to the 30 hour mark you actually your body adapts and whatever. At some point, though, your body goes into like panic mode. Yeah. Starts like eating itself. Right. And it's all you can think about. Right. And it's all you can think about. And I've never experienced that. And I don't know anyone I in my acquaintance who has. Right. Besides perhaps an especially aesthetic persons. Right, right. Or like a refugee or, you know, like someone who's lived through some hell. I shouldn't say that I didn't know someone who went through this. And it's right. And I'll tell the story because because it's so outside of our experience that it makes the point about hunger. And you know what this is actually important for Christians today. Right. So one of the things we're doing all the time I work for the archdiocese is we're trying to communicate to people what it means that we can't receive the Eucharist now because public celebration of mass has been suspended because of the pandemic. And we're trying to say that that done well this should increase our hunger for the Eucharist. Right. So so for for a group of people who most of us have never really been hungry. That's something. So here's the story. And it came to my mind when I said, you know, someone who's been through hell right like a refugee. Well, there are people alive today they're very old who lived through World War Two. And there was a young Polish. Well, she's not young now but there was a young Polish woman who was in my parish growing up. What so she was a grandma by the time I was a teenager but the story is from when she was young. And her and I think it was her and her brother I may not get all the details right her and her brother are sort of walking through Europe after the war and trying to get somewhere where there's food, you know, and they, they end up with like a bucket of potatoes, like old, like half rotten potatoes right and it's like it's gold, you know, haven't eaten in days. And they get these potatoes, and she stays home, wherever home was I don't even know if it was like a barn like wherever they were sheltering, she stays with them on a given day, and her brother goes out searching for more food or whatever. And her brother finds another person who's in the same boat as them who's starving and looking for food and says we got potatoes, like you should come back to our place. And we can eat these potatoes together tonight. And when he gets back. He says hey where are the potatoes. Like I brought this guy he's starving can we give him some potatoes, and she had eaten them all. She couldn't, couldn't resist. I mean she was starving to death. Yeah, and she was at home for hours. So she ate these potatoes and she was so ashamed that that someone had come to them for food and they thought they had food at least one of them did, and they couldn't offer this person food. Because in her starvation, she had eaten like raw half rotten potatoes. Yeah, you know, and just just to imagine the humanity of that situation, and then think what it means that God is feeding us. Right. Right. Like, like we don't, we don't. If you've never been close to starving, I've never been close to starving the closest I can get is, is I know a good story about it. How do you appreciate what's being offered here. Right. Yeah, and I think you touched on another really important aspect of this is being fed and sustained by someone. Right. Like, you know, I have one daughter, you have seven kids, we're in charge of you know feeding our children and our children see us as the source of food. They look to us, they might not think about it very often. Or well maybe they do think about it actually pretty often come to think of it, but looking to us you know as as their, their source of food. And part of this part of the symbolism part of what's wrapped up in the Eucharist is us thinking of, of Christ as our sustainer. Right. Right. Our perpetual giver, who is the one that we go to continuously and trust in for food. Right. And there's something of like a kid parent relationship almost sort of in that. Right. Yeah, I had I hadn't thought of that, but I mean, it does make sense because. And when you're, when you're in a time of Eucharistic fasting, right when when you don't have access because there aren't public masses. The scent well here's and here's how a Catholic would think of it is also the church's mother. Right. So this is right that the church gives us the sacraments. I mean obviously Christ through the church. But we think of the church as mother that feeds us that's that's very common Catholic sensibility and to not have access to the church's feeding of us at this time is a kind of experience of starvation right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting man. I didn't even I didn't even think of how the virus situation would connect into all of this. Right. So I wasn't planning on it, but it's like all of our messaging, you know, our social media, our preaching is is like you can't just ignore that. Like you got to this is the pastoral situation that people are in and we do have in our Catholic tradition this idea of spiritual communion, which is an interesting idea because it says that the grace of the sacrament is not tied to the sacrament. We are bound to the sacraments because they're a command from God, which I mean you talked a little bit about that. That was almost the only reason you guys were doing them is he recognized God said to him about why he you know why God said that. But God is not bound by them. Right. So we're bound to obedience and we have a guarantee that's a that's a Lutheran sensibility. I mean it's Catholic too, but Luther is very clear. God promised to be here for you in this. But but we also say that God is not limited by that. And so so Catholics can say at the same time that that baptism is necessary for salvation. And also that the grace of the sacrament of baptism is available outside of the celebration of the sacrament. So we believe in you know we call it baptism of desire. Right. If someone sincerely desires baptism, God will not withhold the grace from them because It's a criminal on the cross next to Jesus. The criminal on the cross is the perfect biblical exemplar of this. Right. But it applies to communion too that we can make an act of spiritual communion and God can give us the grace to the sacrament. But but we don't say that that means you don't ever have to go to Eucharist. Right. What we say instead and we say the same thing about confession by the way the Pope made this statement that got a lot of coverage in the media last week about like if you can't go see a priest during COVID-19, take your confession directly to God and Protestants were like we've been saying that for 500 years. Great idea guys. But the Pope actually wasn't changing anything in the traditional teaching that's always been available when when the sacrament is not available physically if you can't celebrate it in its normal way the grace is available to those who really desire it. But but part of knowing that you really desire it is that as soon as it's available you will go seek it out. If you don't actually go to communion when it's available if you don't actually go to confession when it's available then what is that desire that you're leaning on in the times when it's not available because if you really desire that you go right. That's kind of the logic of the Catholic approach to that. Yeah, I don't I don't find any fault with that. So, kind of tying back to the idea of what might Unitarians have to say to Trinitarians that could help help see some things so I was thinking about this as I was reading through your book. Like it seems like a common trap that kept being fallen into was the idea of Christ's real presence as being real in some literalistic materialistic and literal is not the right word materialistic. You know this worldly kind of way. All right, and and that that either that was obviously wrong and people would reject the whole thing, or people would just accept what seems kind of weird. And like my, like I said, that's what my mom thought that she was taught right growing up was physically that it is, you know, the, the body and the blood. And I think sometimes Trinitarians in understanding the incarnation are prone to something similar right the Trinity grew up in platonic metaphysics. And in fact, actually, I would even go so far as to say that the Trinity helped influence platonic metaphysics. And I don't think that that would maybe even be a compliment to something like a lot of Unitarians will say I you know the Trinity just came when true Christianity started getting contaminated. By Hellenized Platonism. And while I think that's kind of true. I think if you really study it you realize that the Trinity and Christianity had had a huge influence on Platonism too. And that by the fourth and fifth century Christian, you know metaphysicians were more common than their pagan counterparts and we're having a bigger influence. And even Plotinus the you know had Neoplatonist probably had a decent amount of influence from from the Christians in his area. So, so as Platonism has sort of faded, we talked about the effect that it had on the Eucharist. I think that it has had something of a similar effect on the incarnation, because the incarnation was originally very platonically understood and communicated. And that's what they were arguing about in those councils is trying to sort out all the details of how that worked. And so I think that when most Christians hear Jesus is God, they have something to this worldly to materialistically true in mind that is something akin to thinking that that the bread and the blood or that the bread turns into the body chemically. Right, like they have to imagine that that Jesus's mind is the same mind as like like some sort of mental psychological connection. Right, where Jesus's mind is God's mind it's just God consciousness inside a human body, or something like that, when they understand Jesus is God, and that is actually similarly condemned as heresy early on, even though I think that's what most people can't help but hear now when you say Jesus is God, it's like, okay, so God is a person. He has a heavenly mind. And now that heavenly mind is here on earth and in an earthly body or something like that. And that is not what the incarnation was teaching. Right. Yeah. So when I teach Christology, one of the big hurdles for a lot of people is Jesus's self knowledge. So a common misunderstanding when you say Jesus is God, that means he's omniscient. Right. God of omniscient. And so then the Bible gets awkward at certain points, right? When Jesus is like, who touched my cloak? Yeah, where's Lazarus buried? Yeah, where's where? Right, whenever Jesus shows ignorance, then you sometimes you get these strange, well, like he was just using that for like didactic purposes. He really knew but he just asked and like it, it seems a bit of a stretch. And then there's other times where that won't even work right when when when he's like, I don't know only the Father knows. Right. That right. If he if he if he really knew and he's just fudging on that one that that's really tough to square right so right and that deception problem is similar to the deception problem in the Eucharist. Oh, that's interesting. Yeah, that some people would say it's physically present but we're being deceived from from from recognizing it right which Thomas has no room for that like he there is no deception in the sacraments according to to Thomas. But yeah, so no that I hadn't seen that parallel. So that's so when I teach Christology. One of the major questions is, how do we wrap our heads around the idea that Jesus is God, and that doesn't mean he's omniscient in his human nature. Right. That Jesus was was ignorant self professedly ignorant of certain things and that part of what it means to be fully human is to is to not know some things to be to learn in space and time, the way humans learn in space and time, and not to have constant infused knowledge of everything Now there is in the Catholic tradition there is a sense in which Jesus does have some infused knowledge. And it's debated exactly how to understand that but I think at the at the limit there's a sense in which he is experiencing the beatific vision and have some infused knowledge of his relationship with the father. That's not the same thing as having infused knowledge about historical circumstances. Right. It's not it doesn't mean he can read minds. It doesn't mean he can predict certain kinds of you know he's not a Or he could answer any math question off the top of his head that you could ask him or something. Any language or, you know, those right, like he could have he could have told you equals MC squared long before Einstein right like that's not what it means right but but I think a misapprehension that we have when we hear Jesus is God is to just attribute that kind of knowing, which, which doesn't square well with the scriptural witness right Right, right. Right. And it's similar to that drift in metaphysics or that's just the only way that that could make sense nowadays. And so, so I feel like things get complicated so things that I will say about Jesus right well I will say that Jesus is the perfect image of the father right Jesus is the image of the invisible God. Right. To me, that's one of those verses that seems to distinguish them right but but like seeing Jesus is like seen this the next best thing to seeing the father. Right. No one has seen God at any time but the only begotten son he makes him known he exegetes him. Right, like, and and you know Jesus is all the time trying to get people to understand that the father is in him. Right. You can't see the father, but when you see me you see the father. Right. And like it's, it's the same, like, I think it's a very similar sort of spiritual sacramental scene that we're supposed to understand when we're understanding the father in Christ as to understanding Jesus as the father. Right. And so, you know, when you're understanding Jesus's presence in the Eucharist, I think it's something very analogous going on. And because that sort of thing gets broken and we don't, we have trouble articulating that are taking that as something that Jesus could have possibly meant, then you get stuck in this weird you know, God mind Jesus body thing. Right, right. Yeah, no, I think I think that's right. I mean, when I said that in a way that incarnation is a is the primordial sacrament or that like that, that highlight of that, you know, that it's that language that he who has seen the father, who has seen me has seen the father is that like that's a great encapsulation of sacramental logic, right, right. Something which is beyond our capacity to encounter because in our current situation as time and space bound beings, we can encounter if we could never get outside of time and space to meet God there. I mean, we could die. But I mean, in this life, we can. So God comes into time and space at our level. And so we can see God when we see when we see Jesus. Right. And this is this is like what I was saying, we're like when I read Athanasius like you when if you read on the incarnation by Athanasius, the whole book is talking like this right just goes through various things, you know, various stages of Jesus's life and stuff like that. And he's just exegeting this, you know, very kind of sacramental vision into Jesus to understand the father. Right. And he Athanasius very much thinks that that the father is God like one thing that I would actually say is some sometimes people don't realize that Athanasius is Trinity, he didn't think that God was a multi personal being. He thought that the God that God was the father and that Jesus was full of divinity. Jesus was God from God, true God, true from true God. But if you had asked Athanasius women, aren't you a polytheist? He's like, no, there's one God the father. He didn't think that God was three things in one thing like like that is is sort of a weird sort of way that people will misunderstand him if they read him later. And that's sort of what I'm talking about when I say I can the earlier there, the earlier the Trinitarian, the better I can understand what they mean. So I mean, I would, I'd have to go back. It's been a long time since I looked at Athanasius, I would have because this is one of the things we we tell people to be careful of. When I teach Trinitarian theology to my diaconate candidates, I say, be careful when you preach, for example, that you don't talk that you don't just make the father and God interchangeable so that it sounds like you're not saying God is the father. It sounds like you're not saying Jesus or the Holy Spirit or God as well. Right. Now, I that's a very Augustinian thing to do. What I would say. And when you go back in the east before Augustine, they're perfectly fine interchanging God and the father, they just want to communicate that Jesus was a full recipient of God's divinity. Okay, so I would I would like to go back and reread Athanasius with those lenses and see what what what it what it looks like. I mean, I think I'm just trying to think I think it's a quote from Athanasius. That is, is the When we're working on this divine knowledge thing and people are scandalized that Jesus is not omniscient, it's actually a quote from St Athanasius about how in becoming human, one of the things God leaves behind is omniscience. And, and because of Athanasius is sort of towering authority. You're like, okay, if Athanasius said that Jesus is not omniscient, then I guess that's legit, you know. So it would be it would be interesting to to go back and read on the incarnation. Yeah, and part of it is just translation stuff like in Greek, God can mean the person or God can mean quality or substance. Right. Okay, so when when Athanasius is saying Jesus is God, he's, he's not saying there's a person and Jesus is one of those persons, right. He's saying Jesus is what Jesus is is divine right he's as divine as God is right. It's a, it's a quality substance statement, not like a person, a person statement. And you ask him who God is, is the Father is the God like when you use it as a personal way of talking. Right. Well, and that and now we're using the language of person so some people might say oh you know Athanasius is like from a Catholic point of view, this sounds like you're saying he's a heretic if he doesn't, but we're using person differently and and the word, the Trinitarian language of persons actually comes after Athanasius right right right. So, and and doesn't mean what we mean by person. So, right. Anyway, to my Catholic listeners, don't get panicked if I'm not like, Hey, listen up you heretic. Of course Athanasius thought it was a person. I mean, we're using the word differently. Right, right. Yeah. But, but that distinction of of Jesus is revealing something that's above himself in a certain sense. And like Jesus is a pointer to something beyond. Right. I think that this is where we might disagree. This is where where where Unitarianism and Trinitarianism might meet odds in a weird sort of way that I don't disagree with Athanasius is that that he is opening, it's like he's this, like the, the spiritual opening or a portal that helps you see to God who otherwise is invisible to us. Right. Right. But he is not, he's not saying stop at me. He's saying, you know, keep going. Right. I, I'm not. I'm not. I'm the door. I'm the gate. I'm not the final destination in and of itself that that is my father who I'm trying to tell you about. Well, and even so we would we would we would say yes and no. Right. We would say on the one hand, we would agree 100% that Jesus doesn't stop at pointing to himself. He clearly points to the father. We even articulate our whole liturgical movement as through Jesus to the father in the spirit. We're careful with our prepositions when we do that. Right. That that that we are not able to worship God the father properly. But because Jesus can and he joins ourself to his body in the Eucharist, then we are brought into an act of right worship of God the father through Jesus. And that happens in the ministration of the Holy Spirit, which is the bond of unity that keeps us together in doing this. So we would we wouldn't deny that directionality. Yeah. As you might say, and what you just said there, I could agree with that. Yeah, there I could agree with that. This is the funny thing. Sometimes disagree. Like you said, disagreements are often more superficial than substantial. We are going to the Father through Jesus in the Spirit. Yep. Great. I'm fine with that. And that's why I always want to ask and people disagree with me like, Okay, what do you mean by that? Because we may or may not disagree. And well, here's the thing, we're going to disagree. Um, but I my personal, I don't know, phobia is not the right word. It's very important for me that when I disagree with somebody that I'm clear about what we're disagreeing about. I hate disagreeing. And then finding out that actually, you know, that was all just chips passing in the night, we didn't understand each other. Whether that's like interchurch stuff, whether that's like academic debates about theology or philosophy, or if that's like me and my wife, who are having a really hard time communicating on this issue, I'm like, we might disagree here, honey. But let's be very precise about where we agree and disagree. You know, I just, that's something about my upbringing, you can probably find that it's hypersensitive to that kind of thing. But it's interesting, I mean, that you would find our language about our worship, which we see as explicitly Trinitarian. And the Trinity is all over our worship, right? I mean, we walk into the church, we make the sign of the cross. And if you watch our hymnody, and our prayer at the Eucharist, it's Trinitarian, Trinitarian, Trinitarian. And still, the basic dynamic of it, you would say, yeah, that sounds right to me. That's fascinating. Right, right. And I think part of the reason I'm like you, that I really suspect that there isn't as much disagreement as sometimes there seems to be. I've spent a lot of time going to Trinitarian churches. I actually currently go to just a normal evangelical Trinitarian church. And like, I've been doing things outside of Unitarianism in Trinitarian land since I was a kid. And it's always been my suspicion that there is way more agreement than either side seems to realize. Well, first off, most Trinitarians don't know we exist. But those that do seem to think that they're really, you know, if I can go and I can, the only trouble that I'll have in most Trinitarian services of an evangelical flavor is sometimes the song lyrics might not be stuff that I like. Right. Right. There will be some more explicitly Trinitarian song lyrics. Very rarely they'll maybe recite the Nicene Creed or something like that. But most of the time, the sermons, the worship style, the the emphasis even, you know, reading from the Bible, all of it, it just seems like totally the same thing is going on. Really, I don't know how else to put it. And that there's, when this topic comes up, yeah, there are differences. And like, I would never say God decided to come down to be Jesus, right? I don't think that's not how I imagine it. For the record, I imagine God's Word is sort of an impersonal attribute. It's like his wisdom or something. And the word becoming flesh is like a plan being put into action or, you know, like- Similar to how you answered my earlier question about the Holy Spirit. Yeah, yeah, right, right. Like the Logos is part of God, right? In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God, right? The Logos is like an attribute of God that's a little bit distinct, but also inside God. And Jesus isn't like that transformed into a human. It's like a blueprint that became a house or something like that, right? He's like the full embodiment of the abstract idea of God's, you know, wisdom and God's Word or something like that. So, so what I would say, and we're getting close to two hours here, but what I would say, you know, as we approach wrapping up, when we find, well, like when you say you go to a normal Trinitarian church and you don't find that much disagreement, is I'm not surprised at that because my general experience of humans is that we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we take the Holy Spirit and we tend to have more agreement than we initially suspect. Something about our brokenness leads us to read more antagonism and more difference into certain things than are actually justified. Part of it is, I think, our own need to identify. So we can identify who we are by saying who we're not and that leads us to overdraw the lines between us and other people. But one of the things that I find that this is from Thomas Aquinas and it informs the Catholic tradition immensely. The Catholic tradition, we like to say, will take truth wherever it can find it. So we're not surprised if Buddhists believe something true or indigenous spirituality has something to teach us or that atheists are right about a lot of stuff. Because human beings want to believe true things. Like nobody wants to believe false things. We end up believing false things because our knowledge is imperfect and there's all kinds of difficulties with figuring out what's true. But the human impulse to desire truth means that we're going to find it at least some of the time. Thomas says somewhere like, nobody's ever totally, I'm really paraphrasing, nobody's ever really totally wrong. It's actually technically impossible to be completely wrong because there's always an intention to believe something true. And so I think if we grant to our dialogue partners that basic human capacity for and desire for truth. And when someone says something that sounds like bonkers to you, you can say like, what truth are they trying to say? Because they are like, except in cases of like, I don't know, fraud or something. People are trying to say something true. And even in cases of fraud, right, even when somebody is trying to lie to you, then they're actually still relying on your capacity and desire for truth, even in their attempt to subvert it. Like there's no getting around the human desire and capacity for truth. And so I expect to find that something that on the surface looks really off or different, that there will be something in there. I'm still going to disagree with you at the end of the day about this or that claim. But I expect us to be able to find things that we agree on and find insights about and also that we find more insight about our own positions by being forced to articulate them in conversation with an honest person who disagrees with you. Mm hmm. Well, I think that's a perfect, excellent note to end on. So with that, I will stop the recording.