https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fhxg9NTv5Bo

 Hi, this is Paul. I only have a few minutes before I have to do a meeting, but I want to do a second video today because I wanted to do a little bit more response than the few tweets I did yesterday to the Rebel Wisdom video on Gnosticism. Again, if you listen to the video on word fudging spiritual, some of those ideas will come through in that video too. So one of my surprises is that there are these ancient... see here's part of the issue. Was Gnosticism ever an ancient religion or was it more like a current in the ocean that was impacting things that had more substance such as Christianity or other things that people were experiencing? I just wanted to mention a couple of things that I put in tweets recently. Eating Religion for Breakfast is a pretty major YouTube channel on the topic of religion. He has What Did Gnostic Christians Believe? And he gets into the question of was there actually an ancient thing called Gnosticism or were these tendencies? And he goes into the fact that what Christians tend to do in terms of history is compile all of the beliefs that are in alignment with Gnostic tendencies and call them Gnosticism. And he and actually Ryan Reeves, the next guy now, Ryan Reeves teaches Church History at Gordon Conwell. So this is not a... he's obviously got a degree and he's got a PhD in Church History. He teaches at a very conservative Reformed Seminary. So, you know, it's Tim Keller Seminary where Tim Keller used... where Tim Keller went to... Tim and Kathy Keller both went to Gordon Conwell. So these are not, you know, these are not mainline liberal-ish people. But Ryan Reeves makes the same point. You have docetic and docetism. And the question is, did docetism actually exist? But were there docetic tendencies? And I sort of imagine this... again, I grew up in New Jersey and when I'd go swimming at the coast, down at the shore, you'd stand in the ocean and you'd feel this current pull you. And as a kid you'd just be playing in the water and every now and you look up, make sure that mom's up on the blanket on the beach, and you look up and she's not there and you're like, where'd mom go? Well, mom didn't go anything. The current was just pulling me down the coast and I didn't realize it. And so my mom would stand up and say, move back over, move back over. There's life growing up in New Jersey. And so Gnosticism is a word that... Gnostic is a... it's better an adjective than a noun. It's a word that we used to describe a tendency that was happening. And this tendency had a bunch of things to do perhaps with questions, generally questions about Christ's humanity. Today Christ's divinity tends to be the aspect that we're skeptical of. It tend to have links to Platonism, which saw the forms, the highest ideal being, you know, idealism, Platonism, everything being up in the clouds. And so there's an ongoing historical debate as to whether there was actually a Gnosticism or if we should just use the adjective Gnostic Christian. So you have the main thing of them being Christians and then they were Gnostic Christians. In other words, these tendencies, these cultural currents were pulling on them. And at least in the minds of early church fathers who battled the Gnostic heresy were, you know, were corrupting elements of the Christian religion. Now the individual that Rebel Wisdom has on says, no, actually these were the original elements of Christianity. I think that's a hard case to make when you look at the very earliest texts, which are in fact the canonical text. Most of the Gnostic texts are later and the bishops who were making the decisions, now you'd say, well, these were bishops of power. They didn't have any power. This is pre-Constantine. There was definitely a fight going on in the church over these issues. And I would again recommend Alastair McGrath's book on heresy because he covers those early heresies quite well. And Alastair McGrath is an excellent scholar out of England. And so a lot of these Gnostic gospels and Gnostic writings were very much in the line with another video from Religion for Breakfast. I'll put both of these in the links, which was a fun video that he just released this week that Star Wars fan fiction and early Christian writing. And he was talking about how Christians wanted more than what the canonical gospels offered. And so there was all of these writings that went out and people, you know, have the Gospel of Peter and the Gospel of Thomas and the Gospel of Judas and the Acts of Peter and the Acts of, you know, on and on and on and on. These other books were written and these books were not included within the canon. And if you're interested in canonicity and the history of the development of the canon, there are plenty of YouTubes out there. That's a pretty fierce debate, but within the church, it's not a debate. And I won't go into that. I touched on that a little bit maybe in my Sola Scriptura video way back in January. So I thought the two Religion for Breakfast videos I think will give people kind of a sense of the back and forth, the ebb and flow. I don't know the religious background of the Religion for Breakfast guy, but I've watched a few of his videos. And I've enjoyed them. But I thought this became most clear. I have to keep my hand on the time because I have this meeting at two o'clock. I thought this became most clear in this section of the interview where we're really... Why can't I remember the guy's name? Let's be fair. Tim... I don't know how to say his name now. I don't want to say freaky because then it sounds like I'm dissing the dude. I'm not trying to diss the dude. Let's say Freke, because then it's not freaky. I'll have to find out what it is. So please forgive not knowing how to say his last name. I have a name of Vander Clay. Who am I to point fingers? But I thought this section on what was essentially eschatology, what was really helpful for differentiating some of the issues involved here, at least in terms of a Christian perspective. There we go, here we go. That is a mythos of such grandeur. This is why I say we're on track, guys. This leaves ancient myths just like, yeah, whatever. This is big stuff now. So we've got this 10 billion years of the evolution of the physical cosmos. Then you've got the 3 billion years of the evolution of life. And then right at the end of that, you've got the evolution of psyche, which is Greek for soul. It's what the Gnostics, there's a Gnostic word and it means the soul. It's not a Gnostic word everybody has. What they're pointing to, what the word refers to, is this experience you and I are having now of a non-material reality. And we're in it right now. Our bodies are sitting here, minds doing it, saying, you know, things you're listening and nodding. That's what our bodies are doing and all the actions in a non-material realm. And all the meaning, isn't it, is in that non-material realm. In the physical realm, there's a monkey making funny noises. But in the non-material realm, we are sharing meaning. That's the latest thing. So the whole evolutionary process has gone from basic matter to something not made of matter, made of images. What the reductionists do is they reduce everything to what's come before until really it's just atoms or even lower than that. What the emergentists do is they go, no, no, no, it's reality emerging on ever more deeper levels, more emergent levels. So the soul, the psyche is not some byproduct of anything. It's a level of reality. Well, that's what spirituality says. You know, if you, I've just been to speaking at a psychedelic festival in Hungary, you know, it's like what people are exploring there is soul. And you can go off into it and it's huge. There's worlds out there. It's what shamanic exploration, all the whole of spirituality is about that world. OK. Now, again, just earlier this morning, I did my video on, I did my wordy video on the word spiritual. I wasn't planning on making this video, but it very much follows. Now, this is why for Christians the resurrection is so important because the progression that you see as he just articulated, let's go back to the previous slide, the progression that you see that he just articulated is we are, that's very Gnostic to what he's just describing there. The label is found because we're, you know, we're going past, we're going out of this materiality. And that is the Gnostic tendency. That is the docetic tendency that the, the imagistic, the immaterial is deeper. It's higher. It's that is the destination. And this is why I will say that even in many evangelical churches and mainline to there is a there is a Gnostic tendency in American Christianity that says things like, well, what the gospel is, is Jesus dying for your sins. So you go to heaven when you die. That is not the resurrection. And to understand Christianity and the central place of the resurrection is that no one would expect in the Greek world, and you have the Jews, Jewish in the Greek world. And again, NT Wright is the guy to read on this. He lays this all out for you in his very fat book, the resurrection of the son of man or his thinner book. Let me go grab his two books so I can point them out. So this is this is NT Wright's really fat tome, the resurrection of the son of God, and he goes through the history. And this is a book that I asked Peterson about it and he said he's got it on his shelf. So there you go, Jordan. You got a little reading to do. I'll read your maps of meaning if you read this tome. Now, if this is this is NT Wright's scholarly technical work where he goes into the detail of all of the history that that goes into the question of the resurrection. And this is a more popular book. Looks like something spilled on it. This is a more popular book, surprised by hope, very accessible, quite a bit shorter. Also an excellent read by NT Wright going into the question that Jesus in his resurrection is the first fruits of the Christian destination. Well, what is the Christian destination? It is not that we are evolving past our bodies. It is not that we are going off into mines. It is that is the integration of heaven and earth. It is the integration of body and psyche. It is the integration of of all of this history. Now, a little bit earlier in the video, Tim, I don't want to say his name. Shoot, I said prepare, but I'm almost out of time. I only got 10 minutes. I've got to do this now. Tim Freaky. I'll just say Freaky. I'm sorry. I hope I'm not offending anyone. He makes the point. I really liked how we talked about history, how, you know, history is this accumulation of the past into the future. You've got the potentiality looking into the future. You've got the accumulation of the past. That's exactly right. But what the resurrection does is takes all of that and puts it together into a material future. And when Paul in First Corinthians 15 says we will have a spiritual body, he does not mean we will have an immaterial body, but he means that we will have a body governed by the spirit of God. And this then ties together the beginning of the story where in our rebellion in the garden, we break from the spirit of God. And we say to God we want to go our own way. And here in the resurrection, that's why Jesus appears in a locked room and he says touch my hand, give me a fish to eat. I am not a ghost. I am not immaterial. That's Jesus' point in that story. Now what this does for us is this sets us up with we often, human consciousness, there's another one of my fudgy words. Human consciousness because our conscious self is a lesser member of our committee of our brains that isn't even trusted to drive cars or to have the heart keep time or to do our respiratory or all these other things that the elephant manages. Where was I going with this? Oh yeah. Consciousness, we have a hard time keeping many things in our conscious view at the same time. And there are psychologists that do tests with numbers and treats. You want an apple or you want cake. Interesting, interesting tests. You can read about a lot of this with Jonathan Haidt and other brain books. But we have a hard time keeping a lot of things before us. And so we like dualities. It's this or that. And the reason we so often default to dualities is because we're not that good at keeping track of multiple things. We've got limited RAM and more storage. But the bus in and out of the RAM and the storage, now I'm using a computer metaphor for the brain obviously, but the bus in and out of that thing is limited. And so we often default to dualities. And so we say, well, there's Christians and atheists. But the truth is there's always, there's at least three and more of them that are really in play here. And that comes through with this. And this Peter Kreeft plays with a little bit. And I remember the Dutch for Kreeft. Kreeft is Dutch for lobster apparently. Oh, now I'm frozen in my little box. OK, now I'm moving again. Kreeft plays with this with these three individuals. Kreeft plays with this with these three individuals that died on the same day with C.S. Lewis, with JFK, John F. Kennedy, and with Aldous Huxley. Because in a sense there you have the secular West or the atheistic West. You have Lewis in a sense in the middle with Christianity. And then you have the East with Aldous Huxley. And now remember the East imagines, you know, let's say part of the East at least, you have pantheism and you have leaving the cycle of reincarnation and going off into the great sea of being. And there's a certain, if you listen to the Gnostics, well, there's some easy ways to kind of put that together. But again, it leads towards immateriality. And part of the reason the Greeks wanted to get away from materiality was that they quite rightly observed that materiality decays. Everything in this world dies. Everything decays. And so what if you were a Greek person, what you aspired to was to be remembered because the memory of you hopefully won't decay if you do deeds great enough for renown. And so the Greeks that really were the big winners were Plato and Socrates and Aristotle and Achilles and people and Odysseus and people who live on through the stories. Now for Christians that's not enough. Now in a sense for Gnostics you say, okay, well now we're going to keep going and our, if you go all the way to the beginning of the rebel wisdom, our minds will continue. Our minds, we ourselves, our minds will continue on past our body. And so you listen to that and say, yeah, that's kind of like Christianity. Christians believe that. But Christians believe in many ways as with Jordan Peterson and a lot of the observations he's, you can't really separate the mind from the body. And this is Ray Kurzweil's dilemma in that how are you going to upload your brain to a computer when in many ways your brain is distributed through your body. And the brain-body thing is a unity. And so this is where Christianity in some ways stands between the materialists that say it's all material and it's all going away when the material world decays and the Gnostics that say, oh, we're all heading off into this wonderful land of psyche and we're evolving past our bodies. So that's what the materialists say. The mind is an illusory product of big brains. And the Gnostics say we're evolving past materiality. Christianity says in consummation it all comes together. You don't lose the world. You have body and psyche. You have heaven and earth. And this is again why in my interview with Rebel Wisdom I said this is why the resurrection is so foundational because in the resurrection story all of it comes together. And this is why listening to Jordan Peterson has actually made me feel more confirmed in the resurrection, in the physicality of the resurrection than I was before. And I say, well, you're a pastor. That shouldn't waver. Well, if you listen to Tim Keller enough, you'll know that he was going in for thyroid surgery. And when he was in the hospital, this was his reading. And he said two things. He said, number one, this was really helpful in terms of understanding the resurrection. And number two, he also thought of Sam Gamgee's looking up through the hole in the clouds and seeing the star and remembering God is there. So we as pastors have our own feelings too. And but all of the Jordan Peterson stuff in terms of helping me integrate the history and the development and the physicality has all for me reinforced the necessity of the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ in exactly the terms that the New Testament describes that as the first fruits of the coming resurrection. So that in the resurrection now, I won't be decaying and graying. You'll see a much better looking, younger, stronger Paul VanderKlay than you're looking at these videos. But it'll be Paul VanderKlay with nerves and with hands and with strength. But our bodies, now, if you read on to further chapters and see us Lewis's miracles, you have the miracles of the new creation. And so some of Jesus miracles manifested that new creation. And I don't know what how we will reign over nature, how we will be in sync with our sister nature in that new heavens and that new earth. But I've got some ideas and I dare bet it'll be far greater than any idea I have. And again, as I talked with, I forget what interview I was having, I don't want to live in any other. I don't want to live in any other story in any other vision, because I think when compared to the Gnostics, I don't want to leave this body. I want this body redeemed and restored. And I've got three minutes until my meeting. And when we've been there, ten thousand years bright shining as the sun, we've no less days to sing God's praise than when we first begun. And that singing God's praise will be done with our bodies and it'll be done in action and it'll be done in the glory of the new heavens and the new earth. And so this is why I'm not a Gnostic. I believe in the resurrection. I anticipate a new body and a new heavens and a new earth. And you might say, oh, that's just fundamentalism. I don't think it's fundamentalism. I think it's historic Christianity. And it is the hope that Christians have always had, which gave them the motivation that when the pagans ran from the plague cities, Christians went in because they said, you know what, I am getting a new body. And I know Sam Harris would hear that and say, there it is. But yeah, there it is. And I'll own it and I'll keep it because the thing is, Sam Harris doesn't give me a reason to abandon it. What? My pride? Because I want everyone to think I'm a cool atheist. Now I've got two minutes. I'm going to have one minute. So I've got to end this and I've got to save this and I've got to chair my meeting. So there it is.