https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=40ao7O33MDs

 Hi, this is Paul. I've never done a video commentary on a ContraPoints video. I know that the distributist deals with her often, but someone sent me this video on Envy, and a lesbian trans woman doing a video on Envy, and it was ContraPoints. I was curious, and I was not disappointed. In fact, her video on Envy is nothing short of amazing. It's an amazing video. First of all, trigger warning here. The ContraPoints is going to trigger a lot of people in a lot of different ways. That's just what you're in for with one of her videos. But it was an amazing video. I thought it was incredible. As a preacher, every now and then you do a series on seven deadly sins or something like that. Envy is vitally important to talk about and be able to illustrate. And Spongebob, Mozart, I've used Mozart and Salieri, Amadeus. I was just amazed. And then into Freud, and then into Nietzsche, Rése and Maw. I don't speak French. Nietzschean resentment and how this, and I just thought the entire presentation, again, this is ContraPoints. So I'm going to play a clip from it and it is what it is. So if you're triggered by Natalie Wynn and her channel, there you go. She winds up complaining that most of the social revolutionary stuff we hear, I spelled that wrong, is simply reveling in resentment with little interest in actually pursuing what they would imagine to be incremental betterment. Now Jordan Peterson does come up. I was first introduced to ContraPoints by the Jordan Peterson videos, but I, and I haven't watched too many others, but this one was just outstanding. And Peterson and Paglia come up and she makes lots of disclaimers. I'm not siding with the conservatives, but, and then really does in fact go there. I put it on Twitter and Esther made a meme. Because yeah, you know, I know a lot of Christians are going to be like, you know, you're using the feminine pronoun. I don't know this person at all. It's a female representation. What are you going to do? But that's actually going to be critical to the points I make later in the video. And I want to play some of this video. It's an amazing video. I really liked it. So this morality of resentment, of impotence and permanently frustrated revenge, judges that power is evil. I don't use foundation. I just use concealer. I know that's like not how you're supposed to do makeup, but I don't need to be good at makeup. Okay. I have a million subscribers on YouTube. I don't. And again, this is ContraPoints. Okay. And I find it entertaining. Judge me if you will. There's a New York Times article about young women's attitudes toward political ambition. And one of the women who was interviewed said, as a white woman, I know I have oops, I just realized I don't have the video up there so you can't see what I'm responding to. There, let's put it up. Bad YouTube creator. Unearned privilege. So am I really the best person to be in leadership? Uh, yes. Yes you are. Because we need leaders like you who are capable of questioning the legitimacy of their own authority. Otherwise, we're just going to be stuck with another blonde beast of prey. And of course it's good to be aware of your privilege, especially as a leader, but let's not be so self- Now it's really important to see how she begins the video talking about all of this people stumbling over it. Well maybe I'll just through the miracle of YouTube, maybe I'll actually just go right there to the beginning and start that because I thought, I thought the beginning was, I'm tremendously impressed by the video. So April 27, 2017 was the greatest day in the history of twitter.com.net.gov. I realize that to you children, Twitter is an app, but to us MILFs, it remains a website. We have to dial in. Hello operator, connect me to hell. This was the day that Fyre Festival, a luxury music event hosted by Ja Rule and some charlatan, was scheduled to begin on a private island in the Bahamas. There was a lot of hype, Kendall Jenner and Bella Hadid endorsed the festival on Instagram, there was a promo video full of supermodels, tickets were selling for thousands of dollars. One twitter thread summarized the marketing as exclusivity, conspicuous consumption, and many, many promises of excellent selfies for your already insufferable Instagram. So when the day arrived and the advertised best in food, art, music and adventure turned out to be two slices of pallid American cheese languishing. There's a great treatment of this, where was it, was it on Netflix? It was really very, very good. Over-sliced bread in an atmosphere that can only be described as muddy third world shanty town. I mean, if you weren't on Twitter that day, I don't think you can even imagine the revelry. Just learned about Fyre Festival, aka Ja Rule's concentration camp for Instagram models and rich white kids. Yuppie Hunger Games hosted by Ja Rule. Finisher food, there's starving millennial influencers in Fyre Festival. Instagram entitled Rich Kids. Me, Lord of the Flies. Let them eat salad. It was a shuddering climax of pent-up class rage. You know, maybe millennials couldn't get Bernie Sanders elected, but at least those sandwiches were garbage. Jamila Jamil is an English actress who's just extremely pretty. Imagine looking like this. Imagine being perfect. Why are you doing this to me, Jamila? Why are you doing this to women? One day on Instagram, an ordinary peasant told the Queen Jamila, your skin is so perfect, uwu. And Jamila replied, my skin is currently clear because a- Now, when, when, when John McWhorter makes a comment about being at some highfalutin place where they have everybody getting in touch with their, you know, once we come to terms with racism and says, I can imagine a soundtrack, ContraPoints does the soundtrack well. Privileged people have more access to good quality nutrition, and also our lives are significantly less stressful than those with less privilege. I also get to sleep more because of this. All of these things keep my hormones in balance and I'm able to address food intolerances easily. Oh boy. Jamila, they're going to cut your head off, gorge. I'll protect you, Queen. Could she be any more annoying? Someone wondered on Twitter to 77,000 likes. This trend of fake self-awareness legit makes me want to rip my hair out. Now look, to be fair, everything Jamila said is true. Being privileged does make it easier to spend time and money on cosmetics. But Jamila's acknowledging this, this recitation of all the complex socioeconomic factors that account for why she's prettier than you doesn't take any of the sting out of inequality, does it? The old college humor video has a video on genetics, just exactly about this. And that's kind of at odds with what activists used to say, which is that you should check your privilege, a suggestion which the privileged seem to have taken to heart, since the rich and famous now go around delivering these orations on how fortunate they are compared to the rabble. And this of course turns out to be far more annoying than when they acted oblivious to it. I don't have any beauty secrets, I guess I just drink lots of water. Take me, mother. A similar scandal occurred when Kim Kardashian tweeted about her birthday party at the height of the coronavirus pandemic. 40 and feeling so humbled and blessed. There is not a single day that I take for granted, especially during these times when we are all reminded of the things that truly matter. After two weeks of multiple health screens and asking everyone to quarantine, I surprised my closest inner circle with a trip to a private island where we could pretend things were normal for just a brief moment in time. I realize that for most people, this is something that is so far out of reach right now. So in moments like these, I'm humbly reminded of how privileged my life is. Hashtag this is 40. Attack me, bitch. So like Jameela, Kim is attempting some kind of privilege checking maneuver, and once again, it has not gone well. You are the Marie Antoinette of the 21st century bragging about being humble and letting us eat cake. Millions of Americans sick and suffering, standing for hours in food lines and being evicted as you flaunt your wealth and privilege? Your tweet made ten times worse by hashtag tone deaf, humbled and blessed line, hashtag gross. Happy birthday. I hope somebody got you an alphabet book as a gift so you can read them motherfuckers. So the response on Twitter resembles moral outrage. But what people were upset about was not that she had the party. I mean, wouldn't you escape to a private island if you got that milk money? The problem was more that she tweeted about it and that the tweet was maybe, just maybe, a little bit yikesy. But if having the party wasn't wrong, then why was tweeting about it wrong? This isn't a good look. We say bad optics, not relatable. Relatable. Relatability is not a moral category. This is public relations. It's not ethics. And it definitely isn't socialism. Like I'm pretty sure Karl Marx never said, The problem with the bourgeoisie is they are not relatable. They can't read the room and it isn't a good look. This should have stayed in the drafts. Hashtag tone deaf. Isn't the issue that, when Kim tweeted this, most people were trapped in quarantine? We didn't get to have birthday parties. Some people couldn't even travel to visit their dying relatives. So watching Kim get to travel and celebrate her birthday like normal was painful. Pain at the good fortune of others is how Aristotle defined envy. And I think it's interesting that whenever social media erupts in outrage over luxury music festivals or Kim K's birthday party or Jamila Jamil's privileged pores, no one ever uses the word envy. It's like we're averting our eyes, avoiding confrontation with this dark aspect of our own psychology. So in this video, I want to take a long hard look at envy. What is it? Where does it come from? And seriously, what is Jamila Jamil's skincare routine? Drop it in the comments, bestie. Okay, so what is envy? Pain at the good fortune of others is... And off we go from there. And again, as a... So if you watch my rough drafts for Sunday, you see that part of how you construct a sermon is you construct basically your introduction. And often your introduction has some life comment, life contact point that will be... that basically will connect up with a lot of other people. And now, again, part of the platform conversation we've been having about church and platform and how church fits into the rest of society, how other platforms in many ways have sort of swallowed up and greatly overpowered churches, mega churches in particular, trying to sort of up the scales. And mega churches in some ways have certain kinds of... certain ranges available to them by collecting a large group of people. And again, the High on God book goes into those kinds of things. But as a sermon introduction, that was just simply masterful. Now, of course, a lot of the things just simply won't go in a lot of churches. But as an introduction to a video on envy, and then again, what she continues to do with envy is just just masterful. So that was background to this whole self-effacing power. I had a quote from Martin Luther King Jr., etc., etc. Back to this part of the video. ...self-effacing that we efface ourselves off the faith... ...especially if they're questioning the legi... Yes, you are. Because we need leaders like you who are capable of questioning the legitimacy of their own authority. Otherwise, we're just going to be stuck with another blonde beast of prey. And of course, it's good to be aware of your privilege, especially as a leader. But let's not be so self-effacing that we efface ourselves off the face of the earth. And if, and this certainly, in my experience, is exactly what all of those with power and privilege love to do when they check their privilege so publicly. And of course, it's not well received. This is the self-sabotage of resentment values. If you think power is evil, then you've given up on the ambition to acquire any power, which virtually... And again, you might read... Oh no, I can't remember his name. This is why I do PowerPoints, so I don't forget such things. Anyway, wrote a good, evangelical former editor of Christianity Today wrote a good book on power. And yeah, I mean, Peugeot talks well about power as well. ...guarantees your political irrelevance, since, like MLK said, you have to at least have some power to implement the demands of justice. Remember what incels call taking the black pill. This conviction that the reason you don't have a girlfriend is just that you're genetically undesirable. There's nothing you can do to change it, and I guess women are just too shallow... And even the fact that all of this very insightful lecturing is going on during the application of makeup. Just amazing. ...to be attracted to all the amazing hatred and spite that festers in your heart. For a lot of black-pilled incels, it seems like there's only one thing left in life that they enjoy, which is simply the pleasure of complaining, of moaning in pain. It reminds me of a comment from Dostoevsky's second most horrible protagonist. Even in toothaches there is enjoyment. In that case, of course, people are not spiteful in silence but moan. But they are not candid moans, they are malignant moans. And the malignancy is the whole point. The moan is a protest against the meaninglessness of pain. And part of the satisfaction of moaning is inflicting your pain on other people. This kind of malignant moaning, it's kind of the opposite of music. Because a lot of music, like blues, is benevolent moaning that transforms pain into pleasure. I mean, that's what blues is all about. My woman don't love me no more. But right here on this point, because the malignant moaning, that person has a particular kind of pleasure in pain. And so she sort of says it's this opposite blues, but is it really? I think what happens in blues is actually there's a switch towards a community shares in the pain. Dale Cooper, who was the chaplain at Calvin College when I was there in the 80s, had this lovely phrase that he would say often in his sermons. You know, pain shared is pain divided. And I think that's part of what the blues is. And that's actually sort of what's going on with many of these people. But there's this turn inwards versus I think blues is more turn outwards. But I know her sister well. You know, optimism. I think a lot of incel discourse is really just malignant moaning. It's not an attempt to diagnose or solve any problem. It's just a contagious expression of misery. And this is key because I think she's exactly right. There's a certain pleasure in this misery. You certainly derive pleasure from the misery of others. And this is a way to sort of derive pleasure from your own misery through community. And it's not very much different from what people commonly do. And as a pastor, I spend a fair amount of time listening to people complain and vent. They need some community. So joy. So pain shared is pain divided. Joy shared is joy multiplied. And so when when people vent, which they do often, they look for someone to vent to, they look for someone safe to vent to, they might pay a therapist to vent at. This is or maybe they have a YouTube channel. So so that's it's a it's a little different from from what she's pointing at here. Moan of pain that masquerades as a political agenda. Sexual Marxism. And the masquerading as a political agenda is also key because, you know, we've talked a lot about sort of the religious register. I mentioned before that the wavelengths that I mentioned before, the little I don't know if I did it on my question and answer problem of not finishing my sentences. OK, I'll try to slow down. Rick and I were trying to find wireless mics that would work well in the sanctuary. We bought the wireless mics. They didn't work well. Rick comes because Rick is really a smart and clever guy comes out with this little thing that he bought on Amazon, which basically scanned all of the wavelengths, just a little USB thing, plug it into the computers, has a little antenna, really cool, nerdy stuff. And what we discovered was that not all of the frequencies were as clean. I was going to get it into the video with dyslexic self. Can't keep my right hand from my left hand. Have to look at all the frequencies. So then when we returned the mics and bought some other mics, we found ones that the frequencies were cleaner. But religion and politics are very close in terms of the in terms of sort of the human bandwidth that they share. And so when you get into the incels, political activism is, of course, deeply religious. Solve any problem. It's just a contagious expression of misery, a moan of pain. And again, not just that's it's. She minimizes it, but it's actually a pretty significant thing. The masquerades as a political agenda, sexual Marxism, they call it the redistribution of sex state mandated GF. That's very valid. Of course, they don't actually expect any of this to happen. That's not the point. Exactly. That's not the point. So incels are kind of a. And that's not the point when someone comes to the pastor to vent or to complain. And you get this between husbands and wives sometimes because wives will start complaining to their husbands and their husbands try to fix things. And the wives will stop them and say, I don't want you to fix it. I just want you to hear me. OK, if that fixes it, I can do that, too. Sort of a male adaptation. You know, expect any of this to happen. That's not the point. So incels are kind of a universal punching bag online. It's very easy to point and laugh at them. But what's harder is to look in the mirror and notice how these exact same tendencies are rampant in our own communities. So the inso black pill is just one instance. And again, that all of this is going on during the application of makeup and the looking in a mirror. It's genius. It's genius. And so what I call an ideology of resentment, a discourse that outwardly appears like moral or political critique, but which on examination is mainly just a resentful moan. The goal of resentment politics is not to improve conditions. In fact, the resentful person is full of contempt for any morally compromised sellout. Now, you might imagine James Lizzie, Peter Bogosian, Helen Pluckrose, the host or the hoaxers, you know, riffing on this. Contrapoints is making the point even better. But in a way that the left, the YouTube left community, it's this is insider talking. This isn't James Lindsay on Twitter just, you know, annoying all of those people and just baiting them and trolling them. This is contrapoints. Now, this point that she makes here is so critical and so important. Part of the reason when I saw the rise of the woke in our culture and I recognize that as Calvinist is because I had seen these kind of things play out in Christian reform churches all along. You don't actually expect anybody to do anything about total depravity. We sort of fly the flag and it's the critique of it that if we all agree on the critique of it, that's enough for us to make a community. They want to endlessly critique power because for them critique is an important psychological defense against feeling impotent. Schaler described it this way. It is peculiar to resound to mock criticism that does not seriously desire that its demands be fulfilled. It does not want to cure the evil. The evil is merely a pretext for the criticism. What am I going to do with my eyes? The criticism itself is the joy. That's the joy. Now, it might not be a very deep joy and it might not even be a terribly satisfying joy, but it's an experience of joy. And where we're going to go when we finally turn the corner on bar field and we look at other things, this is what this is about. I think the evil is merely a pretext for the criticism. What am I going to do with my eyes? I think a pink kind of look. We've been doing a lot of pink looks. I just I love that hay fever look as a general rule. The more radical a political community claims to be, the more likely it is to be a community of resentment. Self-styled radicals will tell you superficial surface reforms do not interest us. The problem must be critiqued at its root. Genius soundtrack. And the root turns out to be this universal, all-encompassing evil, right? Society itself, the system, the machine. A resentment ideologue always imagines himself to be engaged in a kind of satanic revolt against an omnipotent, omnipresent enemy. OK, notice that pink eye look on Satan. You make up an idea, right? Society root turns do not interest. Self-styled claims to be a fever look as a general hay fever look is to reform. Turns out to be this unit system, the machine, a resentment ideologue. Always imagines himself to be engaged in a kind of satanic hay fever look revolt against an omnipotent, omnipresent enemy. OK, I just need to do makeup for a second. It's harder than it looks to be a makeup looker. It's hard to talk while doing this. Notice how she's making her eyes look just like Satan in the picture. And of course, this, you know, when she's connecting Marxism and Marxist ideology and the utopia that they point to and look at its parallelism in some ways to Christian eschatology, it's all there. So we are going to jump to a very recent The Rest is History, Tom Holland video, or not video, but podcast. And nothing short of total revolution counts as any sort of victory whatsoever. We have to dismantle the entire system. Burn it all down. I guess it's pedestrian to point out that this is the revolutionary utopian equivalent of Christians awaiting the last judgment. Our kingdom is coming comrades. Often the appeal of utopian ideology is similar to religion. It's not about health care, higher wages, relief from police violence. Those are actual goals that could be demanded, worked for and achieved. Utopian ideology instead promises relief from some general malaise, alienation. And so ironically, it can have the same opiate effect that Marx ascribed to religion. But release from the general anguish of human existence is not a political goal. There's been many revolutions in the last few centuries and so far zero utopias. Resentment, envy, and hunger for that matter are not satiated by the downfall of the old regime. When the people have no bread... And she keeps doing her eyes while she looks in the mirror as she's saying this. It's astounding. They eat the rich. And when the rich are gone, they eat each other. I mean, she's basically making the same points that Jordan Peterson was making. And because of the proximity effect, envy may actually increase after the revolution. You may actually be more envious of a favored comrade, a successful Citoyen. Oui, a Kulak than you ever were of the aristocrats. So envy turns paranoid and imaginative in revolutionary moments. It gets sublimated into morality and the accusations start flying. That citizen is conspiring against the revolution. That peasant is hoarding grain. So the guillotine starts slicing thousands of heads off. The gulags fill up. Or an authoritarian strongman takes over just to announce another revolution two decades later. The things people will do to stay relevant. Honestly. And for what? What long-term egalitarian utopia results? Socialism with Chinese characteristics? I don't know. So look, I do understand that sometimes you just have to do a revolution. And if I'd been there in 1789, I'm sure I'd be storming the Bastille myself. But I just wish we could stop being so doe-eyed about it. Revolution is a bloody nightmare that happens because society is collapsing and people are desperate. At worst, revolution is nothing more than a violent day of retribution. And at best, it lays the groundwork for future incremental progress. But it will never usher in utopia, nor is it the antidote to a vague sense of unease, which, I'm sorry to report, is simply the resting state of an unsedated human mind. So, at some point, not unlike my commentary on the Jordan Peterson zizek, quote-unquote, debate about Marxism, ContraPoint, you know, is she a Marxist? No, not at all. Where does she lie? I didn't mean to ask the question that way. What is, does she have religion? What is her religion about? What, how does her theological system work? Well, of course, I don't know. I just have to try to guess from the basis of the video. But the continued appeal to experience that there's very much a sort of a sad atheist or not, sort of a sad atheist. If Nietzsche talked about resentment, then this is really resignation. Take your experiences, your joys, your pleasures while you're able, because youth is fleeting, age is coming, the revolutions will never finally bring what you want. Don't throw away all of your privilege because somehow you've been convinced that power is evil. It's sort of an ideology of resignation. Now I'm not saying, as some conservatives do, that all leftist or all egalitarian politics is born of envy. Now I need to, I was reading George Ansey's book, and one of the points that he makes in this book is the different way that progressive Christians and conservative Christians sort of modulate their in-group and out-group. This is a classic progressive modulation of in-group and out-group. Please let me differentiate myself from conservatives because I've just been sounding a lot like Jordan Peterson, who I've done two videos on. No, this is a specific subtype. There are plenty of reasons, other than envy or fear of envy, to oppose an economic distribution where some people have billions of dollars. Now we're looking directly into the camera speaking earnestly. While other people are dying because they can't afford insulin. Objectively, that is not an efficient use of resources to... Objectively? That's what we love to say right before we say something, make a value statement. Objectively, it's sort of like literally, it's a literally and objectively have basically become words of emphasis in a materialist frame. ...to promote human well-being. And personally, I just... ...is not an efficient use of resources to promote human well-being. There's the goal, we promote human well-being. Well, why? That's just the one we inherit. And she had said earlier that, you know, she had said earlier about, you know, how most of these values we just inherit from Christianity. Yeah. Personally, I just don't want to live in a country where people are dying because they can't afford medicine. And I'm willing to pay however many taxes it takes for that not to happen. Really? However many? Well, pretty soon you would demand that the government use your tax money efficiently, and the government prioritize your tax money. And then not only will you join the conservatives in their critique of Rezent Ma, globalized through the system and doughy-eyed views of revolution, but you would also demand that your tax money be used in a reasonable way and prioritize so that people who need insulin can get insulin. So while I'm putting down straw man versions of my argument, I'm also not saying, oh, let's just stop being envious. No, that's impossible. I think envy is like libido. It's a basic force of human nature that's So, she believes in human nature. It's more or less unstoppable. But with the right leadership, I think that envy can potentially be sublimated or Oh. or redirected into something more constructive. Because raw envy is a very bad basis for egalitarian politics. It often targets the wrong people, like millionaires instead of billionaires. And eventually it turns the revolution against itself, and you get the circular firing squad, the self-cannibalism. The problem I see on the left today is that without any genuine political outlet, resentment mostly manifests as morality. Morality itself being a way to vent envious aggression and vindictiveness. On the left, we claim to be so impersonal, right? We're all about structural analysis, the material conditions, systems of power, intersectional identity hierarchies. But if you look at what people actually spend their time doing here, it's all this obsessive moral policing. I wonder if because leftists can't seem to win on any major political stage, we Leftists can't seem to win on any major political stage? You mean, what's your time frame here? Russia, China, Cambodia, Cuba. I mean, she just pointed it out. Well, somehow, if leftism worked in the West, we would do it right. It's fascinating. We feel disempowered. And so this moral fanaticism is a psychological substitute. Like with Marie Antoinette, it's easier to blame people than systems. Also, structural analysis is very boring, and destroying people with gossip is extremely entertaining. This obsessive moral policing also gets turned inward and becomes leftist guilt. You know, this useless internalized scolding. I think I'm done with my makeup. What do we think? Leave a comment. That's where you stop the critique right there. Anyway, I'm not going to play the whole video. It's an hour and 48 minutes. And the whole video is worthy of a commentary from start to finish, but it would just simply take me too long. Jordan Peterson just put out a video today with two theological academics, which I have yet to listen to. But I'm very, very curious to see where those three go. But if you haven't watched Contrapoints Envy, I, I. To me, it feels like a masterpiece. Just I just beyond words, I've watched the whole thing through twice, which often doesn't happen with a video this long unless it's something that I'm going to do more work on. But pretty astounding. Now, this might seem a weird transition to make. But as with many of my videos, I listened to Contrapoints twice this weekend and thought that that is a masterpiece. And, you know, I better catch up with Tom Holland. And of course, I love the I love the the Persians versus the the Greeks and the historical things. And then this video about decolonizing Africa. And again, wow, quite an interesting video. Now, what on earth would this have to do with Contrapoints? Well, there seem to be some ideas or perhaps some spirits that are so powerful that they simply can't nothing can stand before them and they remake the world, whether whether at a certain level how we see them, whether that wins as such. But they but they but they remake the world. So I think the Protestant Reformation is one of those ideas post modernity or the the caving in of modernity is one of these ideas. And, you know, part of why I love the rest is history is because they treat certain areas of historical consideration, at least touch on it in areas that I know almost nothing about. And one of those is the decolonizing of Africa. Now, of course, colonization has become one of these one of these one of these huge cries and pan Africanism. You know, we would imagine that these these are all about ancient things arising to finally tear down oppressors that have taken control of them. And so in some ways, that's what we imagine the decolonizing of Africa to be. But once you actually look at what happened, it's anything but it's in fact a new colonial effort now, perhaps not run by Europeans, but European spirits and ideas being run through Africans that are taking over. Places where biologically and genetically their people came from. So during the the interwar period, yes, met many anti colonial leaders moved to the US and the UK to study. And I think this this relates actually to the notion of pan Africanism. What many people I'm not sure understand is that pan Africanism is in many respects a Western concept. So I talked about you have these powerful ideas that they transform us and we're not even conscious of to the depths that we've been transformed. And so what you see is that it is often imagined that the decolonization is sort of a going back in time, but there is no going back in time. It's actually a neo colonization of more Western ideas that are now going back and taking root and then an attempt to re appropriate what is an idealized understanding of what Africa is. Because again, Africa is something that has been placed on a European map. Nobody went to Africa and found a map. The explorers never found maps in Africa that said this is Africa. This is Europe. This is Asia. No, they Africa itself in some ways was developed and that then gets that gets and then we're going to talk about hagiography again a little bit. There's sort of this hagiographic process by which Africa you can you can see it in roots. If you watch the original TV show, you can see it in African slaves who generations where the memory there's no direct there's no longer any personal memory of Africa. It's all being told in stories that this then becomes hagiography for the slaves that, oh, remember the promised land before we were taken into captivity, et cetera, et cetera. It happens in Dutch immigrants in the Christian Reformed Church. It just goes. This is just a this is just part of what we constantly do. So the very first Pan-African conference, for instance, was actually held in London in 1900 and it wasn't actually organized by an African. So even Pan-Africanism itself. Is something of Europe. It was organized by a West Indian man called Henry Sylvester Williams and Pan-African Congresses were held in Paris, London, New York and Manchester before they actually reached an African city. So the very first Pan-African conference that was held in Africa wasn't until 1974. That's amazing. Yeah. You look at that almost 70 years before they actually held the thing in Africa. It's it's sort of been spun out of Europe. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's incredible. In in Dar es Salaam. So so when when these anti-colonial leaders moved to West major Western cities, they were also interacting with West Indian thinkers and intellectuals as well. So like Fano. Yeah. So like Fano. But also like, for instance, C.L.L. James in London. Now you find this again and again in the 20th century because of course, Marxism that takes over China and Cambodia. Well, and Vietnam Ho Chi Minh. Go ahead and watch documentaries of the origins of the Vietnam War. Ho Chi Minh gains his ideas in the French universities and brings them back. And now this that then these European ideas become the expressions. Now it only makes sense of nationalism. Well, where is nationalism coming from? Nationalism is coming from Europe. Now that doesn't mean there aren't taste buds or foundation sort of in a Jonathan Haidt sort of way in terms of a collective or communal identity. Still today when they talk about China, they talk about the Han as well. They're the real Chinese. And so you have this is this this these ideas of a certain degree of of cultural or ethnic purity. And but again, these are these are these powerful ideas that are just moving on. And people don't even recognize that. I mean, if you're paying attention to where these ideas come from, they don't recognize that. Oh, we've got to keep the British out. And in fact, the way we're going to perform revolution will be through British or French or European ideas that have been deeply impacted by Christianity. And one of the interesting things to note is that in the colonial period, each of the different nations had their own way of going about it. So the British tended to establish these separate little colonies as sort of separate little states that were distinct from, you know, distinct from the motherland, if you will. Whereas France, they talked about it earlier in the earlier in the podcast, sort of imagined that these African these African places were just extended states within greater France. Germany, of course, is late to the nationhood game. And so most of the best spots were already taken by the the English and the French and the Portuguese and the Spanish. And so then the Japanese, who are very late to the game in some ways, they side with the allies during the First World War. So in the Treaty of Versailles, they basically are able to get a hold of the German colonies in the Pacific. And then, of course, they beat Russia in an early war in the 20th century and they begin to eat up Manchuria and then they try to eat China. And when they try to eat China, they try to make again Japanese come over to mainland China and they it's very much a colonial effort. And they're going to colonize China. And of course, in some ways, there are similar ideas to what the Nazis will try to do in Eastern Europe with what the Japanese are doing. The Japanese are doing in China. And all of these conceptualizations are are are making their way through the world. And, you know, it's just basic, simple human appropriation. One group sees another group do something and say, hey, we can learn from that. Let's take that idea. You give it its own little cultural twist and then off you go. So they were they were interacting with these West Indian thinkers and intellectuals. And incidentally, Marcus Garvey never visited Africa in his life. And if you don't know who Marcus Garvey is, PBS had a good documentary on him not too many years ago. Look him up. Critical figure in terms of, well, the whole the whole hagiography of Africa that, of course, the descendants of those who were sold into slavery in North America would naturally generate. And you can see this. And again, this comes through and comes through in roots, comes through in the color purple, you know, even comes through in the matrix with respect to those who have been unplugged from the machine. Those who are natural born in in Zion versus those who have been liberated from the great machine. And Garvey was one of the most influential Pan-African leaders. So to that extent, many of these anti-colonial leaders were, to a significant extent, westernized. And they were westernized to an extent that sort of that essentially distinguished them from the native population of the country from from which they came from, because most most of the population, most of the population populations in the countries from which they came were largely illiterate and they couldn't speak the European languages. And I think one of the most distinctive qualities of many of these post-colonial and anti-colonial African leaders was the fluency and was the charisma. Somebody like Leopold Sérre-Senghor was was both an influential figure within the negritude movement in 1930s Paris, but also became the first president of Senegal. And he was he was he was elected a fellow of the Academy of Froncés, wasn't he? Yeah, yeah, the first the first the first black African. And so what you see is this is just this is simply another wave of colonialism with instead of having white governors. Well, now you have sort of educated up. And again, what is education? But colonization. That's what education is. And once it becomes deeply enough embedded, we do it innocently. We do it imagining that this is my sense of authenticity, that that which is outside an alien is so imprinted in us that now it simply feels authentic. Please don't come around and point out to me that this idea has genetics that that go beyond where I think it should. Leopold Sérre-Senghor was elected a member of the Academy of Froncés. And he was also the first person to pass Aggregation, which is like a very competitive exam that allows you to become a teacher in France. He was also a school teacher in France during the 1930s and also a poet as well. I mean, we opened with Fanon and I commented on when I read him. I mean, he feels to me incredibly French. Yes. So many of his attitudes, his assumptions, his arguments, his abstract nouns. And you mentioned C.L.R. James, you know, this brilliant right from the Caribbean. And I read him because he writes about cricket. And I when I read him when I was young, I thought, oh, this is he's very radical. This is most unlike any writing about cricket I've ever read. And I read him again recently and I thought, got this guy's British. He's going on about W.G. Grace all the time. And I guess that's kind of probably true if you're coming from the Caribbean because they've been shaped for so much longer by British and French traditions of imperialism. And Africa, you know, the period of British and French rule is actually pretty short, isn't it? Yes. In many of these places. It's a few decades. And yet it does seem, you know, both within Krumah and Senghor, who you've mentioned, that an awful lot of what is motivating them is coming from the universities of London, Paris, New York. Yeah. So do you I mean, would it be an exaggeration to say that the impetus for decolonization from Western rule is itself pretty Western? I think that would be a correct thing to say, because even the notion of and this links to your book again, Tom. Don't do this. Thank you. I've been so... But the notion of universal human rights is... Now, again, part of what we've been developing over the last number of videos is this, the whole idea of universality. There's a mapping. So in Monday's video about same sex marriage and Chesterton's fence in my Sunday sermon, there's this sort of duplex register where you have heaven, spirit, mind, and you have earth, flesh, matter. Something happens in us that we simply have to flip to the top register. And once you flip to the top register, you have eternality. You have essence. You have purification. And of course, in many ways, you have morality. You have the binary switch on off. Good, bad, right, wrong. And so you simply have to sort of flip things into the upper register in order to hold them to be able to sort of gauge what's going on down below in the bottom register. I think he got a kind of highest distinction in theology, didn't he? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And interesting enough, Nkrumah was baptized a Catholic. And he seriously considered becoming a Jesuit priest. But then politics. Christianity by other means. Put that on Tom Holland's headstone. Christianity by other means. Ever since he wrote Dominion, we sort of see it all over the place, don't we? Yeah, definitely, definitely. And Nkrumah as well was also besotted by many, many aspects of British culture. So when he became Prime Minister of Ghana in 1957, he actually visited the Queen in Balmoral. And a picture was taken of both of them until the day he died. That picture of Nkrumah and the Queen was one of his most prized possessions. Well, there's that very, I think, exaggerated sequence in The Crown. Have you seen that, where Nkrumah and the Queen dance? Dominic went to watch this. He despises the Crown. I think that's exaggerated. But I mean, I guess that's kind of it. But just on the topic of religion, Dominic... Oh my God, that's such a Tom Holland thing to say. But there's this kind of Western type, you know, post-French revolutionary universalism, which feeds into Marxism, and that obviously is very appealing to lots of African leaders in this period. But you do also have the universalisms of Islam and Christianity, and they're also quite important. And one of the things I thought was really interesting when I was researching Dominion was to discover how important Ethiopia was as the first Christian nation before Rome. And the sense that its origins go all the way back to Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. And the sense that it had preserved its independence and therefore could provide a kind of inspiration to both African nationalists and to African Christians that did not come from Europe. And so here now you see this repeated pattern within Christianity. You see it in the reform tradition, where at some point you realize these new revolutionaries, that they are in fact, they probably at some level feel themselves conducting a new wave of colonialism, because there's no clean room from which to do this. And so, well, we have to somehow find, we have to somehow find this archetypal or primeval state, this garden, this clean room with walls into which slithered corruption. And then we now try to reappropriate that which has been lost and spoiled by the serpent. And just to have Ethiopia come up in here again, again, Peugeot and Roland are doing this universal history. And, you know, why all this talk about Ethiopia? Oh, this, this grabs so deeply in the imagination that Ethiopia then becomes sort of the, the pure Jewish and then Christian African bridgehold that predates the coming of the, of the colonial powers and their corrupting of pure African soil. And so you can just see the patterns of the story developing and this pattern continuing to repeat and work itself out. And that seemed to have a kind of salience and importance that I hadn't properly understood until I began reading that. Yes, yes. Ethiopia played an integral role in the, in the concept of Pan-Africanism. So you can even see a legacy of that in Rastafarianism, which is a sort of a melange of Pan-Africanist ideals with a sort of worship of Ethiopian monarchy. Highly slassie. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And even though there was even a time when to call the Black, when Black people were referred to as Ethiopians or, yeah, or Ethiops or something like that. Yeah. And I think, yeah, that refers to again, again, the sort of integral role Ethiopia played in a sort of collective Black identity. And you can see how, let's say, a story like the Ethiopian eunuch in the Book of Acts just plays into this because universal histories almost become inevitable. And so you look around to find, well, where are my people in this story? And that's, you know, that's exactly what Pajot and Rolland are pushing for and finding in their universal history series. Now, almost what we get here is sort of a Barfieldian break from participation. And we see this both in Contrapoints and in this interesting step of decolonization, which is sort of a recolonization of older patterns, trying to reach back into Pan-Africanism and into the kingdom of Ethiopia, a reappropriation of universal history. But it's no longer the innocent, unified thing itself. It's the idealization of the thing. You know, hagiography ensues. The materialist instantiation is incidental. There's a reaching for a purified thing and there's a desiring of that purified thing. In some ways in Contrapoints, you see that deeply in a trans woman dressing up, you know, the again the stagecraft, the costumes, the sets. But this is a this is this is a trans woman talking about envy. And, you know, she herself is almost hagiography put onto YouTube. And and the material instantiation is is all about the stagecraft. Again, the getting taking the picture with the Queen. The shape of the colonies will will be likely continue to be indebted to their the colonial patterns that went in deep. And then the the reappropriation will will be in some ways always a reappropriation. So there's the the whole process is one again. What do I mean by barfield? I should probably do a little bit of background of of Owen Barfield here, too. Again, this is a deep friend of C.S. Lewis. And he had this idea of initial participation, which which is immediate and direct. It's back in the day when wind and spirit were one idea with one word, ruach, panuma. And and then you have this separation, this loss of participation where you have wind and spirit. There are two different things. There's there's a division in there that can't that can't be lost. And again, watching Contra points go through this video and and talking. I mean, it's it's all over the top. It's it's it's all a desire and it's a desire for an instantiation that you know can never become. And then at one point in the in the video, she talks about, you know, well, is this really desire for cis women? No, it's it's much more than the envy of the of the proximate. And it's the the competition between the trans. And then it's the the trans that heightens up and those who who get so much who get so much plastic figure, they almost begin to look like a doll. It's not really a race with the ideal. It's a race with each other, but you can't help in community see the ideal as drawing. But the ideal itself almost becomes hyper real. And of course, all of this is longing for final participation when when finally the the hagiography, the idealized thing that has flipped to the upper register of heaven. Of heaven, of heaven, spirit and mind from the lower register of earth. Flesh and matter than is once again. Full participation where heaven and earth are united, where. In a sense, the trans woman doesn't become a real woman. She becomes a real trans woman. That's not the same. But then what is it? And how do we regard it? And well, this is sort of where Contra points becomes a sad story because within her worldview, she can never get there. The hagiography longs for the reinstantiation, but this time in an idealized world. Oh, see now how see now why Christianity imagines a new heavens and a new earth. Oh, OK, we've located in this this in thought and imagination. This must be the account for this move that Christianity has made. So now we can sort of understand in Barfieldian terms, the psychological progression towards our stories. The hagiography of final instantiation of full participation of final participation. So now we can account for the story. So now we can go home and sort of be sad in a Contra points way. But in many ways, we're sort of back to the ontological argument, because if you stop here, then it's finally a very sad story. Because not only will Contra points never become a cis woman, but the real trans woman that Contra points longs to have or the idealized romantic relationship or the idealized partner. When you listen to that video, you just hear the longing throughout. In fact, envy is in some ways the an ontological argument for C.S. Lewis's argument from desire, which he begins mere Christianity with. Envy is almost the is almost the cry of pain and the demand. That heaven become real, instantiated, actual. That participation finally become full again. And if you have to live with a system that says these are always only just good ideas and ideals. Well, then we're sort of just stuck in a Dossetism where. The best we can do is flip up into our nice thoughts in the upper register and with a long sigh or maybe a moan say it can never happen. But Christianity, of course, begins with the resurrection of Christ. And we can go back to the Peugeot Peterson conversation where Peugeot quite nicely explains to Peterson. The reason Christians continue to insist on the resurrection is because if there is no resurrection, then we're sort of left with the trans woman longing to become a real trans woman. But the reality of that realness always only is in the imagination. And you can never get past loss of purpose or participation in Barfieldian terms. And that's where secularity leaves imprisoned in the buffered self. The secret sacred self is, in fact, the hagiography of our desire. Powered sometimes by envy, which is the bitterness that will never be forgotten. Powered sometimes by envy, which is the bitterness that will never get there. The secret sacred self is the is the only the mere participation in the imaginary. It's it's in the upper register. It's heaven, its spirit, its mind. But it's never earth and flesh and matter. It can never be because the age of decay will just keep doing its work and no matter how much makeup or plastic surgery. Well, every now and then someone from Hollywood who's had a lot of work done, especially the early work, and you see people in the 70s show up and their faces like this. I'm really trying hard to hold back the age of decay. What will the poor embalmer do? We sort of become trapped in a Girardian rivalry cycle. If we're if we're borrowing our desires from each other, we're also hating ourselves for desiring it. But we more hate those who have achieved just a little bit more of what we desire. And that sets into motion the the the ideology of resentment and all of the things that she's so so masterfully laid out in the video. Get too close. Get envy triggered. Can't dare hope that its physical world and its physicality is both one corrupted yet one which will be redeemed, turned blessed matter. In which this world is in some ways sacramental that points to another, which is exactly Lewis's argument from desire. Again, in the beginning of mere Christianity, it's in some ways the ontological argument applied to a redeemed envy. But it's actually not a redeemed envy. It is fundamentally jealousy, which is, as she exactly rightly pointed out early in the video, something we desire, which is properly ours, which is something we are estranged from or threatened to be estranged from. And so again, we find secularity. A dissatisfying realm to be in. The buffered self is a prison where only in a deceptive way can we imagine heaven. And when we try to instantiate it now, with recognition of the zero-sum games that materiality often foists upon us, we can't even enjoy our attempted instantiations of them with guilt, and if we do so, we'd better hide. But then we lose our morality too. And even the momentary owning our privilege play on Twitter is now decried. It always comes back to the resurrection. It always comes back to the resurrection. The hope of final participation, where our desires are actually met, not by the blood and misery of our rivals, but by the gift of our God. So there it is. Commentary on counterpoints. Commentary on colonization through Barfield into Christian hope via the resurrection. Let me know what you think in the comments.