https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=0haQUPnCtc4

 Hi, this is Paul. One of the issues that comes up often in my conversations with people is the issue of conversion. And one of the things I notice is that there's a difference of language between traditional Christian language of conversion and the terminology of transformation that I hear from John Vervecky and Jordan Peterson. So I want to do a little bit of a video on transformations and conversions. Let's just grab this definition from the internet. Transformation used in psychology and new age thought refers to a major change or shift in an individual's thought or behavior patterns. This type of change normally involves a major change in thought patterns and values. For instance, an individual who suddenly gives up a non-religious lifestyle, become highly religious, can be said to have undergone a spiritual transformation. And we're going to deal with that word spiritual today too. Piaget, who's also willing to come up, uses the term transformation to refer to any type of change that an individual could experience. In psychoanalysis, transformation is when unconscious ideas or desires are disguised so that they may be, are disguised so that they may become acknowledged by the conscious. I don't know if disguised is the right word or revealed. So this is all barking up the alley of transformations. And this, this came up in the, in the Jordan Peterson one last, one last question video with, with, with David Nassar. And I played actually the same clip in the last video, but it, it bears seeing because it just illuminates what's going on here. Your question is more about personality transformation in general. They're talking about alcoholism. And again, one thing that I've seen often in my ministry is people who, let's say, get sober with a 12 step program after a few years of sobriety are looking for a broader transformation beyond just no longer drinking or no longer using drugs. And this is exactly what Peterson is talking about here. Your question is more about personality transformation in general and, and how it plays out even into the trenches of addictions. I mean, I'm a Christian. I became a Christian when I was 18. My addictions didn't, didn't stop, you know, tempting me, you know, and it's not just even the things that I, that I had before I became a Christian. I've had, I've added new temptations. You wanted to say addictions. I don't go away. But rather than tapping into self power or tapping into even good things like the accountability of a community and those kinds of things. For me, it's in so inside out. I just have to continue to preach to myself. Now, when he said instead of tapping into self power, we almost think he wanted to say to tap into divine power. So now we're introducing the, the, the framework, which is so incredibly fraught right now between natural and supernatural, because once in our context, you engage this framework and you begin talking in terms of supernatural, entire audiences stop, just close their ears. And in fact, I've, Adam, Adam Frendit and I have gone back and forth a number of times on Jordan Peterson and Adam keeps telling me, well, the reason, the reason Jordan Peterson is so popular is because he, he avoids the supernatural line. And I very much understand that. And so then Adam says, well, you should stop talking the supernatural stuff. Oh, but now here we have a division of communities. And, but also why Jordan Peterson is so popular is he keeps, he keeps climbing towards that line. And there are real reasons for that line. And again, I believe it's more, much more of a cultural line rather than a metaphysical line. I think, in fact, it's an epistemological line that is functioning. And again, if you go back to the videos where I dealt with, I used Paul Maxwell's little schema that ancients used metaphysics, moderns use epistemology and to postmoderns are tending to bank on axiology. I mean, we can't even know epistemology if you're postmodern. So, so right here they get into this question of transformation and conversion. And then the question, obviously, of supernatural, God, all these kinds of things. So, so how do they happen, these transformations? And again, as we said, we saw separated magisteria in this conversation with Jordan Peterson at Liberty University. How do they happen? What language? How do we language them? Can we evaluate them as to whether or not we call them good? Can we provoke them in ourselves or in others? And one of the things about when Vervecki was talking about, for example, Buddhism and the Four Noble Truths, Four Noble Truths, I think it is, you know, he was saying, he was saying, you know, these aren't beliefs. These are things that provoke. And so we're talking about transformation. And one of the things that we're going to see again and again is that there are two things here. There's process and there's destination. And so when Jordan Peterson invokes meaning as his sacrament and you're going to drag that heavy cross up that hill, as someone in one of my conversations said yesterday, well, you know what? You get at the top of the hill when you're dragging the cross off, they put up the cross and they put you on it. That's what you get at the top of the hill, which is true in the story. But there's process and destination. And often in our context, we're spending a whole lot of time looking at process and the elements of destination are presumed. And we're going to see that in what for me is a go to Brett Weinstein conversation on rebel wisdom that I've played in previous videos before. But you have to deal both with the process and the telos, the end, the destination, because for us, in fact, to. So if I'm thinking about my South African friend who he's he's going to know exactly who I'm talking about, you're dealing with nouns and verbs here and the verb is the process and the noun is the destination. And both of these things are important to actually have a story, which is the way that we connect with these things. Now, traditionally in Christianity, we call this conversion. And when I was in college, I read this book and actually I picked it up at the Erdman store. I lived and went to college and seminary in Grand Rapids. But this little book of famous conversions, which, you know, when I was in college, you know, when I was kind of sorting myself out in terms of, you know, do I believe any of this Christian stuff? Do I do I want to? I found these conversion stories to be very meaningful and helpful for me, partly because they're told over a diversity of cultures and spectrums. And each one is different. And this is part of the reason why I still enjoy listening to people's conversion stories, because it fascinates me the process of transformation, that the process of conversion that happens. So you have that changes. Where am I here? Changes because of pervasive secularity. So conversion, once you say that word conversion, right away, in a sense, ears closed, because now you have invoked to this, you've hit the tripwire between the natural and the supernatural. And I've been listening to Will Durin's story of philosophy. What a lovely book. And, you know, one of the things that I was listening to it, I was thinking about, OK, what do we mean by natural? A lot of what we mean by natural is without mind, without intention. And I'm reflecting on the conversation I had with Colin yesterday, which I which I already posted. You know, when I think about, say, some of the places that say Colin and I might disagree and what Darwin did as told in The Metaphysical Club, which is a book that Jordan Peterson recommends with respect to the American pragmatists. You know, it's what Darwin what Darwin did in terms of the history of the West and secularism was was able to promote an idea that the transformations that happened in the in the world were natural. And what, again, we mean by natural is without mind or plan or intention or direction. And that's, in a sense, where we get natural and actually then supernatural becomes mindful. It's minded. You know, there is a mind that is guiding this process. And we're going to continue to glance off this question of minds, because when you get into the question of, well, OK, so let's let's assume when I had my conversation with Adam, I should probably do another conversation with Adam one of these days, which is my schedule gets crazy. But I find Adam a really good atheist conversation partner because he's he's got his anti he's got his anti theism under control. And part of me would so love to get so many of these new friends in a room. And that's what we do with our with our local meetups. And I can't tell you how much fun our local meetups are. I was just I was just thinking, you know, you know, how can we anyway. So these distinctions, these lines, these tripwires, these these reflexes that we have with respect to mind, it deeply troubles and shakes us when we think of when we think of a divine mind with this much power and authority having dominion over us. And we would rather imagine that mindlessness has control over us, which is which is really a very strange thing. So some of the changes because of pervasive secularism methods and goals of transformation are less shaped by institutions. People people. People associate mindlessness with authenticity. Just think that one through. People associate mindlessness with authenticity. If it comes from a source that they can't discern or explain, suddenly it seems authentic to them. I just started started going through Chesterton's orthodoxy, the book that that Zizek quoted to Peterson. And just the first couple of chapters of orthodoxy seem right out of the Jordan Peterson moment. It's in fact spooky when I listen to Chesterton at the beginning of orthodoxy. I hear Ian McGillchrist now Chesterton didn't have McGillchrist's brain science, but the whole the whole known and unknown in terms of Chesterton's initial story of the man who rediscovered England. What an amazing book orthodoxy is. Almost all sources or outcomes of transformation are within the secular realm. Again, this is part of the dogma of secularism that these these are the only these are the only sources or outcomes that are legitimately allowed in the public sphere. We are more respondent. But what was the implication of that? Well, that means that we are more responsible for these these outcomes and processes, both good and bad. And therefore our failures are our fault. And this sets up this interesting psychological dynamic of of not wanting there to be a God because we would blame him. And and to me, again, these these questions are just so so interesting and they come up again and again and again. Now, I played some of these clips in a previous video, just play shorter versions of it. This question about believing and provoking. There's a there's a broad spread skepticism, frustration and avoidance of of the language of believing. And and and with I think there's a sense that we have used this language of believing. We've pushed it further than it can really go. And and I'll just play these three little clips because it's interesting because Vervecky, Peterson and Tim Keller are all basically singing from the same book. And to me, something like that is very interesting to follow. And without beliefs, because he tries to argue that part of what is preventing us from really getting both sides of Buddhism is that both of these are fixed, locked, like being locked inside the box in the nine dot problem. I'm trying to understand Buddhism as a set of beliefs. We have gotten so used to this way of thinking and we'll see later why it is a post-Christian way of thinking that these traditions for these axial legacy traditions for cultivating wisdom and self-transcendence are to be understood as creeds, as systems of beliefs that we now even will equate. Right. The word belief with these practice will talk about it as a belief system, or will you even use the word belief as a synonym for faith, etc. Now, now that's such an interesting move because actually in the New Testament, I think, if memory serves me, there's only one place in the New Testament where this conception of the faith is referred to as such. It's almost always much more something in the realm of a form for action than a place of belief objects or propositions. And that's right there in the New Testament. And so this dynamic, boy, it seems like every time I do videos now, I got to scratch my nose. I'm turning into Zizek as we speak. The transformation is happening. It's underway. There are worse things to transform into. So this question of this practice that we have, which is deeply rooted obviously in Christianity, and perhaps you could find Brad Gregory talking about it in terms of his chapter, his teaching series course on the Reformation, this tension about what Christianity is. Is it a set of beliefs? Now, why do we talk that way? And now there's a lot of skepticism about that. And that skepticism is not only academic, that skepticism is popular. And you hear that from people all the time that, well, these things that we call beliefs, well, they're unimportant. And when I hear that, I think, well, I appreciate the point, but they're often more important than a simple dismissal of them is. So we have to kind of get it right in terms of understanding how this functions. So obviously there's Vervecky. And if you go then to Jordan Peterson, I mean, he won't even say he believes in God. And I'm not prepared to say things in any other way than I've already said them. You know, it isn't obvious what belief means. People think that what they believe is what they say they believe. I don't believe that. And I love how he uses belief right after he says that. You can't help it to say any other way. Notice the frame is on the metaphysical reality. That's modernity and our skepticism of metaphysics and modernity's comfort in epistemology rather than metaphysics. You risk when you reduce. And I'm not willing to do that. And I'm not interested in providing people with easy answers, including me. So there's a question. So, you know, that's his that's his very that's his very famous answer. But now Tim Keller. They need to be directed toward God. And what that means is what you really are is basically what you love the most. And using the word love to hear not so much just an emotion. Essentially, it's not your beliefs, at least not the beliefs you subscribe to. I love when he winces there because he knows how hard that is to say in his Christian subculture, because this is a conservative Presbyterian subculture. It's not just Presbyterian. You get Baptist in there, too. But but it's a conservative subculture that really bit down hard on the propositional truth thing and the old modernistic fundamentalist war. And so when he says this, he knows this is a challenging thing to say to this community, but he's willing to say it. Not so much just an emotion. I watch him wins. Essentially, it's not your beliefs, at least the beliefs you subscribe to that actually makes you what you are. It's what your heart trusts in what your heart loves the most. You can say I believe in God. God is this and God is this and God is this. And yet your heart is basically based in your career. We all know how that works. Your heart is actually trusting in career. Your mind is saying, no, no, no, I trust in Jesus for my salvation. I trust in Jesus for this and that and all that. But where is your heart? Jonathan Edwards, who was a great Augustinian, therefore said that if you're going to be thoroughly biblical, you must not pit knowledge and feeling against each other. That if you say, I know I should be generous with my money, but I'm just not doing it. He would say, well, there's a sense in which you know what you should do, but you're not doing it. But there's another sense in which you don't really know what you should do. Let me give you an example. And then he talks about the little girl in his church. And so we have this general skepticism that believing as such is sufficient to initiate cause or provoke a transformation. And so, in fact, that whole video by Tim Keller there is all about preaching in order to provoke a transformation. Now, I want to mention, I got it over here. Hang on. Warren's, I should have paused it. I could just pause it. You know, Warren, so when I went to Australia, Warren Mills was my host. He's the one that set up the conference. And he wrote a book. And I don't know if this book is quite available to everyone around the world or even in America, maybe in Australia. They had copies of it. But how good is the golden rule? Well, what I really like about this book is that so often Jesus' commands are posited in terms of a talk about Agent Arena situation are posited in terms of these are the things that you must do in order to qualify for entry into the kingdom of God or entry into heaven or entry into a wonderful afterlife zone and so forth. And one of the things I really like about Warren's book is that he he talks about how the golden rule is in a sense a it's something that provokes the transformation in us. When we actually start loving our enemies and paying for it, that actually begins to provoke the transformation in us. And here again, you know, not unlike not unlike the Sam Harris, Jordan Peterson sitting at the side of your bed, praying into the darkness. You know, you don't know where that answer comes from. And and so there's the there's the edge of epistemology and the and the the wonderings about metaphysics. And and so if you begin to if you begin to practice the golden rule, if you begin to live this out, you will provoke transformations. And well, you will probably get some discomfort. But things will happen in you. And and so, you know, here we have Verveki talking about Buddhism, Jordan Peterson act as if and even a Christian pastor is talking about this. Well, well, then why is this believing mode so pervasive? Well, well, I think part of it is that the limits of consciousness and language that we have and that it's such a handy way to communicate. These are aspects. These are things we say about ourselves. And as in some ways the disconnect between the rider and the elephant, the rider is pretty chatty and the rider makes things up. Well, well, these these are ways actually that we can label ourselves. And also, they also have they also have a powerful community forming aspect. Now, now, I don't know, because I don't know. See, a lot of the Buddhism that I see practiced in Northern California is American secular Buddhism, which makes it highly individualistic. It's individuals seeking transformation through a particular process. Christianity remains a highly communal activity. And part of these believing tech tags and labels we use, we use, in fact, in order to create community. And in fact, in the whole confessional age in the in the wake of the Protestant Reformation, what what happened in Europe were that these groups drew up confessions and these confessions, these believing statements became the boundary markers whereby a certain amount of assumed acceptance could be had within that community to actually give shape to the community. And that's, in fact, how these confessions operated. And you see this, you see this, in fact, with with contracts. You see this with constitutional government. You know, the fact that the United States, the fact that when they they tried the the experiment of secular government, which in the case of the United States was a grand experiment, they needed something to act as a proxy instead of God. Whereas, you know, in England, you have a state in the European countries, you had state religions and throughout the history of the world, politics and religion were the same thing. You needed something to act in a proxy instead of God. And so you drew up a document called the Constitution. And you right at the beginning of the of the Declaration of Independence, there's all these belief statements. We hold these truths to be self evident. These are belief statements that all men are created equal and endowed with by their creator with certain inalienable rights. These are all belief statements. Now, now, are these belief statements sufficient to provoke transformations? Well, I think the answer is clearly no, but they are functional within a community and they are even functional within ourselves. And if you go back to David Nassar talking to Jordan Peterson about transformations, David Nassar kind of turns around in a very gospel coalition type way says, I need to preach the gospel to myself. And what that means is that the belief is sort of a if we're going to use Harry Potter terms, sort of a horcrux or it's a way that I can take myself out of myself to compare myself to something and keep going back and forth. Okay, that's one capacity we have as human beings because it's it's very difficult to see ourselves. So we take something of ourselves or we take an idealized self or we take something and we hold it out here and we keep going back and forth. So I'm not supposed to lie. You could do this with Jordan Peterson's 12 rules for life. Here's a rule. Tell the truth or at least don't lie. Then I measure my behavior according to that. And I could say, I believe I should tell the truth or at least don't lie. Or I should do what is what is meaningful and not what is expedient. You know, a number of his rules and rules function in that way with us. So the believing mode is extremely pervasive because it's very helpful. We use our believing mode to express the source of transformation. And so when you when you see Jordan Peterson saying things like at Liberty University that well across the board, psychologists know the power of facing, you know, fully facing that which, you know, in a sense, fully facing your the adversity that is challenging you and tackle it. That that's very powerful. And that's true. But you have David Nassar saying, well, the rules need a rule giver. And so what you're doing then is you are positing, obviously, a deity or a positing a personality or a positing an author and an author who is shaping the narrative in which you're living. And I would argue that that is a tremendously powerful and popular. That is a tremendously powerful and popular. Is it a psychotechnology? We can let John Verbeke discuss that. And my list for talking to John Verbeke is getting longer and longer. So I'm sure John and I will have these conversations at some point. But that's an extremely powerful mode. And in fact, it's been practiced throughout history. Now, is it is it is it fail safe? Well, no. And in fact, it's all over the place and critics of religion can can point to its shortcomings. But at the same time, pointing to something shortcomings doesn't necessarily mean you should abandon the the you should abandon the thing itself. All right. And that's taking a fairly view from below. Look at, I'd say, classical theism. So we use the believing thing as evidence of transformation. I used to believe this. Now I believe that I used to behave this way. Now I behave this way. I used to think this was OK. Now I no longer think this is OK. And I think that is the preferred way to live. And again, all these believing language comes into play here. And we need language, desire and frustration in initiating, promoting and ensuring transformation of other loved ones and whole communities. And this is something we're going to have to get in. And so part of where this believing language gets overused is when we in fact use it as a way. I want you to believe this. Now, now here again, we face the fact that beliefs are not voluntary. We cannot just sit down and try real hard to believe in something. That's not how our beliefs are shaped. And so when we get into the question of transformation, we have to get into the question of contexts in which beliefs are shaped. Now, our contexts are powerful in terms of shaping beliefs. And a lot of people have recognized that part of the role of modern media is in contextual manipulation in order to shape beliefs. OK, because if we are if the world is presented to us in a certain way, we will derive beliefs from it. And part of the obviously kind of the spy versus spy game that happens in modern advertising is here is the world. Oh, you're just doing that to try to sell me something. Oh, cynicism comes through. I'm going to deconstruct the thing that is before me. And so then it's like, OK, you've deconstructed this. Let me construct this. And there's a there's a really cool front line that was out a number of years ago called the merchants of cool. And it showed kind of the spy versus spy game that gets played between marketing organizations and youth because they want to, in a sense, capture them when they're young. If you can get them to use windows in high school or a Chromebook or Apple, if you can get them hooked on an iPhone, they'll they'll stay iPhone devotees for 20, 30, 40 years. So get them when they're young. And this gets into this whole question of activism, education and society. If you are traveling in or out of San Francisco and you're on Route 80 by Berkeley, there's a footbridge over Route 80 on both sides of that footbridge. There are sculptures and these sculptures, I think, are so these are as telling as any Egyptian statue in Egypt. And so this communicates the culture of Berkeley. Now, it doesn't matter. And the fact that the placards are empty, it's actually the act of protest in which they have faith. Now, again, what's interesting is that this is very much process theology for social justice warriors because it is the act of protest in which they believe. And the and the the statue perfectly exemplifies this. Ryan and my conversation a few days with him mentioned the mentioned the series The Century of Self, where they talked about the fact that at the beginning of the 20th century, women didn't like smoking because they thought it was dirty. And so Sigmund Freud's nephew worked with the tobacco industry on a little experiment to see if they could subtly communicate to women that smoking made them powerful. And before you knew it, you had women smoking all over the place. So so that is, in fact, a transformation. And that transformation is, in fact, provoked by a commercial interest. And part of what the Century of Self video is about is the use of propaganda and the use of public relations in order to, in the words of the in the words of the documentary, pacify these mass populations. And now are they pacifying them for their own good? Well, it's debatable. People are formable. And we know this. There is a vision for how we want people to act. Remember, there's always process and there's always destination. So there's a vision for how we want people to act. We, you know, if you're in charge, you pretty much do want sheeple. There are tools that are employed to shape the world. And we could call all of these transformations. And this stuff is practiced all the time. And what we're seeing now with the technological disruption of mass media is the hot competition for truth out there. And I don't think there's any I don't think it's a coincidence that we have our post truth president while we're having this this multiplication of gatekeepers. I just going to put this in hang out. Some of you might remember Alistair Alistair Roberts in November, November 8, 2016. He had a tremendously prescient blog post in which he talks about super peers and and how, you know, churches, churches no longer have in a sense the trust or the ear of the people in the pew. Who has those who has their ear these super peers and you can see this in politics as well. AOC is in a sense a super peer. Donald Trump is a super peer. And by using Twitter, Donald Trump communicates to his faithful and they will believe him no matter what any other expert says. This is this is very much part of the current landscape. I've lost control of my program. I've regained control. And so where whereas we're we're struggling to figure out these transformations and we're especially struggling to figure them out on an individual level. We're recognizing that these transformations are happening all around us at an accelerating pace. And and we're we're deeply disturbed as individuals and as small communities as factions as networks as families at the at the power of certain groups to transform us and our inability to actually have transformative power over ourselves. But now remember that there's both process and here we're talking process but there's outcomes or ends or goals or tell us now. Now one of the things that that you see is in fact is that the As I've been continuing to kind of piece together Jordan Peterson's program is is he he looks to Piaget as that which might orient us in this equilibrated state. You see a better transformation is not the result of tyranny. A better transformation is contagious towards others. A better transformation is eternal. It goes backwards and forwards in time. Now now I could talk a lot about how it goes backwards because that's not self evident. But in fact that's exactly what happens. How it and if you look at verveky and meaning and the question of of meaning versus events part of the way that transformations can move backward in time is that the transformation is not the result of tyranny. And because of other events and because of other transformations the event has a different meaning. One of the best examples of this that I know is found in the Book of Genesis you could all this is set in the books of Genesis because it is part of the another work they've done called Plot for escorting so the rest of the real feeling involved in this event is the way it comes along we're not saying what happened in the book as a result of that is the event that we have to reflect the current events and the other transformations, the event has a different meaning. And one of the best examples of this that I know is found in the book of Genesis. You get all the way to the end of the book of Genesis where Joseph's brothers were, they first beat him up and then they were gonna kill him and then they sold him into slavery and all of this stuff happened and he eventually humiliated them and restored them and treated them kindly and then when Jacob dies they're terrified that he's now going to use the power he has as the number two man in Egypt to make their life miserable just like they made his and he says you meant it for evil, meaning God meant it for good and so what Joseph does in that moment is via words applies a transformation that actually transforms events that have already happened in the past. The events themselves don't change but their meaning changed by virtue of Joseph's words and so actually transformations can happen and so what I really like about Peterson's, oh no, it's here I messed it up again, there we go, what I really liked about what I really like about Peterson's use of Piaget is is how this works. Now here's a November 2016 video of Jordan with a not so not so not so cleaned up kitchen which I think is a fun video. So I would say to wish on a star is to aim at the highest good and the question then is well what what is the good? Well we can answer that in two ways we could say that the good is the opposite of evil and I can tell you what evil is. Evil is the conscious desire to produce suffering where suffering is not necessary and so if you read about what happened in the Nazi concentration camp I'm not sure his definition of evil is fully satisfactory but let's let him continue. Camps for example or in the in the Russian concentration camps during the Soviet time of the Soviet Union you get a good flavor for what constitutes evil and evil is the desire to exploit the vulnerability of other people to self-consciously exploit the vulnerability of other people and to elevate their suffering beyond their or anyone's ability to tolerate and so the good is the opposite of that whatever the opposite of that is the good is harder to get a handle on but here's one hint and I got this from reading Jean Piaget partly who's a developmental psychologist and Piaget talked about the equilibrated state and an equilibrated state is like a game that children play where every child wants to play the game you have a little social group and that's the children's play group and and you have the individuals within it those are the individual children and the structure is the game and it's a good game if everyone wants to play it and and Piaget noted that a game like that will outperform a game that people have to be tyrannized to play because it doesn't entail it doesn't require any enforcement cost and so I've sort of developed the idea of an ill-equilibrated state to think that if if you're aiming at the good then you want what's good for you and I mean good care of yourself and we're good to yourself who are treating yourself like someone you love that was good for you in a way that would also be good for your family and then it would be good for you and your family in a way that was also good for society and then it would be good for you and your family and society in a way that would be good for the world and then it would be good now and it would be good next week and the week after and a year from now and as long into the future as you can see so the good is something that's equilibrated across multiple levels of being in multiple timeframes simultaneously and it isn't necessarily that you know what that is going to be at any given moment but you can orient yourself so that's the state that you want to exist in and I can tell you as far as I can tell when you exist in that state even moment by moment your life is imbued with a sense of meaning and that sense of meaning can help you transcend suffering the philosopher Nietzsche said he who has a why can bear any how he who has a why can bear any how and so Nietzsche's idea was that if there was purpose in your life of sufficient grandeur that not only could the suffering in life be accepted but maybe could even be appreciated like it could be that you're willing to bear the burden of being because of the exciting things that you can do with being the things you can build and the things that you can bring about and that might be the highest imaginable state of being and that's that's a form of paradise but it's not a paradise that you attain by transforming others it's a paradise that you attain by transforming yourself yes but ideally it in fact gets contagious and it does transform others and and this is this is the question of when transformations hop and now there are I really like this idea and I think this idea is is very helpful I think I think there are some limitations to it but but it is it is a very powerful idea and one that I think is super helpful and and so what you do is you look for a better transformation that is now the result of tyranny a better transformation is contagious towards others a better transformation is eternal it goes backwards and forwards in time and look at us look at stability endurance as confirmation signs this is one of the things that I see often that that that inherently bad ideas are unstable now it's it's also the case because of how we are as human beings we have difficulty holding on to good things but in most of those in most of those cases the thing the good thing itself isn't that which is unstable and what I've seen with with bad ideas and bad little sub personalities bad principalities and powers floating around in the culture is that they are inherently unstable and they they pretty quickly bring misery to the people who adopt them and attempt to promote them because they just can't they just they just run against a grain of reality too much now we're gonna have to come to terms with the word spiritual and I've already done a word that fudge on spiritual but I've by no means done coming to terms with this word because this word if if you if you start to listen for it and any me just saying it for some of you will make you start to listen for it when you when you listen for that word pay very care pay very careful attention to what people are meaning by it the best presumed meaning of this term in modern you seems to be that which is unseen and yet moves me or the world and in fact I'd say this is nearly Jesus definition in John 8 now I'm sorry John 3 now John 3 is a very famous story in the Bible now a certain man and put the Greek down below for those of you who know Greek and want to look at it now a certain man a Pharisee named Nicodemus who's a member of the Jewish ruling council came to Jesus at night and said to him reading out of the New English the NEB said to him rabbi we know that you are a teacher who has come from God now again now pay attention to all of this language because obviously there's plenty of metaphysics and and and religion built into the language who has come from God for no one could perform the miraculous signs and other signs that you that you do unless he is from God I mean you just got a little picture into his worldview a worldview that some of you will simply say well that's a archaic outmoded superstitious worldview others will say no that's really the way the world is just so just leave it there you don't have to react to it one way or another Jesus replied I tell you the solemn truth unless a person is born from above now there's a wordplay here that goes on in the Gospel of John and the Gospel of John is full of these kinds of of dual miss intentional misunderstanding word plays it happens in a variety of places in the Gospel of John and this is one of the more famous ones because the Greek is actually ambiguous it can mean either born from above or born again unless a person is born from above he cannot enter the kingdom of God so Jesus means it one way and he very much means an axial so you have heaven above and earth below okay and the tension between them Jesus and the Gospel of John is very much the man who comes down from heaven and we are to believe in so that's we're to believe in him and so that's that's the language that's used in that but now part of the difficulty that you have in English is that most English translations will say believe in him you can also translate pistis in Greek in terms of you can have faith in him and when I say it in that way in English suddenly things start to change you might even be able to say you can trust in him and that now relocates it very much into the realm of action that's not what I want to point out in this passage born from above he cannot enter the kingdom of God Nicodemus said to him how can a man be born when he is old he cannot enter his mother's womb and be born a second time can he now it's interesting here that Nicodemus set takes the other way this gets into some very interesting things about about the Bible with respect to now where Jesus and Nicodemus talking in Greek or in Aramaic and does that wordplay actually work in Aramaic so lots of so much fun stuff in biblical studies to ponder on anyway Jesus answered I tell you the solemn truth unless a person is born of water and spirit you spend a lot of time trying to figure out what Jesus means by that and also pay attention to the typography of the English edition because when you have obviously when you have a capital LAR a capital S in spirit a Christian Bible is meaning something else and there's no capital S in Greek and so again this is all what editors and scholars try to put together to make the text intelligible for people and if you like this kind of thing you can watch my Sunday school class because I spent a lot of time in my Sunday school class talking about this kind of stuff and you cannot find the link to that below but anyway I tell you the solemn truth unless a person is born of water and spirit he cannot enter the kingdom of God what is born of flesh is flesh that's sarks what is born of spirit is spirit but what is that and then he says this do not be amazed by what I say to you I'm already amazed you must be born from above oh how would I be born from above that's a transformation that Jesus is pretty clearly talking about to be born to be born again born from above that's it that's all a transformation you need you need to undergo a transformation Jesus is saying the wind blows wherever it will okay well now right away you have the relationship between if you if you see three verse eight if you look down at the Greek you'll notice Pnuma I'm gonna have to use the right down here and if you looked at well let's see three six which is up here there it is Pnumatos Pnuma so verse eight the English here is translating as wind the Greek is Pnuma it's the same word that he's just used for spirit now again you have to do this with when you're doing translation but it's really helpful to see that well Jesus is using the same word so the spirit you could so you could you could read it the other way the spirit blows wherever it wills and you hear the sound it makes but do not know where it comes from or where it is going you can also say the wind so you have this wind and spirit and and so so it is with anyone who is born saying you could do it anyone who is born of the wind but notice again the English translation and this again this is legitimate I'm not saying it's illegitimate but you have a capital S spirit so the the translators are doing some interpreting for you you could you could say the Spirit blows wherever it will and you hear the sound it makes but you don't know where it comes from or where it's going so it is with everyone is born of the Spirit you could say the wind blows wherever it wills and you hear the sound that it makes but you do not know where it comes from or where it's going so it's everyone who's born of the wind listen you what do you mean born of the wind well Jesus is Jesus is talking about both spirit and when you listen to how people use this spirit is this animating presence and one of the ways that you know is if you, if spirit is in you, well, you can do a Bible Word study on this in terms of the Old and New Testament, how God, what God gives his spirit. In the story of Genesis, he makes a man out of the dust of the ground and he blows into it and Adam becomes, Ha-adam, becomes a living Nephesh. That's the language of, you know, it's in Hebrew. You can read the Greek translation, see how the first century Alexandrian scholars tried to render the Hebrew into the Greek and what that meant for their world. But here you have spirit. Spirit is that which animates and we don't know what it is. We just know it's something and we know it's something other than ourselves and this, this of course gets into endless, endless theological things. But, but now this is where I get into my, my favorite Bret Weinstein video where he most clearly invokes what I call the circular me because I am the assassin robot but I can transcend myself. What that means is that I can suddenly take a step back from me and so, so watch this conversation and listen carefully and ask yourself, well, what is the source of me and what is the source of all of this stuff? So let's, let's play some of it. Involves an enlightenment. You know, and you, you point to it, I think you called it the psychonaut route into that sort of unity. Involves an enlightenment. Okay, that's a transformation, all right. An awakening to a deep truth. And just follow the language. An awakening to a deep truth. So there's this, this truth out there or maybe it's in here or it's somewhere and suddenly you're awakened to it. It involves a transformation and in fact you might even say a believing in transformation with respect to my relationship between myself and that truth. The analogy I use is this. If you discovered that you were a robot and that you were sent to, I don't know, assassinate some person who was innocent, if you discovered that that was the explanation for you, you would reject your program, right? See now right there, you would reject your program. So in other words, in the same moment you are saying I am a programmed creature and I am a thing that can evaluate the program as it's running. Evaluate in what terms? Evaluate in terms that are alien to the programming of the robot. Where does that, where does that added evaluative tool come from? Is it from within the robot? Because if it's from within the program then it's just a subset of the overall programming. So you have this, in a sense, you're talking in a circle about what me is and when you talk this way you undermine the entire programmed me and you in a sense have a me from above, a me that is born from above. Well where is from above that this me is coming from? Who as the robot that had been given decency in order to get by everybody so you could commit your assassination would say actually. So you so decency had just been something that you had been given in order to manipulate others but now suddenly this decency is going to occur to you that maybe I should be decent and just instead of just looking decent in order to get my way because what I really want and desire is for my spelling bee, which we'll go into in a minute, to trump everybody else's spelling bee. I prioritize the values and I reject the mission that I've been sent on. That's who we are. We are that robot. We are on a genetic mission that is absolutely unacceptable. How would you just succinctly define that genetic mission? That genetic mission is just propagation at all cost. Propagation of your particular genetic spellings and here's the key. See here's the key. Oh here's the key. The robot doesn't even know his mission. The robot is blind to his own mission. So now not only are we supposed to have word from above to critique the mission of the robot and this is supposed to come from within the robot, the robot himself is not aware of the mission that he's on. So where do we get the knowledge in order to put this whole picture together? It doesn't work. It's a little subtle but if you and I have different spellings for a particular, let's say a respiratory enzyme and let's say that respiratory enzyme functions better in you than in me, it's 10 more efficient. My respiratory enzyme still wants your respiratory enzyme to go extinct because it doesn't care about the function. It cares that that spelling. So in other words, the subroutines of the robot are actually pulling the strings on the robot and this robot's going to self-transcend. is advanced and your spelling is in conflict with my spelling. As long as yours is around, there will be fewer copies of mine. So our genomes are actually interested. I mean, if I can just be clear about it, the mind fuck of the whole thing is that the entire evolutionary story is the cosmic spelling bee and it ends in genocide. Once you realize that that's what you are, that you're built to advance your genetic spellings into the future generations irrespective of what they spell and that under circumstances like these, we can afford to be decent to each other but if things were different, one of us would be putting the other in a gas chamber. No way. I want no part of that and neither do you. Who is I that want no part of this? Aren't you the robot? Isn't this your programming? Isn't this what you're determined to be? And maybe in this moment when everything is wonderful and there's plenty of food around and we have this thought, won't we revoke to the other thought when we get there? And so, well, if you're going to somehow grow a program to resist your other program, where does that come from? So when people realize that that's really what they are, they are built to be nice when it makes sense to be nice and they're built to be genocidal in circumstances when genocidal. And doesn't that mean that what you're doing to me now is in fact following that program and you're just nice to me because, you know, if everything crumbles that, well, then you're going to knife me and you say, well, I surely won't knife you then. Well, isn't that part of the, you know, that's what all the con men say. They're not upfront with it. So isn't this itself a trick of the assassin robot? Side is the thing. Then the question is, well, all the things that you actually value, how consistent are they with being that robot on that mission? So it sounds like you are sort of saying at our root, we are nasty, British and short, right? That the old selfish gene kind of thing compared to some Ascensionist or triumphalist clearly is very prevalent in the self-help popular psychology space. We are on the frothy edge of realizing our true natures as, you know. Ah, we're the frothy edge of realizing our true nature. Well, where does true come from? Does it come from above? Notice how he's pointing up when he's doing this and all of our languages oriented that way. Ah, did you hear what he said? Clearly, it's very prevalent in the self-help popular psychology space. We are on the frothy edge of realizing our true natures as, you know, spiritual beings, our true natures as spiritual beings. What does that mean? But what all is built into that word spiritual? Yeah, blah, blah, blah, blah is right. Something you don't hold out hope for. You feel like at root, we are just self-oriented. And you can hear the actual age geography at root, we are self, but it's the spirit from above. This is John three. Robot programs is what's, what's, what's our shot at redemption? Do we have one? It's easier. It's easier than you would think, because the fact is, I'm telling you, we are that robot on that mission. Once you know that that's your mission, you could just reject it. Right? I'm not, I'm not putting anybody in a gas chamber. I just won't do it. Right? I don't care about the on that mission. Once you know that that's your mission, you could just reject it. Then why is the world so crappy? Then why are people so lame? Because they don't know they're on this mission. And once they know they're on this mission, then suddenly they'll be generous. And, and, and I hear this, and I think, dude, you were horribly treated by your own school that you loved. And you have, you maintain this view of human nature that once someone says, oh, by nature, you're, you're, you're a selfish robot, but you don't have to be that. Then suddenly they'll be magnanimous and they won't fight like crazy for the ideology that they believe comes from above. And you think religious people are naive? Right? I'm not, I'm not putting anybody in a gas chamber. I just won't do it. Right? I don't care about the genetic spellings at all. And I really don't. If I discovered that my sons were switched in the hospital at birth and they were not actually related to me, it doesn't change my relationship to them. It doesn't. Really? Then what do you say to all of these kids who are going back and finding the, the, the places where they got their spelling bees from? This, this blows my mind because he goes on programs and talks about all of the implications and ramifications of all of this evolutionary biology and how we're all playing it out. And then, and then seemingly the solution is, well, once we recognize that this is all being played out from below, then we can somehow resist it. And I think, I don't see people like that at all. I, I, and your, your assassin robot business isn't, that's not in conflict with my Augustinian, with my Augustinian anthropology. It's, it's the naive imagination that people are somehow want the best for things. Well, he's right. They want the best for things when the best is easy to come by and it's cheap. When it gets costly, well, then it's, it's, we're usually all out for number one. That's how we are. It doesn't affect whether I love them. I don't love them because they're genetic spellings. So my point is we are actually, evolution screwed up. It handed us the tools to recognize. How do you evaluate evolution? On, on what Archimedean point do you see the world and can you move it with a lever? That we don't have to value the game that it is playing and that we can now repurpose the hardware to something that's actually worthwhile. Worthwhile? How do you judge that which is worthwhile? And how liberating is that? I mean, who wants to walk around with bigotry? Yeah. Oh, bigotry is somehow something we can easily opt out of? And why has it been around for so long? I mean, it's funny because I mean, that was just in my next book, there's going to be a section evolution is a moral and, and, and, and there's, and the sooner you realize that that you realize, Oh, we are being pushed and prodded into a whole lot of outcomes that create tons of pain in our psychosocial frameworks, our value sets, that are a hundred percent. So then you should ask where these value sets came from that are so anti-evolutionary. Wins on the evolutionary level. Yeah. And tragic for us. Tragic. How are you making these evaluations? Right. And the, the crazy thing is freedom from that is as close as just recognizing what it is and then saying, well, I mean, I have a particular analogy. I like, he's obviously never been a marriage counselor. Cause if you sit in a room and you talk to two people who pledged undying love to each other, and then they're fighting like cats and dogs, go watch the movie war of the roses. This is how we are. There's this point at which a pilot, the pilot's name was Sully, I guess, captain Sully who landed the plan on the Hudson is a point at which the birds have struck the engines and he needs to land the plane on the water. And there's a good chance that he's going to kill everybody on board, but their best chance that they're going to live is him. Right. And he says, my aircraft, which is what you say when you take it away from that really what we're going to do, because usually that's the start of a lot of wars, my toy, my land, my money, my wife, my rights, my, the autopilot, right? You take responsibility for it. And the basic point is we need to look at evolution and we need to say my aircraft, right? It's that simple. That simple. Ah, forgive me for being dubious. Where is the knowledge, the morality, the source of enlightenment that allows the robot to reject his mission? We can imagine the story. We appropriate the identity in the story. We engage in internal and external war. Isn't this another spelling bee? If your first story is to believe is to be believed, I will not put anyone in a gas chamber. Well, now you've got a dogman. You're going to double down on it. The reason we put people in gas chambers is not simply religious. If you, if your definition of religion is made up stories that we believe, we put people in gas chambers because we see ourselves and our loved ones threatened by others. And usually some story. And so for Nazism, it was the Jews were a direct threat to the, the ascension of the master race. And in the Soviet Union, it was political dissenters are a direct threat to the emerging, the emergence of the, of the great, of the great egalitarian state that will bring utopia upon the world. We put people who are threatening to our ideas, these same types of ideas with which we're going to transcend our robot programming. And so one might say, well, have we really even transcended the programming? What is the source of your dogma? There's some pretty powerful implicit metaphysics assumed here. If my sons were switched at birth, a host of kids looking for the source of their spellings seem to care. Does the story verse Trump the spelling bee? That's the battle that's at heart here. Then how determinative was the spelling bee in the first place? Someone who's made a career out of telling people what the spelling Billy is like and therefore explaining and illuminating the process of human community. So if, if it's really that easy to transcend, if you go on, let's say a podcast or something and say, this is our program and that explains what we do. And someone could say, no, I decided to, all I have to do is look at my programming, realizing it's that way and say, nope, I don't want to do my programming. And I think you've certainly never seen a psychologist because any psychologist will say along with the apostle Paul, I'm way more complicated than that. Difference between my head and my heart can be a long ways sometimes. I thought our spelling bee gets played out in the story verse. That's in fact the heart of the assertion that evolutionary biology can tell us why we are living the way we're living. And then you have to ask from what source of morality, which seems so self-evident and obvious, do you actually make the presumption about what the brave new world should be? And here we have, in a sense, the conflict of the two languages is his language, the completely apart from anything supernatural, any different from Nasser's language. Really, Nasser is saying it's Jesus that lives in me. Brett's saying I can just, I can just deny my programming. They're both making assertions about themselves. One's positing a third person character. Brett's just thinking he himself is a third person character. He needs to transcend his programming. So transformations, is it really just talking to yourself? There are processes. Do we know who all the agents are? There are desired outcomes. On what basis can we know the good? Is it really self-evident? Now again, let's see, I bring this book in fairly regularly. Christian Smith did a survey of American youth in the 90s to find out what their real religious and spiritual lives of American teenagers were. And what he discovered was that in many ways, the religious upbringing that they were indoctrinated into, whether that be Protestant, Catholic, Orthodox, Muslim, secular, didn't matter. They all were formed into a whole bunch of different beliefs. One of these beliefs was morality is self-evident. And you know, when I listen to a lot of these people talk, that's exactly what I hear. So is it really self-evident or was a transformation done in your culture that you are now subjected to? And you think I can just change my programming just like that. And I think that is astoundingly naive. And in terms of working with people, even just in terms of knowing myself, I find it horribly difficult to change my own programming. That's what it means to be a human being. Psychologists have known this for years. And so the whole game is, okay, how can I have power over myself to transform my programming? But then the real game is what direction would actually be good? And how could we know it's good? And I think you actually need to have, I don't think you can play that game without some presuppositions about metaphysics. I think it finally comes down to things that deep. And modernity is in real trouble when it comes to that. Good for me now, good for all of us. For how long? Are there winners and losers? I don't know, am I doing on time? Not too much. Okay, good. So I think we have, we've got a tenuous kind of agreement that there might be some kind of utility, that that utility might be morally questionable sometimes, but. So now we're going to preside over the beliefs of traditional religions. That there is some reason that people would resort to a fundamental, simple interpretation, because as they depart from that interpretation, things get more difficult and it creates some kind of disadvantage. Well, part of the problem with that would be that as you move away from the text, you fractionate the moral belief system and you end up with a nihilistic situation. So as you move away from dogmatism, you move towards the parallel danger, which is moral relativism and nihilism. And so hopefully you can find some balance. In other words, you're trying to orient yourself in the world and you can see this towards the end of my conversation with Colin last night. The way religious texts work are they act as orientation devices for our morality and to look at not only the processes of transformation, but also the desired outcomes of transformation. So let me ask you. No, no, I want to ask you a question. Oh, yes. Okay. And also what time do we actually stop this part? We have, I just missed. There's no objective reality to time. So here's my question for you is, if we agree that there is some way in which religious texts carry some kind of value because they allow people to figure out how to navigate their lives in ways that might reduce suffering, reduce the complexity of the choices that they have to make, presumably, does Sam agree with that? You will agree that that would be consistent with an evolutionary interpretation that the fact that the stories themselves are functional would provide an advantage to those who were deploying them. Yes. So here's the problem. Isn't it then also true that those stories are responsive to past environments? And so the claim that these things. Now, what's interesting about Brett here is isn't the claims that he just made in the previous video, wouldn't they under the same rules also be responsive to the environment that he's in now? The difficulty that you face is that you are a captive of your moment. And one of the things that religious texts offer you are windows from crowdsource, from other worlds, other places, other times, genetically same creature fundamentally. Our genetics haven't changed that much. Whereas our story verse has continued to change, the contexts have changed. And the basis of his argument here is that, well, different contexts, that's going to impact morality. And so the difficulty he has in the simplistic assertions that he made in the previous video are that you can just decide because morality is self-evident. I would argue it's only self-evident if you're living in a little bubble and it's self-evident to the little community around you. Might be timeless would be suspect. And the fact you would expect a spectrum of durability. Some stories would be right in a brief moment. And yes, okay. All that's true. All that's true. So far, so good. Well, so far, so good. This is actually, I think, quite excellent then because what we have is a recognition that there is something to these belief systems that has to do with practical realities in the past. And we also have an acknowledgement that we cannot trust in these things based on simple faith because even if they... Cannot trust in these things based on simple faith. What on earth do you mean by that? Now, the argument that I basically laid out for Colin last night is essentially this. Religions do modulate their dogmas and their practices over time. You see that consistently. And in fact, what you see with religious groups are a spectrum of modulation over whole different ranges and settings. And this has been, in a sense, part of the interesting nature of the separation of church and state in the West, originally in the United States, because it in fact allowed multiple experiments to modulate their religions over time. You'll find churches that affirm gay marriage. You find churches that resist gay marriage. You find churches that affirm women in leadership in the church. You find churches that resist it. You find churches that say alcohol use is okay. You find churches that say alcohol use is not okay. You find churches that say sex between any two people or any number of people is fine. We won't police your sexual life. You find churches that are policing sexual life. In fact, you'll find churches all over the map. And that's just in the United States. You go all over the world. You find them all over the world in many different ways. And then you find other religions doing similar things. They have a system built into keeping track of the changes and doing contextual evaluations. Churches and the people within them are always thinking about these things and processing these things. Divine inspiration is obviously a function of a hierarchy. And so even though you have all of these churches that are saying, well, the Bible is the word of God, and Sam Harris will come and attack it and say, well, the plurality shows that it's corrupt. And I'd say, no, it's not a bug. It's a function. And in fact, what's happening in terms of these functions is that they are working out all of the relationship between the set text and the context around. And that's happening constantly in terms of conversation and discussion and action and practice. In fact, all of the adaptations that when I listen to these guys say, well, religion should have, I would say they actually do have it. But maybe none of the three of you on the stage know enough about religion to recognize this is actually always going on. And in my conversation with Colin last night, we talked about stoning gay people. When's the last time a person got stoned in the United States for being gay in a church? I mean, even Westboro Baptist, who makes more noise on that front than anybody else, they don't do it. Why? Because of the law. Well, good thing. So, you know, you've actually got all of these things being modulated. And in fact, often when I listen to people talk about religion, their understanding about how the Bible actually works within religious context is itself not so simple. And in fact, churches have multiple layers of interpretations, confessions, practices, traditions that modulate all of these things. We understand these texts in the light of these other texts. These texts in the Old Testament are read in the light of the New Testament. And all of this theology has built up, which in fact, gives shape to all of this stuff going on today and practices and procedures and all of that going on. Belief language has its limitations and in fact, religious people are highly aware of those limitations. It's not itself sufficient to provoke transportations. And preachers know this, and you've basically heard Tim Keller say it. But it is helpful in marking and tracking individual and communal transformations in the light of all of these questions that were actually brought up in the Peterson Sam Harris conversations. In other words, because people are tagging themselves with respect to beliefs, even though they aren't actually living them out or fully practicing them, which I think many of us will agree with, it's actually helpful to know how the belief propositional level actually functions with the action level and what kind of psychotechnologies actually connect them. And what you heard from David Nasser was exactly that. He said, well, here's the Bible, and all of that is, in fact, the whole interpretive framework that he had of the Bible. And he looks at himself and he compares himself to that interpretive framework. And there's many, many aspects of human life that, in fact, might not be addressed directly in the Bible, but are added on with traditional and interpretive and confessional layers that actually connect the person to the Bible. And you might say, well, why don't you just get rid of the Bible? Well, actually, what the Bible offers you is a stable text or a baseline for tracking all of this over time and in a variety of cultures. So, for example, if you visit churches, the kind of the likes of which I work at in the Dominican Republic, you go there, you'll notice that all of the, let's see if I have a hat and I don't, you'll notice that all the women are wearing hats because of a particular text in the New Testament talks about women having their head covered. And you'll notice that the men are not wearing shorts, but they're wearing long pants and the women are not wearing slacks. And so, you know, these conversations are always going on and religious communities are, in fact, always working through these things together. And what the Bible actually provides is this baseline, this authoritative baseline. What is the assertion of divine inspiration, but obviously it has meaning within this whole story verse picture of how we live. And we already saw that, at least for Brett Weinstein, the story verse can trump the spelling bee, the genetic spelling bee, just like this. So says he. So, you know, actually, when I listen to these people who don't have a lot of experience with religion, talking about religion, I say, you're not really, you want to be fact based and evidence based. Look at what actually happens in religious communities. And they actually adapt to most of the concerns that you're saying here. Contemporary 21st century Christians in North America do not actually live like early iron age Hebrews in the ancient Near East lived. Why not? Because they're not there. And in fact, religious communities are always dealing with these contacts. But and here's the addition, religious communities are being informed consciously by whole sets of contexts that someone who is just living naively in their current bubble is not consciously and awarely and self-awarely engaging with. And that leads to some of the really naive assumptions about morality that we see practiced in American culture. That people who are actually religious and paying attention, and many people in church aren't, but people who are actually connected with religious institutions can actually have conversations that are informed by far more contexts over history than even some groups that are say having a so-called scientific conversation here that has to deal with morality. Because implicit in many of those scientific conversations are presuppositions and assertions about the good that are simply brought in and picked up naively from their context. So now you want to transform just like this. I don't think so. The process is considerable and the outcomes are what you define as the good even more difficult. So I'm going to keep talking about transformations and micro transformations because I think actually we can we can do a lot of work thinking about how day-to-day decisions and the way that we of desire impact our lives. And those might we might call micro transformations. Again I'm playing with language here and I'm looking for language. Augustine is obviously a big person in this. The adaptive advantage of living with an active metaphysic, I think, and this is a theme that I bring up in other of my videos, there's a ceiling in the iron box of secularism and it incarnates hell in the attempt to secure heaven. And this is in fact Jordan Peterson's great caution about what happened in Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. There have been many attempts at trying this stuff. Read history, pay attention to religious traditions, look at philosophy, educate yourself, ask yourself what are my assumptions about the good? That's actually at heart of the Bret Weinstein assassin robot moment. It's just that I think his little moment is far too naive. What in fact is the good? How can we know it? Where can we learn about it from? Should we give our ancestors passing through time and a whole realm of conditions that are very alien to us, especially given the abnormal affluence and security that we now enjoy, maybe we should learn from them. They're not controlling us. They're not governing us, especially if you buy Bret Weinstein's idea that even our genetic spelling bee isn't governing us. And I think I'm just blown away by him making that statement because it seems to me, no, the spelling bee, it gets its say. And that's in fact why as John Vervecki continues to move through the philosophy and religion, I'll be interested to hear what he has to say about the cognitive science. But all of that is terribly difficult. Well, I'm about out of time and an hour and 20 minutes, not too bad. Thanks for watching. Leave a comment.