https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=9ie5y0eet7w

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm trying something different. I, as is my case, I finish up a bunch of work and then I sit down and I think, should I make a video or should I do a live stream? And then suddenly everybody's texting me on my watch. I got to shut that off. And I thought, you know, really what I like to do, what would be ideal is if I can sort of live stream my thoughts and then maybe hop into the Discord for some real time feedback from people. Rick and I were talking about talking about the Friday Q&A. I don't know that it'll be any different tomorrow. We started 11 o'clock Sacramento time. Used to be 10 o'clock, but Rick has a day job. So 11 o'clock works better for him with his day job schedule. But the, you know, we were participating in the Verveki question and answer. And I talked about the fact that I really like part of the reason I like the these Thief in the Night live streams is because I can see the faces of other people. People can push back on me. You know, Jacob, Jacob is always good at pushing back. And a bunch of people noted in the last one that while there was a lot more conflict in this and conflict, but you know, it's good to test each other. And it's good to challenge each other. And, you know, part of that is interesting always. And part of it is helpful because a lot of YouTube and a lot of videos are sort of a gentic promotion. Here's the idea. I want you to believe or enact on or do etc. or sales of an idea or an ideology or a religion or a way of life. I've been making a lot of videos lately that are sort of thinky talky about abstract ideas and they're important, you know, questions about evangelical leadership or establishment Protestantism and sort of default implicit religions in America. I've been having most of the conversations I've been doing lately have been randos conversations that are not for publication. And usually the randos conversations that are not for publication are because it's absolutely right that not everybody needs their personal story told on YouTube. Or there are there are reasons why people want to stay private. But I do enough of these thinky talky theoretical videos and sort of the pastor in me begins to feel a little anxious that I'm not talking to I'm not I'm not I don't want to use that word authentic after all the abuse I've been putting into over the last few videos, but we're not we're not we're not talking belly to belly heart to heart. And we need to and we need those spaces and those spaces are terribly hard to find. You know all the all this theory is often for people who aren't feeling a lot of felt need neediness, you know, they're sort of settled in and where they're at right now and they're happy with it and they're happy with their choices and they're happy with their practices or lack of practices that they're happy with their ideas. And so they sort of wander out there into the into the marketplace slash battlefield of theoretical combat and and and test their ideas and all that is fun and fine and cool and I enjoy it. But I know for so many people they just they want a space to process this stuff and I haven't figured out you know what I haven't really restarted the local meetup since COVID and I wrestle with that every day. I got to start this thing. But how to how to how to I mean sometimes it's it's just great together with James and Rick and Mike and Joey and you know all the and Tyler and all the local guys and just have a good time together as friends. That's totally cool. That's not what I that's not what I long for in terms of what I want the church to be able to become and I'm never quite sure how. Mega churches have been working at this in lots of different ways and often it happens in small groups and that's good. But part of the part of the reason that YouTube both works in terms of well you're sort of having a sense of of a personal relationship with me right now, especially now that I'm doing this live. But in another way, I can't always wrestle with this. I can't reciprocate there. I've got a whole list of discord messages that I haven't responded to and sometimes I open I open email and it's like, oh, I don't know. I don't know how many people I can care for. Because I've already got people I care for and caring is a limited quantity. Yet another part of me knows that each of you out there is worthy of care and love and concern and you know, it's for that reason that we have churches because the ideal is that each of us will have a space where there's a degree of concern and concern. There's a degree of historical wisdom and community knowledge and and all all of these levels of community so that everybody has a niche. Everybody is cared for. Everybody hopefully has a pastor every and and I know that that's by no means the case and and what we currently have in the world is is by no means ideal. But that's. We all we all need. I'll get on to some of the other slides that I made. You know, there's there's so many questions about church. There's so many different experiences and reflections on living with church and whatever version of Christianity you are exposed to or pursued. One of the conversations I had. There's a chance she might release it. I don't know. It's still a question. There's a chance she might release it. I don't know. It's totally fine either way. If if she knows who I'm talking about, but. I have these pastoral conversations and you know, people of course open up to me and in some ways people online do so. I think partly because it's a little safer. Because through this Internet, I'm not all in your other relationships. It's just me and you in the zoom room. And if I say something you don't like, it's like shut zoom unsubscribe block VanderKlay on Twitter. You can't erase me from your world because I'm connected to you through this Internet thing. And so it's it's it's all at your discretion. And and and meat space in real life isn't like that. Family isn't like that. Local church isn't like that. People ghost local churches all the time. And after after Kovac, there was a great ghosting. It's like, well, it'd be be sort of uncomfortable to get out of my local church. Well, during COVID, you know, I've I've I've at least got some plausibility reason to not go even if it's open and to and to wear a mask and to hide myself and to and so I can sort of just kind of slip away and then mega churches are a big are a big part of that. You know, the conversation that I had with trip and Jim Wellman that comes up fairly often in in the randos, especially the private church. And I knew it would and I should probably contact trip and and James and have another conversation with them. And I love that conversation, that conversation. James and trip, they were both so honest and transparent and and reasoned. And and it was just it was just sort of a it was just sort of a dear John podcast. No, Vixen, I'm not leaving. I'm not going anywhere. Can't leave Vixen Dixon. She's our queen. No, I'm just I'm just kind of putting my heart out on my sleeve because because I you know, I I feel it and. There's just so many lost sheep out there. And seem to be so few shepherds. You know, I come in today and Billy's sitting against the wall. How's it going, Billy? Oh, maybe if you give me some bleach and some brush, I can I can I can scrub away the the burn marks on the church left by there's this other homeless homeless guy. I call the fire bug because he's always lighting fires on the church. He's going to burn it down with a fire. As is often happened, Billy, you know, if you're kind to someone, especially if it's a homeless person, you'll eventually build a relationship and and then, you know, well, pastor, I'm going to keep the I'm going to keep the fire bug away. OK, Billy. So because he burns down the church, he burns down your home, too. I was listening to Joe Rogan podcast today with I don't think it was today's I think it was a few days ago, but with Schellenberger, I guess he's running for governor of California. That should be interesting. But just talk about fentanyl drug abuse and, you know, meth drug abuse and Joe Rogan, Joe Rogan talking about, oh, it must just be people who, you know, who have who have horrible lives or horrible things happen to them. It's like, no, there's a lot of really normal people. That get bound up in addiction at various levels. And Schellenberger was talking about how there's a lot of people who are using a lot of substances. You know, it could be alcohol, could be pot, could be even harder drugs, and they're just sort of keeping it together. And I think that's the thing about the drug abuse is that it's not just about the drug abuse. It's about the people who are using it. And life is hard and people struggle. And as a pastor, sometimes I see people suffer and I know they're some of what I can give them. I can only give to Christians because at least if they have a little bit of belief, I can sort of fan it into flame for them. And I think that's the thing about the drug abuse is that it's not just about the drug abuse. It's about the people who are using it. Because at least if they have a little bit of belief, I can sort of fan it into flame for them and tell them with a degree of sincerity and honesty that, you know, I believe Jesus does love you. And I believe Jesus does care about your situation. And although I can't explain your suffering and even though I would love to dismiss it, barring a miracle that might not happen, I can't honestly say that I have hope for you and your situation. But when people walk away from the faith, I have limited tools I can use for them. Because for one reason or another, they no longer believe. And how much can I really do? Sorting these kinds of things out is difficult. Probably with any given one of you who would have the appetite for it, we could spend tens or hundreds of hours ranging all over what goes on. I have a short list of people that I've picked up in this journey who basically made a pact with them that if they'll, you know, credibly support the local church, I'd give them time on a regular basis and we talk. We just talk. We share stories. We share our hearts. Share our doubts. Confess our sins. Describe our hopes. You know, this happens in friendships. This happens in all sorts of other relationships. But it's needed. It's important. And when it comes to church, again, churches should be places where this kind of thing happens. A lot of stuff happens at church and that's okay. Sunday morning, sometimes I look at St. Elias, St. Peter's Day. It's an Orthodox church and I watch it on YouTube and I think how strange this would not be my cup of tea. Maybe in person it would be much more magical than it is seeing it on YouTube. And then I go visit in other churches on YouTube and I look at their services and everything from mega churches with the skinny jeans pastor to the Orthodox churches where they're where they're doing the service. And moving things around and doors are opening and closing and there's pictures on the wall to Christian reform churches with hardwoods and business suits or maybe just dress shirts and business casual dress and sermons and blended music and This is an enormous diversity of churches. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of the church. And we're in the middle of this political and culture war all these values flying around. When I was in college at a senior seminar, senior seminar, I had to write a paper. I wrote my paper, of course, on Martin Luther King Jr. I was listening to Michael Schellenberger's biography was given on Joe Rogan. And I thought that dude and I, we've lived a similar life. I toured the I toured the revolution in Nicaragua when I was in college. I protested Ronald Reagan. You know, I was I was suss in my denomination for liberation theology. That's why I look at the woke stuff. And I think this is this is nothing new. I saw all this and I saw all this in the 80s. And then in that senior seminar, remember, one one student wasn't doing a particularly good job at his presentation. And all the other students had a whole bunch of questions. And I remember the professor telling a student because because they put all of us pre sems in the one history. Senior seminar course and keep your head down. Boy, they're shooting at you. He told the guy just laughed for that a long time. That a long time. A lot of people just don't want conflict. There's a lot of shooting going on on Facebook, on Twitter, at work, between people. And you see conflict over things that they have questions about. You know, so many of the things are for most people, I'm convinced, are not just black and white. They're not, you know, it's Leah Thomas or it's it's wokeism or it's anti wokeism. And so you just have these shrill voices on YouTube and on Twitter and they're just all all over the battlefield. And most people are like, I don't want to be a jerk to this transgender person. I don't have their experience, but I don't wish them ill. And so then they just kind of keep their head down and keep their mouth shut. Hope to hope everything will just hope everything will just go away and leave their life alone. But then no, things don't just go away and leave them alone. Oh, thank you. Thank you, Phlebas. Unlight spaces afford a degree of anonymity, but the quality of the interaction is uneven to chaotic and sometimes even troubling. You know, Bridges of Meaning Discord is a special place. But yeah, that's people often go to it and say, yeah, that's a. What's my take on Doug Wilson? I've made a bunch of videos about him. Yeah, and that's that's just it in terms of it. I mean, do I have a take on Doug Wilson? You know, some some women have written me and sent some really good, some really good emails about. I almost made a video about, you know, Doug Wilson and some of the scandals around him. How what position am I in to judge? Yet I know that, as I mentioned in the last video, you can be Amish and you're still changing, even if you're trying really hard not to change in relation to the world around you, because the relations change. And that means in a to one degree or another, you are changing no matter how high how high the walls are around you. So I don't have a problem with a, you know, Benedict option, little community saying we're going to we're going to try to we're going to try to create. We're going to try to create a. We're going to we're going to try to live out our dream of Christianity here among us. And part of the beauty of I was listening to this David French, I can't say I forget that Catholic dude's name, but it was a great little video that Julian pointed out to me. I was listening to I was listening to that video and thought David French made a lot of good points about about classical liberalism and not only religious freedom for individuals in America, but but religious liberty for communities. It's a really precious thing and it's a really rare thing and it's a really difficult thing as. You know, all this hullabaloo over Disney's. Gender agenda for the future, at least in America, you don't have to watch Disney if you don't want to. But, you know, in terms of the post liberals, yeah, but all that representation doesn't go away. Thanks, Wendy. So there's a lot of conflict and there's a lot of online spaces and and so people are out there and they're. You know, Jesus says it sheep without a shepherd. How do you know what to do? How do you know what to say? You know what to say? So many people, they're just they're they're they're trying to stay sane. They're trying to put food on the table. They're they've got needs and dreams and desires and they're just they're just trying to. Yeah, trying to what? Let's keep going with the slides and then I'll jump into the discord at some point. There are reasons Christianity remains vital and vibrant in the world. I get busy with mothering and pop in and out of the social media. Yeah, no problem, Julie. And then that's and that's partly my point. You should be busy with your mothering. That's that's exactly it's exactly where your primary focus should be right on those children because there's no bigger, no more powerful influence than a parent to to to raise those children and to love them. And the years that you pour into them, especially when they're little and I know it gets complex as they get bigger and out into this world and this world will not be kind to them. Those are so formative. You know, I've been blessed with five lovely children and, you know, I'm proud of each and every one of them. That doesn't mean they're perfect. Doesn't mean they're living their life as I think wisdom dictates or Christianity would have them. Yeah, my mother, those children. Crazy Calvinist pastor from Sacramento yapping on YouTube isn't isn't really all that important. But there are reasons Christianity remains vital and vibrant in the world, especially in the West. It's you it's ubiquity, its diversity, its locality, just absolutely incredible. If you look on the map. Thanks, Anselman. Need a need a wrench in there. I should probably hand out a few more to some other to some other maybe maybe Friday. Rick will do that without I'll tell Rick to hand out some more wrenches just so that someone can keep the keep the spammers at bay. You know, in a place like the United States in a major city, there'll be there'll be churches of so many different kinds, so many different liturgies, so many different theologies, so many different traditions. And and whereas there's certainly a degree of of missing the mark and and many or all of them. There's also a capacity to reach lots of different people where they're at. That's so important. Often I'll have people visiting the church and I just know that little living stones and little me are not up to their tasks. So I pray for them and and say, Lord, you know what they need. I don't send the people that send the people what they need. Jesus is the only one who can do that. I don't send the people that send the people what they need. Jesus is the good shepherd, John 10. But again, Christianity with the ubiquity, the diversity, the locality. It just that's why religion that's not a religion. Wow. You're the churches, you know, see us. Lewis sees it in screw tape letters. Just powerful. Deep resources increasingly available. All of all of the the battle tested theology and thinking that has happened over history and now with the Internet so ubiquitously available. I've been I've been listening and listening again to Josephus. It's just so many resources. So Christianity is vital and vibrant in the world. In some places growing because it hasn't had much influence in other places. Yet struggling, though, its its roots are deep and people. Participate in it and and assume it and embody it in ways that they never would attach to the word Christian. But there it is. If there's all this anxiety about Christianity in the West, why is it struggling? Faces tremendous competition that's evolved out of Christendom. Again, I think back even in my own lifetime before the Internet. Now there's televangelists on TV, but not my cup of tea. There's Christian radio. There's magazines and books and there's churches. But now there's so many psycho technologies that that Christendom has spawned that either build on Christian practice or compete explicitly with Christian practice. So often in the past, what would drive people to church is they're afraid or they're lonely or they're they have a problem that they they just they just need a community around them to to encourage them and be with them. And so they go to church. Now, well, then you had TV and well, you can keep the TV on and the TV will make noise and at least you won't feel alone. Even before the Internet era, you go and you visit someone and you just get the sense that the TV is on all the time. It's just making noise because they live alone. They don't want to be lonely. You go to a church to be with people and at first it's good. Oh, good. I'm around people and they greet me. And then then, of course, well, then suddenly then the friction starts. People are complicated. People are people have problems. People have opinions. People will share their opinions. People will share their opinions about you. You'll share your opinions about people. Thanks. Thanks, Vixen. That's the way it is. Now with TV, what's on TV? Oh, when I was growing up, New York metropolitan area, channel, channel three, channel five, channel seven, channel nine, channel 11, channel 13. There it was. Then we had UHF and, you know, a few more channels and radio. Then cable TV came along. Oh, my. Look at all the programming. Now you've got cable TV plus. Well, even streaming TV now, there's there's so many channels digitally. And, you know, increasingly, you know, I'll watch something that my wife and I find pleasurable to watch and something that's stimulating for the both of us. It's not too stimulating because, you know, she's got to get up and go to work in the morning and something we can talk about, something that can give us some give us something through which to connect in our long. We've been married 34 years this year. But then, you know, if I if I sit down and have a few minutes time, I go to YouTube. I didn't do that before I was doing YouTube. I had no idea what YouTube was. But now almost any conceivable thing that I think of in the moment, you know, do I want to watch it? Do I want to watch a lecture from Gresham College in the UK by a really brilliant scholar on the history of Protestantism? There it is. Do I want to watch a tech review of some latest notebook? There it is. I can. There it is. There it is. There it is. All day long. Don't even have a chance for boredom or on we or nostalgia or something deeper to to invite me to get into a community and to sit down and to meet with people. Nose to nose, belly to belly. Don't don't lose. Don't miss that when you're wondering why people are bowling alone and the church is part of that. Within secularity, Christianity is mixed with other religions, religious traditions and for for a boutique of offerings within established Protestant moralities. You know, if you if you visit a local yoga studio, you're not going to get the morality of 16th century India. You're going to get a mix of traditional yoga practice and establishment Protestant moralities and how they've evolved altogether. On one hand, consumer consumer religious marketplaces is simply fertile and abundant with mix and match opportunities for all sorts of things. But the difficult the difficulties below are you wonder, well, how much of these things will really work long term? Will they be credible? Will they will they endure when they're tested? Will they will they fold? Oh, to be bored again. Yeah, this this video. Let's see how this will work. Hopefully, yeah. This video from I'll just turn off that I've learned that, you know, I can turn off the sound and and and and do a bunch of things. The life of this is in the at the end of the at the end of the 18th century, the life of cultivated persons is removed from everything that would in the least way resemble religion. You have succeeded in making your earthly lives so rich and many sided that you no longer need the eternal. And he first starts talking about Schleiermacher. And and that's at the beginning of the of the 19th century and the development of liberal Christianity. I might make a might make a commentary on this video, at least treated in some ways. It was really a really a terrific video. Someone from YouTube pointed it out to me. I've listened to Alec Riley before. He really does amazing work. I can't always grab the thumbnails. But then he talked. But then he goes into World War One and Jesus and Otto von Bismarck. Jesus and John Bull. Christianity and. There's only one power that can do it. The German Martin Luther, the man of the gospel, who found courage through the power of the gospel and the sword of the spirit to assault the whole world and its money politics. That's that's sermon church church attendance. Church attendance grew dramatically at the beginning of the First World War in Germany. To be a good German and to be a good Christian was one in the same little more complex in. The UK, but similar. And then, of course, in the US in 1917, when first the first the progressives and the liberals were beat the war drums and eventually the fundamentalist followed suit. You need to talk with Portland pastor John Mark corner. Check out his podcast, this cultural moment. Oh, I've read I've listened to that podcast. It's a good podcast. Yeah. You know what you say Anselman is very true. One of the things that I've been noticing is, again, people who have deconstructed. They've given away their faith. Their reconstructions tend to be idiosyncratic. Usually a bunch of sort of pop ideas, you know, universe replaces God energy replaces prayers, you know, I'm sending good I'm sending good energy to you. I live in Northern California. People are always sending energy. I said, Can you do that on Venmo? Or is that only for dollars? Yeah. Yeah. So, and then I think about, you know, what to say to people because they want to they want to explore. And I usually tell them the first thing you should do is try prayer. Well, I don't know how to pray. Okay, well, there's a few easy Christian prayers. There's the Anne Lamont. She says, you know, her two favorite prayers are Thank you, thank you, thank you and help me, help me, help me. They're not bad. You can start with the Lord's Prayer. Jesus disciples said, Teach us how to prayer. Roman Catholics will call it the Our Father. That's a good place to start. Start doing that. And via Christian practice, don't do it where anyone can see you. Don't even tell anybody about it. Just start doing it quietly. Go into your room, close the door. You don't even have to make noises aloud. Maybe if, you know, you're married to someone and that's going to cause ruffles in your relationship, just do it in your bed with your eyes closed. And then maybe, you know, part of again what the Internet gives you is the chance to poke around and explore churches. Go to go watch some things online. But don't stop there because what you see online is is nothing like actually being part of the church. But the church will disappoint you. I mean, it's part of the reason. I mean, I couldn't believe how. Naive Joe Rogan seemed talking to Schellenberger about that. Thanks. Thanks. Thanks, Teo. Teo sending me energy via Super Chat. Funny. Yeah. Oh, Lord, rescue my soul. It's a good prayer. You know, it's a good prayer. You know, in so many ways, I often like it to something like falling in love because you need that infatuation period. You know, that infatuation period is what Steve's make me watch Benny Hinn. And infatuation period gets you over the hump. But then after you're married, and please do get married, you know, you're going to be married. That's an important institution and it's important for learning the discipline of a relationship. Because as long as you're in a relationship only for when it works, you won't be in it very long because I can promise you they'll come a day when it's not working for me right now. Yeah, no kidding. But then you make it work. Then you're in it with each other and you struggle. And that's when you learn all the important things. How to love when it's hard, how to forgive, how to forgive when you know you've been grievously hurt. You know, I look at the. I didn't. I'm not a celebrity watcher. So this afternoon, of course, the whole Will Smith, Jada Pinkett Smith stuff was then forefront in the news. Boy, if you if you felt uncomfortable about media attention on your relationship, slapping a guy on the Oscars, not the way to keep a low profile. Yeah, praying out loud does help. You go stealthy revolt. Did you know then then I just did a little Googling about all of the news about their relationship. Apparently he wrote a memoir which he talked about it. She had slept with other people and he had slept with other people and they had been separated. And you know what, as a pastor, people's relationships are messy. People have affairs. They do. Sometimes when that happens. You know, the other spouses doesn't mean they don't love. Sometimes sometimes the other person is repentant. Sometimes the marriage can be saved. But even when it's saved. Those kind of things, those kind of things last. Those kind of things last. And so they're complex. And just the just the pattern, it seemed. Krimgriz sent me a conspiracy theory about it. Hello, Pisha and Pharma. Wow. I had no idea. But, you know, just the fact that he laughs at first, she's obviously not liking it. Then he goes up and it's just like, oh, I feel sorry for these two people. They're just trying to get through. You know, they've got two kids. You know, they both got into they both got into Hollywood and they both got they both got famous. Thanks, D-Dod. They both got into Hollywood. Thank you, Lane, too. They both got into Hollywood. They both got famous. They fell in love and they got married. And then how on earth do you manage a marriage when you're that famous? And then, of course, you know, some people in Hollywood manage to mostly by keeping a low profile. But if you want to be at the top of the fame hierarchy, you're going to have to give the you're going to have to give the public what it wants. And all that scandal is just so delicious. What does that do to people? Far more, far less famous people who have complex marriages, who are trying to trying to raise children, trying to do what's right. And, of course, it's interesting that Will Smith, a shout out to Denzel Denzel Washington's one of the more high profile Christians in Hollywood. And, of course, it's interesting that Will Smith, a shout out to Denzel Denzel Washington's one of the more high profile Christians in Hollywood. You would almost imagine that in some ways, Denzel is a friend and in some ways a mentor and. Part of what's difficult. I'm sure for a guy like Will Smith is who can you talk to? We can talk to a therapist and a therapist will give you some kind of insights, but the therapist hasn't had the lived experience of that sort of fame and pressure and the weird mechanics of of being an actor. And so someone like Denzel Washington. Probably can say, you know what? If Denzel hasn't had affairs or I'm sure he's had many temptations, I'm sure he's had many offers. High status male like that. How many women wouldn't like the chance? How many women wouldn't like the chance? Attractive woman like his wife, of course, she's going to be attractive. How many men wouldn't like the chance? Most of us don't get that level of temptation. Thank God. But there they are. There are real people behind all this mess and all this drama. And so on one hand, they they present themselves and they're handsomely rewarded to be archetypal figures for us trying to figure out the patterns and dramas and understand the meaning of our worlds. So yeah, they're fair game. But they're still real people. So. They had not today's question answer. Why is this so healing? You've got a these rights have had a very bad day. Yeah, I think it's healing because. We just need each other. And yeah, there's a little bit of. Inauthenticity and looking at a screen on your phone or on your TV or on your computer, I get that. There's also a little bit of healing. Because one way or another, you know that you're not alone. And each of you is trying to make sense of this world, trying to do the sense making, trying to. Trying to figure it out. And, you know, our friend Jacob. You know, very sincere. Very sincere, Jew. We've got Father Eric on the discord. Lovely young Roman Catholic priest. Got all sorts of people who are testing out orthodoxy. Will will that fit for me? Got other people who are sticking with their churches. We've got others who are doing their their 12 step thing. And, you know, again, I mentioned this a few times lately. If you were born 700 years ago in a small town in France. The only sense making institution around you is your local church and the connection that. And priests 700 years ago weren't often terribly well educated. One of the things that one of the ways that Protestantism sort of, you know, one up to a lot of Catholicism was demanding for education for its clergy. But, of course, Protestantism was also part of the wave of urbanization. I mean, there's there's just always so much complexity going on and. People are small and struggling and trying to do well. Paul Newman stayed with Joanne Woodward 58 to 2008. I did see some stuff about that that Newman would step out. And, of course, they had to figure out what that would look like. Bill and Hillary Clinton are still married. Think about that. And I know you're going to have your political valence on that. I get that. Tony Soprano and Carmela. They're fictional, but. It's complex. So. Well, let's see. Let's see what we'll do here. How long have we been going? About an hour? No, that's the old ones. It's boring watching me having to fiddle with my computer while I'm still live streaming, but I'm going to jump into the impromptu recording. There we are. We are. Want to make sure that we are in fact. Things are in fact working properly. So, yeah, this was an experiment for those of you just joining me. This is sort of a combo. I'm going to be doing a PVK thought video and talking to people in the discord. So I put the link. I wanted to see this here. Make sure that. It's there below. I put the link to the. The room I'll be dropping into. The discord server. And. But I wanted to, you know, often when I do these impromptus, I just sort of drop in and then I pick up the conversation from whoever's there and what's on their mind. And that's a good thing, because for part of me, it's sort of breaking the shamanic patterns that I've got my little headspace and all the things I'm thinking about. So then when I hear input from from you via the estuary of the bridges of meaning discord server, then I I get to, you know, break my frame and hear from you and and see what's going on there. But today I wanted to sort of start with. I guess it would be the phenomenology. Sounds like some philosopher book. Phenomenology of religion. Or the phenomenology of your faith or the phenomenology of your being. Something fancy like that. This is where we discuss the fake. You can talk about that if you want to. All right, let's. Let's. We'll see if anybody's dropped in the room yet. I'm sure I'm sure because once I start this, some of the usual suspects, some of the usual suspects usually come in. Let's see. I got to turn on the. Come on. Turn on the video. There I am. I always got to use the. I haven't really. I could set up a second camera here and have the better camera. But when I'm in the. When I'm in the room and the impromptu live stream. It's my face isn't so important, so that's what you see here in this part of the video. That's the good camera and what you see up there. Freaking dyslexics. What you see up there. That's the that's the crappy little computer webcam. So. So if you want to share with us all the phenomenology of. Of the religious aspect of your being. Up in the room and let's talk about it. Up in the room and turn on your camera and. And we'll have a conversation. You don't have to. You don't have to wait for the. You don't have to try and get a slot on the. On the Calendly. Randos conversation. You can grab it right now. And nobody's in here. It's really quite surprising. I should have probably opened it sooner. Authenticity standing with you. Well, you know that, you know, that's part of what I've been wrestling with with these videos. This word authentic has become such a powerful buzzword that. What do we mean by that? It's, you know, walking through Truman's book that I'm really enjoying. You know, it's sort of a self referential self validation. Very much in a Rousseauian. And it's something sort of downstream from Rousseau. Oh, hey, CW is coming in. Uh, Paul. Hey, CW, how are you? I am well. How are you? I'm doing good. Yeah, it's so dark here. Are you? Did you not pay the electric bill? Your Internet's still working. You don't have to turn it later. That's OK. Well, and with you, CW, I mean. There's a there's a post in that one forum that we join and we've been watching that one individual's journey. And, you know, that very much puts me on the thought of the phenomenology of one's religious experience, because. That person is, you know, they're they're they're feeling their way through on lots of different levels. And there are lots of different layers. And, of course, I good friends with one of his pastors and know some other others of his pastor. So why don't you talk to me, CW, about phenomenology of religion to you? Because you mentioned before that, I mean, you've had some interesting relationships with churches. Well, yeah, I'm not sure if the most constructive rubric to approach my relationship with churches is phenomenology of religion. I mean, I was certainly excommunicated from an Orthodox Presbyterian church, which, you know, that's that's a kind of phenomenal way to interact with religion, I suppose. Did you throw away Jesus because the church excommunicated you? No, I didn't. In fact, it was kind of a perverse thing because I had to convince them to excommunicate me because I was no longer comfortable with. I never want to be excommunicated, to be clear. I just wanted to drop my formal affiliation because I could no longer maintain in good conscience my confession of the member affirmation of faith, particularly as it related to doctrine of scripture. I was not, you know, there for an obvious heretic or something. They didn't quite know what to do with me because I had all of these uncomfortable questions, which they were remarkably nonconversant in. And so we kind of went around and around for like two years trying to litigate my various concerns. And I'm like, you know, I can just keep going here and be a member of this community if you would simply allow me to drop the formal dimension of our relationship. And so there was this long, complex negotiation. And after two years, they finally relented. And it was funny because, you know, that I was not involved in that part of their decision. It was kind of like they were like, OK, we're sick of this guy. Let's just give him what he fucking wants. They certainly came to me and announced, you know, we're going to erase you. It's not technically, you know, it's not like you're being fired for cause, so to speak. Right. It's as though you just sort of left and we as an administrative function dropped you from the member roles. And erasure is very different from annex communication. That's the sort of a weasely way that Christian reform churches get clean up the books, too. So I had to say hi. Go ahead. Well, I was going to say like that was the funny thing. So they did that. And my understanding was that it was like you said, this kind of technicality that the conceit of which is we are going to agree to disagree and you can still kind of be around. But we're not going to debate whether whether you should be a member formally or not. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so I was very happy with that. But then I was dismayed when the very next week I was placed in the bulletin on this list of apostate people who we should pray for in order to repent and look solely to Jesus for their salvation. That they did not know what to do with UCW. Well, and so I kept going there. And, you know, obviously I would argue that it was a little disturbing that, you know, while I have this somewhat orthodox confession of the living creator God who is love personified in the historical Jesus Christ, they identified me as an apostate and somehow sub or even anti perhaps Christian. But I kept going. You did so at your prompting though. Well, I wanted to be not a member formally. I didn't want to end the relationship nor repudiate my Christian faith. And I, the other in which lies the problem, Paul, of these ambiguities of, you know, what, what is the church and how do we separate the life of the institution from the existential reality of the people in relationship before God. Yeah, yeah. Wow. I have to say hi to Teo, because he is, he's such a, he and the Queen are like always right there right away and, and we've never got a chance to speak before so welcome. Thanks for dropping in. Yeah, I was told I didn't in the voice chat a little bit just should I go into that not but yeah, I'm glad you did. I'm glad you did. Thank you for you did. And a whole bunch of people have jumped in so and anyone else want to want to share something about CW already did a bit and we can go more into yours and if the others don't want to talk but any of the rest of you want to share something about the sort of the enter. Go ahead. I actually have a question. I have a question about CW. Did you, or did you went after they did, or when they were considering it, would you have more respect for your denomination or your church itself, if they had kicked you out. No, I mean, I was not so belligerent at that time that I would have really known how to represent myself in a formal trial. And evidently they picked up on the fact that my views were ambiguous enough as to not constitute a formal heresy. And then therefore they were not comfortable ex communicating me by the normal formal procedure. But you were saying that you felt you should have been, or that you wanted to be kicked out. I'm just wondering if that's coming from a place of wanting them to be right. And for what they believe in, you know, I didn't want to be kicked out. I just didn't want to be deontologically formally committed to a confession that I could not unambiguously maintain my conscience. I see. So there's the subtlety there. And then it doesn't lend itself to the black and white absolutism of an institutional formalization, not just of an expression of the corporate religious will or the religious life, but the religious as such. Yeah, I relate to that. I remember. I went to a Southern Baptist Church for years and one day I had some Mormon missionaries, I think, or maybe they were Jehovah's Witness, knocked on the door and were talking to me about something. And they said, well, you understand you're a Baptist. And I laughed and he asked what was funny. And I said, well, no one's ever called me a Baptist before. I mean, I was raised Catholic. I never would have introduced myself as, hi, I'm a Baptist. I just went to a church that was part of the Southern Baptist Convention for years. You know, and people, what do we call you? It's like, well, I have a name. That's interesting. So you attended a Southern Baptist Church for years, but did not yourself identify as Southern Baptist as such. How do you explain that? What's your account for yourself? Well, I didn't see anything in the Baptist faith and message that was contradicted by, for example, the Roman Catholic creed. It seemed like it was all fringe stuff. I was attracted there because of the people that made the church up. You know, it's the people that made the church. And as the church has rotated the staff and the population and all the people there, it has become weirdly more Baptist. Wow. A Baptist Roman Catholic Church. No, a Baptist Church. I was confused there. It's become weirdly more Baptist. Yeah, yeah, it was it was a Southern Baptist Church. And for years, the pastor said, you know, we got to get Baptist off the name of our sign. So it was just church, not Baptist Church, because people had preconceived ideas of what it was going to be like. And after he retired and if several different things happened and there was, like I said, a lot of rotation going on, weirdly, it's kind of become sort of exactly what you would expect, more than it used to be for sure. It becomes so unmoored from the existential relationship or maybe even religion of the people that this Roman Catholic no longer felt comfortable. I don't even know if I would want I wouldn't have even introduced myself as being Catholic. So this primordial Christian of the unbroken historical line no longer felt comfortable in the sectarian body. Yeah, well, I mean, I'm just a living meme. I go to an Orthodox church now. I see you're even worse now. Now you're even worse. Yeah. I don't know if Paul muted him. Oh, yeah, Paul, you're getting the audio. Could I just interject from Australia? It's interesting that you speak like that, because one of the one of my formative years was spent in a Church of Christ. And the motto of the Church of Christ is in essentials, unity and non-essentials, liberty. And that basically means we don't really care about your doctrine so long as you believe in Jesus and the Trinity. That's basically it. And so you would get a whole bunch of people through there. But what I kind of discovered through it is that Hillsong in Australia has such a tremendous cultural pull over the entire Christian community here that most churches either descend into becoming pseudo Hillsongs or rebelliously stay at small enough not to be Hillsong. And so you have all of these Baptist or pseudo Baptist churches all around Australia who are in the 70 to 200 ish size mark that all basically practice the same. Their theologies may be different. They may identify differently. But for the most part, you walk into one, you walk into another and you're like the only difference here is the actual people. And the thing that that Church of Christ really taught me and one of my youth pastor in particular at the time, his entire focus was about building community. And it wasn't about specific theologies. It was about getting in there, being with other people and just sharing Jesus and your your struggles and your the things that you were finding difficult to do. And and your own spiritual journey with the other people in that community. And that was really what it was all about. And that that was a very formative experience for me. But anyway, I've got to go now. I just thought I'd drop in and say hi. It was the first stream that I managed to catch. So, yeah, hi, everyone. Thanks for dropping in. So I would like to introduce myself. My name's Matthew. I've listened to you, Paul, for like, I don't know, like for a few years now, but I've never come on the discord or spoken before. It's kind of weird and disassociating to me because I've listened to so many of these that like it's just kind of like I'm watching a video online. Yeah, it's it is disassociating the first time it really is. Or a randos conversation. People are like, you're talking back. I usually it's usually just only goes one way. Yeah, it is. It is weird. But yeah, I just wanted to say hi. I don't really have anything to be able to add at this moment to the conversation. But this is great, guys. So, hey, Paul, I'm curious. You wanted to talk about like the phenomenology phenomenology of religion, but you don't really talk a lot about like your own personal inner experiences with religion. And now I've had like a lot of dreams, like really powerful dreams and and visions that have like brought me into where I'm at. And I think largely it's because like I need those things. But I've heard you share before that you don't really have those type of experiences. And I would be really interested to hear more about like the inside. Like what is like how do you experience your relationship with Christ? Like part of part of what's hard to talk about things like this often is I have to use something that's sort of publicly relatable. So so for me. My relationship with Christ is is very. Conversational on one level. My prayer life is very conversational. I. I wouldn't say that dreams are not a part of it. But some of the dreams that have been a part of it have been pretty profound and foundational for me. A lot of it is I mean. It's it's sort of it's sort of strange to to talk about this because in some ways the channel is an open. Ear into my faith life. So the things that I wrestle with. Are how part of me wrestles with Christ. One of the things I don't do on this channel that is a big part of my faith life is is obviously prayer. I could. I could do videos that are just simply prayers. The difficulty with that is that there are there's so much personal stuff not only from me but from other people who. Don't really deserve to have. Their stuff put out on my channel. Worship is a big part of it. I. Both both private worship in terms of prayer in terms of enjoying music when I'm alone. But also corporate worship on Sundays. That's a big that's a big part of it. Relating back and forth to people. In conversation. I very much see. I very much see Christ through nature. But I also very much see Christ through other people. And and he speaks to me. And and he speaks to me. Through other people. And it's usually not necessarily direct although sometimes it is sometimes sometimes someone will tell me something I think yeah God really spoke to me. Through what that person said. But often it's God spoke to me through my experience of that person. Part of. Part of. I mean again the videos are a big part of me sort of processing my doubts. And struggles and questions with the Christian faith sermon making and doing my adult Sunday school class for me is a big part of my faith. Studying the Bible. Thinking about how how can we. How can we bridge this gap between us. And Christ. This this this gap between creature and creator. And what does that mean so. So so for me a lot of. Even though I you know your question I get I actually get your question a fair amount. And I try to answer it like I'm answering it now and I never really feel like I'm. Succeeding but in a strange way a lot of this channel is. Sort of the phenomenology of my faith. Yeah that's kind of interesting so like I could immediately tell when you start answering the question you started going into what is this person need to hear from me. You know like yeah that that's really that's interesting. So I've heard for Vicky say before that he hears your voice in his head. And I largely have the same kind of interaction like I've listened to so much of you that I have this projection in my mind and oftentimes. Like I hear the way you speak directed at like my own thoughts to kind of check. You know where I'm at what I'm thinking trying to kind of bring me back into what I would view as right alignment. You know and. I don't know that's just that's really interesting. I think so much. I think so much of. So so in Christianity you love the Lord your God with all your heart soul mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself. And all of us sitting here are image bearers of him. And so so much of. You know obviously he speaks to us through his word and he speaks to us through his spirit. But he speaks to us through each other. And and now we're falling image bearers and we're missing the mark image bearers but we're we're still image bearers. And so you know I you know every day I wrestle with you know what to do with the junkies and homeless people outside my door here. I mean should I call the cops and just run them away. I've done so many different things with them that I know a lot of easy things don't work. At some point defenses coming and this is going to shift probably unless they they find a way around the fence or something. And that may very well happen too. But we'll we'll deal with that when that happens. But you know they're all image bearers of God. And so I. I'm called to love them. And and all of this is also through you know you've got Jesus parable of Lazarus and the rich man. You don't really want to be the rich man. You really don't want to be Lazarus either. And so you know and that weighs on me with this Dunbar number exploding experience of. Of so many image bearers on screens. And how can I love each other. How can we love each other. Go ahead CW. I'm curious. Do you have maybe like a specific historical time in your life or a kind of thematically categorical times in your life where you identify with that junkie or that homeless person as it relates to how you imagine God must be. What must be relating to you. That's tough because there are certainly times in my life when when I when I wasn't. You know when I when I was missing the mark in some. In some ways that were quite obvious to me. Yet I don't think I don't think the drama exists in that way as much as. I grew up watching my father. Do this. And so for me. Relating to these individuals is. Is is is in some ways becoming an adult. I watched my father do this for years. And of course when you're a kid you just absorb this stuff. And so treating treating junkies and homeless people and people who are wrestling with poverty or. Mental illness with. With love and with decency and with patience and with kindness. He modeled that for me. And then I think well who modeled it for him well his father modeled it for him. It was the you know this was during the Depression out in the rural Midwest and the hobos had had marked the telephone polls to. To show where the the minister's house were was because if they knocked on that door. Even during the Depression when my grandparents were desperately poor. They would get a bowl of soup or a cup of coffee or you know a place at the kitchen table. And when the. You know when the train would come in and there would be some. Some Dutch refugee family that had one way or another found its way out of. You know post World War two. Netherlands and made its way to Owen Sound Ontario that the guy at the train station knew who the Dutch minister was and so. You know my my father at that point was already in college but my you know. My grandmother would wake up my aunt in the middle of the night and say OK you gotta you know. You're sleeping with me Dave is sleeping with dad so we have to give the bedroom to the. The refugee family that's come into town and we're going to put them up for a few weeks until. We can get their sponsorship sorted out and find a place for them to live in a place for them to work. That's that that has been now in my family for three generations. And you know I don't to what degree can I take credit for it I simply inherited it. Well maybe explains materially Paul like your habit of struggling with loving the homeless or caring for them. But I guess I'm curious if if you are in a Christian sense. Driving to love them as your neighbor and in so loving them as your neighbor as yourself. What is there do you have to identify something of yourself within them. And if so what is that for you. It's not an easy question so yeah it doesn't it doesn't run through my conscious mind. Although I do reflect on it especially with. You know I've had a case with a guy who and I've written about it a little bit on Twitter I have a case with a guy who. You know literally camped against my door for for six to eight years. And then assaulted a member of the church so spent two years in institutions and then came out with a four year restraining order but. But you know and so working with him to on one hand. Help him I have to keep him away from church because you know the the person he attacked and the family of the person that he attacked is is really sensitive to his presence especially on Sundays and so. But a little bit more leeway during the week but. At the same time. You know I love this guy. I've spent hours with him. And you know spend hours with a guy who. You just sit down with some homeless people and it could take a while I often think of Gandalf getting information out of golem. Gandalf is like yeah I sat down it took a while to sort of tease everything through but I was able to get a picture of what he said under torture Adam. In Mordor and it's kind of like that talking to some people it's you develop a lot of patients of like. Yeah I'm going to hear about hear about this about a hundred times until I get that new little nugget to give me some insight into. Who this person is and what they need and how maybe I can have. Some interaction with him but I don't know you know I don't I don't see it as roles so much. Paul do you think you are as hard to love as that person. You can ask my wife. Sometimes. You know because because in our family relationships you know a marriage a long term marriage. There's ups and downs serious ones. And you know even even parenting I mean my children are. My children have been formed and shaped in a world that is very different from the one that I was formed and shaped in. Even though I'm their father. So you know. Yeah. Hard to love is pretty normal. Hard to love well. Probably more so the more honest you are. Yeah yeah well you I also learn. I'm I'm I'm fairly transparent on this forum but selectively so there anybody who would let's say diagram the things I talk about will notice there's a whole bunch of things he doesn't talk about on YouTube. Yeah. It's YouTube. There's things I shouldn't talk about on YouTube but. I. But this channel wouldn't work if I wasn't honest with you. And it's not that oh I want this channel to work. It's more that. There's there's not a lot of point in this if we're if we can't be honest with each other at least to a certain level. I wonder Paul to Xerxes question if if if it has something to do with this phenomenology of your relationship with Jesus. If an aspect of this is being hard to love well. How would you describe your experience of Jesus loving you well. Hmm. Boy that's hard. Well you know there's there's of course the. The narrative that is the gospel narrative that is set in the story. Of his crucifixion and resurrection and his incarnation because what the church does is helpfully appropriate all of that to me the Heideberg catechism does that well. But there's also the there's also the cosmic Christ who is reigning at the right hand of the father and it's that Christ who. As the Heideberg catechism says brings fat years and lean years it's that Christ that puts homeless people at my door. And. And and gives me a struggling little church. That's that's quite miraculously open still and you know here late in life gives me a. All of you and a YouTube channel it's a strange thing and a discord server and randos and you know friends that I've met online and all of this so that it's that Christ that brings those things to me and in some ways says OK Paul. Care for them to. Share yourself with them too. Because I care for them. And that Christ is available to to each one of you. I don't know if that answers your question. Well it's interesting because it sounds as though you're saying that or at least you kind of landed or gravitated towards the most obvious way in which Jesus loves you well is making you to the instrument by which he loves other people. Yeah, yeah, well, because you know there's. It's a weird dance in ministry. It is so. It is you know somebody mentioned in the chat a little bit earlier. I don't know why this is healing but it is. It's so gratifying to at least have some participation. In someone else's healing or restoration or betterment. There's something very profound about that Paul and it's hard to imagine what could be more phenomenological than what you described. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I see Jesus is loving me well as he makes me to love others well. Yes, yes. Maybe that's kind of part of the mystery of faith is why it is that Paul VanderKlaai ascribes that strange phenomenon to Jesus. Yeah. Well, maybe Joey might not. So I kind of I kind of had an interesting idea and I kind of think a lot of people use this analogy of like Christ loving them. It's almost like them having to love themselves. And if you're really honest with yourself, it gets really hard sometimes to see how much you're actually really not a very good person sometimes. And that's really true and honest. And it's so easy to just like pretend you're not that person because I don't see it right now. Right. Like I'm this great guy right now. I'm not going to be mean to anybody, but I have the capacity to. Yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah. And, you know, and my it's funny too, because I mean, my wife, I'm I'm high in openness. But I'm also not I'm sort of moderate. I'm sort of in the 50s in terms of politeness. And so there's another side to me that that probably doesn't come out as much on the stream where I can I can tell someone exactly what I think sometimes in some ways that are very Dutch blunt. It doesn't always work in America. But no, you're right. And there are there are loving people well is really hard, especially when there's so many of us. And especially when the things in them and the things in me don't line up. I mean, I like people who are low in agreeableness. That's like so many of us around here. Right, Joey? Right, Mark? Me? Me? I do have a feeling, Paul, that at some point you prayed for more people to talk to and the whole experience is proof that Jesus has a sense of humor. I think that is exactly right, Joey, that that, you know, for a long time, you know, the struggling little church, I would I would tell people I would say I would say to my membership, I would say, look, do you want more people in this church? Yes. Why don't you ask Jesus? And I would tell them and I would do it. I would say, Lord, you know, bring us more people. And I guess you're exactly right, Joey. My prayers were answered just in a way I did not expect. That's how it works, right? You're not supposed to be able to anticipate it. And some of this conversation is interesting. It reminds me of I just watched John Mullin sent me this video from Mike Winger. I don't know if you're familiar with him, Paul. Yeah, so bothered the heck out of me. He's got the he's got the Protestant stage and all those idols, those vicious little musical idols. There's no people behind them. So I know they're they're not enchanted now. And but he's given this great talk and it's too long. It's an hour. I was like, it's 20 minutes worth of information. But one of the analogies he used, I thought, was absolutely brilliant. He said and, you know, on the thumbnail, it says it's not about Jesus. He's talking about progressive, the progressive movement in the in the in Christianity. And he brings up some clips and he points out what this guy said in this clip. And he had this brilliant analogy. It's bobblehead Jesus. And I was like, oh, wow. And then the way he does it is he says this guy critiques and says, oh, well, look, you know, Christ could have meant this could have meant that. And Jesus is sitting there going like this. And then you're left right to reinterpret the text and then you reinterpret it for your own view, of course, because who else is you going to interpret it? Who else is you can you interpret it for? And then Jesus is still going. Yes. So he's agreeing to the critique and to your into your reinterpretation at the same time. And I was like, wow. And then you can see in that particular talk, let's see the threat of individualism and that intimacy. That's only one way. Like, well, I want to know how it's related to me, not how I am related to it. And so in your stories here, you're not talking about this mystical bang experience that just, you know, and and I was there before the people on the mountain and I got the rush and then God was within me. It's none of that. It's like it's these little moments where it's your intimacy that to a subject of and subject to relationship where you're seem to be saying, you know, if I'm not misinterpreting you, that you're feeling the glory. Yeah. Right. But there are other big times, too. They're just rare. Sure, sure. Yeah. Yeah. Well, but everybody look, I want the mountain. I don't want this daily thing. Come on. Give me the give me the pop. Give me the sizzle. Sizzle it. Right. But it's better this way. Right. I mean, because that's what you want is that re-enchantment through the intimacy through the it's not it's not its relationship to me. It's our relationship to each other as persons, not as individuals. Yeah. I'm sure if if Paul ascribes that symbiosis, that living together that you are so eloquent a proponent of, if Paul ascribes that to this living creator God who is love personified in the historical Jesus Christ, and that's what makes it work for him. Or that's maybe even the only way that he can understand it. Do what do you ascribe it to? And does it matter? Symbiosis living together. How do you account for that phenomenon that you advocate? And does it matter how we account for it in, like, say, in the way that Paul does so definitively? Yeah, I mean, I think Paul, you've gotten gotten into this in a couple of your videos recently, right? Like, you don't live in the world where the heat death of the universe is the thing that you're gonna have to worry about. That's not the world you inhabit. Right. That's not the world you inhabit. Right. And so, to the extent that Paul lives in an enchanted world with Jesus and walks with him, because I think that maybe maybe I'm wrong, but I think that's what you're supposed to be doing as a pastor, specifically as a Christian more generally, then it's appropriate for him to talk about it that way. But things aren't one thing. Like, this is the identity problem. Like, we keep trying to narrow everything. What's the aspect of the he asked you about you, CWCW asked you about you. Let me get there. Okay. All right. So the the aspect of subject subject for me isn't the same, even though the phenomena of say, loving, you know, loving Joey, right, loving Paul loving loving the people on the discord server is the same aspect, right? It's the same love in some sense. I don't talk about it from that perspective. Whether or not I feel that way. I'm not going to talk about it from that perspective rather deliberately, by the way. I thought so. Right. Not hiding the ball. But I don't think I have to. And I think it's beneficial that everybody not talk about it that way, because I mentioned this last time. Right. The evangelists all sound the same. They're little robots of happy Christian. And I happy Christian sounds great, except it doesn't match my life. Right. A lot of tragedy. I have a lot of difficulty. Right. I have a lot of struggle and them being all happy about their happy little happy lives doesn't resonate with me at all because I don't need to solve the happy happy problem. When I'm happy, I'm happy. It's already solved. The problem I need to solve is how are these Christians getting to happy from suffering? First, you've got to come in with the suffering. Oh, here is my suffering. Well, that's a lot more interesting to me. Right. And I think that's the problem. When we get caught up on this single message, you end up getting fundamentalist evangelist Christians running around giving the same message to everybody like little robots. Oh, I wonder, do you think it's possible to answer the question that Mark seems to have the question of Makarios joy through suffering? Do you think as a Christian, it's possible to answer that question? How that is possible with a methodological atheism? If if that's what he's advocating or something like that. It's hard for me to say what is and isn't possible. Possible is an awfully big thing. What I do is try to offer it to people from what I know, which is that I know it is possible to get there through Jesus. And I know what you found, Mark. I mean, I mean, would you describe that as part of what you're doing, trying to attain joy through suffering? And how is that going? Yeah, I don't I don't like the suffering frame, particularly, I'd say suffering is inevitable. But struggle is, you know, can be converted to joy or suffering. Right. And so some of your suffering is optional, but some of it is not. And that's as far as I think anybody needs to go with it. Right. Because if you're if you're if you're trying to translate and very much the work that I did in computers for years was translation from, we'll say, developer speak to IT speak and or business speak and or right. If you're trying to do translation, right. That's what you want to do. You want to capture a different perspective on the same thing, right. On the same phenomenon in this case and exemplify it in a way that a different audience. I don't think of it in terms of suffering into joy, but I do think of it in terms of what is the mess, the Christian message for struggle, because that's what people are asking. What am I doing about struggle? If you're in a meaning crisis, that's that's a struggle. You're struggling for something. How do you connect that to the other side of the world? You're struggling for something. How do you connect that struggle with the apparent joy that the that the that we'll say the evangelists are telling you is available? And if you do that from this perspective, you get little evangelist happy robots, which is great, except maybe we need other other ways of approaching that problem. This perspective. The 45 degree. I don't care. You said you alluded to this perspective. I'm curious what you mean by that. Well, it's upper register. I think if we're going to use if we're going to use Pastor Paul's excellent language, I think that's right. They're coming from the upper register and say Jesus solves all problems or something. Right. Roughly speaking, I mean, I'm I'm parroting them to some extent. Right. But that that's the message. Like, oh, you can be happy in Christ sort of a thing. Fair enough. Maybe you can. But somebody who's in the struggle and is in a meaning crisis, they can't connect to that. And it's coming down at them from somebody in the position of happiness. And that's one perspective. But it's maybe it's not the right perspective for people who are stuck on the meaning crisis, which I think is part of John Verbeckis message is that you guys are never going to message the NONESs or what I'm calling the Clueless. The people who just don't know anything about religion. You like that, huh? So so I think there's two different groups there, although maybe the approach maybe I don't know. Maybe the approach is similar in terms of not trying to message them from the upper register, because like Sam Harris is never going to hear it. Right. Paul, like you said, Sam doesn't hear this and not cannot hear it. Cannot know what you need to hear and eyes to see. So what's the message that has to come from from the emergence not from not from the upper register, from the lower register, from the emergence, not from the emanation that can meet these people where they're at to provide them with the boost that they need to go where they need to go. And, you know, look, if that's to Jesus, that's the G. All I can tell you is there's an awful lot of people on the waking from a crisis server who aren't there anymore in church. Just say it because you're not there anymore because what? They're in church. Mark, are you saying that there is a message though? I mean, you're asking what's the message. But then you're saying it's not necessarily to be characterized in an exclusive theoretical way or maybe even theoretically at all. Right. Yeah, I don't think you can characterize it. I don't think you have to. And I don't think you should think it's a message. And if so, how is it characterized? No, I wouldn't characterize it. So, you know, I mean, to some extent, I don't know and I don't care. Right. But there are messages that people need to hear to get them from their suffering out of their suffering. Right. And it's just that the we'll say the evangelist approach is happy robot with the you know, with the Jesus, Jesus, Jesus story all over the place. Happy robot and appeal to authority then, Mark. I don't think it. I can't hear you. You're saying it. I'm just trying to understand. No, no, you're casting things I'm not saying. I don't know. I can't listen to those people myself. Like if happy evangelists come up to me, I'm zoned out. I can't hear a thing they're saying. I've known quite a few happy evangelists in my time. And I think that one of the struggles for Christians that are living out of Christian life is especially in this question of is there some sort of proposition that you can provide that will direct somebody to the answer, so to speak, that you purport to possess is knowing that we haven't arrived there ourselves. It's like directing somebody to go to a place that eventually you're also going to go and knowing that you're giving people advice that in some ways you haven't even taken yourself. You know, you've done the best you can, but you're telling them what's at the end of the road that you're both walking on. Right. And I think that any amount of humility makes people that can guess themselves. I think that's where it starts to creep in. Am I doing this right? Is there maybe maybe we are on the wrong road? I don't know. Right. I would say personally, I don't think that it can be encapsulated in a proposition. It's something that has to be embodied. Right. It's like we're both walking. You know, it's embodied in a person. That's what the incarnation is, is about. Right. And we get to be a little tiny mirror of that in unexpected ways. I don't think that there's any difference between the homeless person that's literally on Paul's porch and myself. I mean, what do we have in common? Right. We're both not used to having second conversations with people. Right. We're both. Make people who go to the church regularly kind of uncomfortable, probably hard to deal with. And maybe we do have a home that we're not taking responsibility for. Maybe in some way we're not as homeless as we purport to be. Right. But nevertheless, we find our way here. You know, Paul, you said you were going to put up a fence. And I think that it'll be interesting to find out how much effort you put into it. It'll be interesting to find out how much effort they're willing to go through, what they're willing to pay essentially to be in that place. Yeah. Maybe it's not just an accident that they are where they are. No. Right. No. There's one guy, in fact, who already lives behind the fence that we put up and he gets over it every day. And he's, to the best of my knowledge, he's one of our homeless people that doesn't appear to be a junkie. And he's, I'm sure he's got some mental illness issues, but he comes in after dark. He sets up. He sleeps. Usually by the time one of us gets there in the morning, he kind of cleans things up and, you know, leaves place as clean, if not cleaner, then he found it and just disappears. And of course, people at the church don't mind him. You know, he's not panhandling. He's not urinating, you know, on himself or right next to, you know, if you step outside my office, it's like, oh, this place. Some days this place smells like a toilet, which isn't so nice if someone comes to see me for, you know, for my day job reasons. Sometimes people come by and they're like, pastor, do you know what it's like out here? This is the first time you've been here. I'm here every day. I know what it's like out here. Well, how can you tolerate that? Well, you got any suggestions for me? You know, all the suggestions are the normal options on the menu. But yeah, we are we are not. We are not as far from the junkies as we think we are often. And I've known a lot of people who have been junkies. And sometimes they they show up here. One of the guys that I talked to on that Break the Rules podcast, he talked about how he had been a Calvinist, but he had also been a heroin addict. And there's a lot of people out there who have never slept on the streets, but who have been heroin addicts or had a thing with opioids or and they were able to sort of keep it in a range where it didn't completely tank their life. There's a lot of people who have flirted with various addictions at certain points in their lives that that could have flipped it. And some people who it did get flipped, but then they were able to write it fairly quickly and go on. So it's the tail end of a distribution that we see on the streets often. You're one catastrophe away. Have any of you seen the channel on YouTube called a soft white underbelly? No. I've introduced to it. It's really fascinating. He just does interviews with different people that live in Skid Row or other places. And like, man, some of those testimonies are really powerful. Like, yeah, it's it's really important. You know, and he was getting into the issue of like, you know, what is this? They're walking through this tent city and, you know, they're addicted to drugs, but the drugs are because of the sexual abuse that they received. And that's because of the, you know, destabilization in the family that they had. And that's because of this. And you have all these interconnected issues. And then the problem becomes so big and there's so many people that it's like you can't what are you what are you going to do? You know, and then and then like Paul said, we're individually we're one step away from that ourself right now at any point in time. You know, like you don't just by the grace of God, you know, go I. It's you know, it's I mean, again, I was watching the Rogan conversation with Schellenberger and it's lots of people have been abused. This is a point that Peterson makes often. Lots of people have been abused, didn't become drug addicts. Lots of people who have had bad childhoods didn't become drug addicts. Some people who have had wonderful childhoods became drug addicts. I mean, it's we love to try to we hear we talk to them and I do this same thing, too. You talk to them, you hear the story of abuse and then it's like, oh, and they were all they were abused. That's why they were drug addicts because they were abused. Probably one of the reasons, but and and we're such as human beings were so mysterious that what what brings you know, somebody somebody having a sibling who's a drug addict turns them into one thing and turn somebody else into another thing. We're we're there's so many variables were so complex. It's really quite amazing. I'll check out that YouTube channel. It sounds I probably won't watch it a lot because it's like, oh, yeah, it's kind of like going to work. I mean, maybe it's important for me because I don't experience the things you're talking about. Those people don't don't come to me. I have nothing to offer them. So but I can see it kind of vicariously through the channel. And if anybody hasn't seen it, I really think it's important. Some of the testimonies are are really important, I think, you know, to kind of get at the heart of the struggle that we have. I watch a lot of her Vicky and an awakening from the meaning crisis. And I really think that like this conversation that you're having with him and that he's having with all these other people that's kind of developed from like this whole Jordan Peterson movement. It's really getting down to the meat of what's going on inside our subconscious that makes us so we're not controlling ourselves. You know, like it's really fascinating. What what do you think about like this conversation you're having with for Vicky in particular? Like it almost reminds me of like this struggle between Christianity and this new atheist movement kind of. Just wants to be on the channel like the TV reporter, you know, he reports down there and everybody comes around. Yeah, he just said he wanted to check it out. What do I think about it? Well, in what way? OK, so what do you think about it in relation to like the whole cultural shift and movement that we have between Christianity and this kind of non-religious movement? So I kind of I kind of really like sorry, I'm going to go back to the beginning of the conversation. I kind of I kind of really like sorry, I'm going to go in on a tangent, but I really like this idea of a Vicky has of this. I'm sorry, I have I really like this idea of a Vicky has of this religion of no religion. What it signifies to me almost is like a lack of an idol where we break down these type of like focus points almost to where the religion becomes the practice just in and of itself as opposed to an ideal. You know, and I don't think it can be done. OK, well, what do you think about that in relation to this this like dichotomy we have between Christianity and this new non-movement? I think what tends to happen in these. In these religions that. Avoid. What secularity has defined as religious is that other things tend to sort of slip in and function in place of what all of the old mythological elements were doing. Right, and I see this all the time in people who have left the church and left Christianity. They in order to continue to function, they sort of it's almost like methadone. So we're talking about addiction. And so one of the ways to get people off heroin is to get them on methadone and methadone is well, you're getting it for free so you don't have to break in and you know, rob somebody to get your fix. The government's given it to you and it's satiating the hunger that, you know, heroin tends to build in you. And it doesn't have this. It doesn't have the side effects or the negative effects of heroin. And you can sort of live in it. And I think that's in some ways what we've been doing culturally for a couple of hundred years. But that can only go so far and other things then start to break down. And so, you know, and John and I have talked about this is this has been one of the cruxes in a lot of the conversations. And, you know, I know Mark's over there just trying his best to restrain himself because this is something Mark feels very passionate about. But there's I think that the one one of the elements that John really wants, you know, as deep questions about, which is tell us. I just don't I just think it's indispensable for human beings. I was so what a part of what I do for exercise is I I walk on a levy just because we're right by the river here in Sacramento. And the other day there was a guy and he wasn't going for a walk. He was going for a run. But I just looked at his face and I could just see on his face, you know, he he has a goal in mind. It might be to run a certain distance at a certain speed. It might be to achieve a certain level of fitness. I mean, that goal is just energizing him and drawing him forward. And I think Peterson is is right in terms of all of his talk about an ideal that there needs to be an ideal. And you can sort of try to move around what those ideas are and abstract them into something like fitness. But probably in that guy's mind, there are much more physical entities of fitness that he is striving for than just fitness as such. And so I think that's how people work. And so I think this, you know, lots of people over the last few centuries have tried hard to sort of get a demythologized rational religion. And they're going to start institutions, at least in the West, that sort of mimic Christianity. Compt tried this very hard. You know, I talked to a guy in Unbelievable who was working on it and it almost never steals the culture in the way that Christianity did. And I think it's for all the same reasons why we elect presidents and religious movements are started by, you know, pioneers like Mohammed and Jesus and and the and Gautama, because it's that embodiedness and that givenness that that sort of gets idealized, mythologized that grabs us and off we go. Can I say something about that? Sure. Yeah, like I've, you know, like everybody, I guess, sort of been witnessing this interfaith dialogue between especially you, Paul, and And what's so interesting to me about it is what I think one thing for me seems to be doing in advocating a religion that's not a religion is he's trying to retain religious philosophy and especially religious practice without resorting to or succumbing to the temptation to articulate a speculative theology. And and there's, you know, there's a lot of reasons why you would want to dispense with the speculative theology and a lot of the big bugaboo among Christians, especially say like, you know, my friend here who looks like Jesus, the Paul up in Minneapolis here, is is that they don't take it to the point of being a religious person. Is that they don't take it to be speculative. So they're not as ready to dispense with it as verveky is. Well, another thing that's interesting about that is verveky seems to be a kind of neo Platonist. And that has emerged more and more fully over the last few years in the conversations. What's fascinating about that is the vast majority of Christian thought is itself neo Platonist. But it adds this speculative theology or perhaps even accounts for its neo Platonism by way of exclusively theological terms. And so it seems to me that verveky is saying and when part of the reason why there's there's so that why you could be so conversant, why he can be so conversant with Christians is much of Christian thought is just baptized Greek metaphysics. But the well, but what likely salted nut might know in attending his Eastern Orthodox Church is that there is this minority report within Christianity that says no, no, that's syncretistic scholastic theological paradigm is not necessarily the essence of Christian thought, much less hebraic theism. And that's what I would really love to see is a is a more kind of full throated explicitly Christian ontology come into dialogue with verveky's neo Platonist thought because I think he's really a Christian. I don't think you need Christian theology if you have neo Platonism, but I don't think that Christianity is reducible to neo Platonism either, which is why I would love to see you Paul talk with him about the before he fucking dies because he's 84 years old. He's not going to live. And he's one of the most eloquent advocates for an explicitly and exclusively Christian ontological perspective in plain commonsensical language. So I hope you can get for Fakie to talk to him. He's so old, Paul. You're much more unassuming. John's about as nice a guy to talk to as you can find. I mean, he's tremendously generous. But you know, to your point, though, and I agree, and this sort of is where I have to land the plane and get home here pretty quick. But y'all can keep talking on the Discord, obviously. But but you're going to want to hear my thoughts on this one, Paul, but oh, good. OK, well, and well, maybe we'll see what you have to say after I finish saying what I'm saying. Sort of where this whole conversation here started was. A lot of this neo Platonist thinking. An attempt to try to understand the events. And the person of Jesus of Nazareth and to fit that into the larger Hellenistic Eastern Roman Empire worldview. That you're correct in that that's all up here, but it's it's rooted in the events of Christ in his person that that just sort of how do we think about this properly? And so how do we think about this is really important for the the thinky talky sect that's way up here of which we've got plenty in this little corner of the Internet that YouTube sort of lends itself to. But the real Christian living. Is with flesh and blood people. And you can sort of say, OK, practice, but so much of that practice is in the service of the kind of the the experiential and the phenomenological trying to prime certain of those experiences. But it's actually in the flesh and blood living out of Christ in all of these different cultural contexts. Where the gospel resides and where the vast majority of Christians live. But there's always the up and down in between the registers, and that's where the the neo Platonism and the thinky talky and the abstract theology really contends with. So there's my little speech. I want to hear what Joey has to say now. He piqued my interest. So what's super valuable about written are and what John Verbeck has talked about talked about in it is that you could have a relationship with the Bible. You could have a religion that's not a religion. And so what you're doing with that is you're moving what the problem is in religion, which is all these religious people. So we can take this model that he's established for us and we can apply this to other things like Aetna, which is academia without academics. Get rid of all the academic principles, all these people quoting each other, all these certifications, all these people going to like these buildings that are just really not about the learning. That's how we fix academia. We just remove all the academics from it. And that way, the academics that have bothered me personally will no longer be involved in the project of academia. And that solves all the problems about how academia could get corrupted. It's the people. It's the same thing we said the other day. And I'm being absolutely facetious, but like these are this is a. This the idea of written are is that the system of religion can exist and be good without the people that are part of the system. And like, sure, great, great philosophical experiment. But like you, that's just empty buildings. And if you do the same thing to academia, it becomes super obvious to anyone involved in academics that like, no, you can't do that. You can't just get rid of all the principles and say, well, no, the purpose of academia is people need to be educated and they need to learn new information and have new new ideas. And it's like, well, let's just do that without all the other stuff that makes that possible. No, no. It's it's if you if you look at church history in some ways, Joey, what you're just talking about has been. Pursued, I won't say tried, because that sounds too much like failure failure pursued so many times, especially in the American context. It's like the problem is all of this stuff up there. So, I mean, the Anabaptist really perfected it in a lot of ways. And the irony is that the other stuff always just keeps growing again, because we've got this we've got we've got all people with big brains become Christians and they've got to keep their body and their mind together. And so they have to try to figure it out. And it all keeps going again and again. So it's a natural inclination people have, because when they find something that they think is a solution to something else, they want to they want to expand that solution to other people. But how do you do that? You eliminate variables. What's the most variable thing? People. If you eliminate people from your problem, your answers to the problems become a lot easier. And that's where you get the idealist way up here. That's it. It's so obvious. It's simple. The problem is people. But of course, there's no people that the whole goal was set for. Mark told me an anecdote earlier of like, oh, why doesn't Ukraine and Russia just figure out who would win the war and then just act as if they had fought it and just move on without it? It's like it's wars that aren't a war. It's like, I mean, we could do this. We could do this all day with stuff again. It's just you can't eliminate people to that level, despite how much you'd like to try. And why don't we just why don't we have all these head injuries in football? Let's just have Sports Illustrated tell us who's going to win the Super Bowl and just give them the trophy and they can all make the rings. Why have the season? They already do that. That the video games have gotten so good that Madden NFL, they can simulate the game ahead of time. And it's accurate more often than not. Really? They use it to make sports betting books now because it's so accurate as to what they think is going to happen in the game that it's way more accurate than any expert operating off of pure observation. However, it's still not the game and no one would accept it as the game. No one would accept computers playing computers as a way of predicting the outcome of a football game instead of watching the football game. And what's the difference? You know, it's football without the footballers. Like, it's not a thing. Wow. It's a useful tool for breaking things down to analyze portions of it. So it's not without any value. However, as a practice in and of itself, it's not that. I'm curious what you think and how you could say so definitively that Verbecky is attempting to construct religious communities without people. I don't see him as doing that at all. I mean, I do see him as trying to get rid of things that people often do, which is to gauge and speculative theology, perhaps. But I don't see it as... If you want to create a religion where no one in there is spiritual, well, good luck. Have fun. I want no part of that. He's creating nothing at this point. He's relying on other people to create what he thinks of as his vision. And his vision, roughly the way he states it is all the good things from religion and none of bad things from religion. And that's why it's the religion that's not a religion. That's where the name comes from. And I think that for me, saying that like Verbecky is a bad person or a bad guy for trying or thinking about this, because I do believe that people should experiment and they should think like they should think up these ideas and stuff. I'm just saying that I think this idea is a... You failed before you even started because the... On my own criticisms of Verbecky, I just don't see that as his idea. I don't see him as trying to get rid of people or hollow out religion. No, but that's all it is. But that's all it is. Verbecky is not there doing things. He's not even involved in the project in some sense. He said this explicitly. He's a non-participant in the project. He just wants to know what the idea is. The name itself is a square circle. It's an absurdity. Yes. Yeah. Well, it may be that someone has to go up to the mountain and talk to the non-god of the religion that's not a religion, then come down and explain it to the people. Maybe he's serving that role. But I don't see the religion as getting rid of people. No, he's explicitly not going to do that. He explicitly said he is not going to do anything like that ever. And that's why Joey's correct. His characterization is correct. And again, as a tool, as a concept to play with in order to see other things, it's valuable. But as an institution, the religion that is not a religion is absurd. No, I don't think it's absurd. Paul, talk to that guy on the fucking British show. I mean, there are people who are literally doing this. I mean, whether it has cache in the culture, whether it's successful or whether it has any future, whether there's a there, there, whatever, you can debate about that. But clearly, you can engage in a kind of religious community without having a definitive speculative theology. Clearly, you can do that. I agree. I don't think that that's a good idea. But clearly, you can do that and it's possible. I think that, as Paul was saying, it's been explored several times in the past, and sometimes it's been very valuable to go one way or the other, to go into the more disembodied, idyllic elements of your culture or your religion or into the more embodied practical aspect. And in some ways, it's almost relative. A weird, probably a bad analogy that came to mind is the Contiki project that Thor Heyerdahl participated in, where he's put forth this idea that people, essentially Stone Age people, could transverse the entire Pacific Ocean by writing on the Gulf Stream, I think is what it's called, right? It's called the Gulf Stream. Anyways, it's a current. And they remade this boat in the way that these primitive people made it. They said, we're going to do it exactly the way they did it. But there's one thing that they said this, they probably just didn't know enough. They probably just didn't have the technology that the boat didn't have a rudder. So the one modification they made was they put a rudder on it. Right. So they go out, they get in the ocean and their boat is about to fall apart. It is getting banged around. And they're like, this isn't going to make it miles, much less all the way across. And they took the rudder off and it stopped. It completely stopped. And they realized that they're surrounded by fish. They're surrounded by a current. They're being carried on this thing and it's working. Right. So it didn't exist for a reason. There's a bit of an instinct to then say, rudders are bad. Boats shouldn't have rudders. You should figure out where you're going and travel the way, you know, this ancient wisdom that boats don't need rudders. The rudders are a conceit. Right. Uh, I, that is not always true, but it's also not always wrong. Well, it's interesting in that case too, that they, they, they threw out all the theory and they made the darn raft. I there's Contiki and there's Rod, both of them. I loved, I read those when I was a teenager and I loved those stories. They're great books and, um, they're, they're, they're, they're, you can find old documentaries, I'm probably even on YouTube and, uh, it's, it's just fascinating stuff where it's like, Oh, ancient peoples couldn't get around the world as I, well, we've got these pictures of things that they did. Let's try and build one. All right. And this is, this is just so much fun. Let's not only try and build one, let's try and do it. Love it. I love it. You know, that's kind of a case in point, like Christian speculative theology has a whole very well developed conceptual apparatus to account for this notion of rudderless telos. Yes. We call that the Holy spirit. All right. On that note, I am going to end at least the YouTube stream. And, um, of course anybody who wants to jump into this conversation can find their way to the bridges of meaning discord server, where these kinds of conversations happen all the time. And it's the discord that's not a discord. So I approve the discord. That's not a discord. So thank you all for joining me. And I think I did, I did record this so I can put a copy of this on the voice only podcast. And, um, so thank you all. It's good to see y'all. See you. Thank you. Thanks. Bye.