https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Yn00pmo4sSE

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to do a little bit more reading in Matthew Peugeot's book, The Language of Creation, Symbolic Symbolism in Genesis. And I know it's a very popular book in these circles, and I think it is very much worthy of attention, and I think it's an important book actually. But I, as I mentioned in the last video where I talked about the introduction and the first chapter, the chapters are very short. I want to talk about the introduction, the first chapter. As a preacher, I just want to say a few things about some of the language and some of the, yeah, about some of the language because it very much gets into a lot of the kinds of things that I deal with. So, as you notice, I'm playing around with different ways of putting the screen. Chapter two, Coming Full Circle, the Copernican Revolution. God exiled him, the human, from the Garden of Eden to work the ground from which he was taken. The spiritual and material perspectives have always been in competition because they are fundamentally different. And if you remember from the first video where I did some commenting initially on the book, I don't have necessarily better words than spiritual and material for what he's doing here. But in terms of my experience as a preacher and as a pastor, I know what these words conjure up in the minds of listeners. When you hear, well, and part of it, the overlap isn't bad. So spiritual, of course, people hear that as immaterial and that's what's intended here. But again, there's sort of an implicit pictural embrace of a Cartesian dualism, that spiritual has an essence or a substance beneath it and it's a different substance from material. And I think actually part of what's going on as people are sort of implicitly intuitively feeling their way towards a new paradigm, this is one of the big issues involved. Now I had a conversation with Mark LeFevre and he sent me this diagram which I think is a helpful diagram and he used down at the bottom, this is his competing or at least adaptation of John Vervecki's Four Ps of Knowing and you'll notice that the perspectival is gone and the parabolic in terms of navigation is inserted there and I don't know if I'm going to post this before or after my conversation with Mark. I haven't decided that yet. But this touches on, if you look at the bottom line, because Mark and I got into talking about the heaven and earth duality, he set up his heaven and earth, his two worlds mythology, heaven and earth duality a little bit differently and I thought it was very interesting the way he set it up in terms of material as static and he calls it ephemeral rather than spiritual and that would be dynamic, more control and less control. Now if you think of human beings, human beings are hybrids, we're the breath of God and the stuff of earth and so we're sort of halfway, not really halfway in between but we are in fact a merger and I really like the way Matthew Peugeot gets into that idea as a merger. Now let's see if I can negotiate. Oh, look at that, okay. Still learning to use OBS. So again, instead of spiritual, Mark LeFevre uses ephemeral. Spiritual is the proper word for it, ephemeral works too. Material is the proper word for it but again, there's a dualism that I find when I listen carefully to Christians about these things and I think that dualism kind of lends us astray. So the spiritual material perspectives, okay, and even that, so a spiritual perspective here would basically be a spiritual worldview and I'll use that language a little bit later, a materialist worldview. So a spiritualist worldview or materialist worldview, I would think Aristotle comes into a lot of this because of Aristotle's ideas about causes. So spiritual and material perspectives have always been a competition because they are fundamentally different. Nevertheless, since neither of these worldviews has successfully subsumed the other and subsumed, replaced, subsumed again is a valid word, they have learned to coexist and even cooperate in the past, that's true. And I think that in many ways is what has happened in modernist Christianity. There are all these adaptations to a different world and a different world and a different world and it's sort of put together and I think a lot of those adaptations have led to the kinds of things that we've seen in the church. However, a series of important scientific discoveries have dealt a fatal blow to the spiritual worldview and again, I think someone to check out on this is C.S. Lewis's Discarded Image. Lewis, this very much is what Lewis's book, The Discarded Image is about. And Lewis goes into great depths describing aspects of the ancient medieval worldview that I think Matthew Peugeot is trying to illustrate here. And of course, the Copernican Revolution is big in that, in terms of a geocentric model of the universe versus a heliocentric model of the universe. And I think that's a very important point that even just thinking about these things like we do reemphasizes in my mind sort of the pictorial nature of our imagination. The geocentric worldview had in a sense the conscious observer, the first person conscious observer at its center. Now if you read C.S. Lewis's Discarded Image, you'll notice that again, the moon is sort of the beginning of the seven heavens and the seven heavens correspond to the seven stars. The seven stars are the seven, the moon, the sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. Okay, those are the seven stars. They correspond again with Lewis to the seven books of Narnia. They correspond to the seven days of the week. I did a sermon where I touched on this briefly a couple of weeks ago. And so there's a perspective of the earth there and the earth is sort of the lowest level, but it's the furthest level from God, okay? And the earth is sort of the bottom of the heap. And once you get out of, once you sort of cross over into space, into the lunar realm, then suddenly you're at a place where, well, all of these, all this decay stuff on earth doesn't really sort of happen up there in the heavenlies. And again, Lewis's book, The Discarded Image, is really helpful on that. And so I would recommend if you're getting into Peugeot's book, The Language of Creation, read C.S. Lewis's The Discarded Image because that will go into more detail of both the classical and the medieval perspectives on this. And Lewis at the book acknowledges also the death blow of the geocentric worldview. The scientific discoveries illustrated above were not merely technological, technical in nature. They transformed our conceptions of space, time, and causality. That's right, they all came together sort of. Ultimately, these discoveries completely undermine the foundations of traditional metaphysics. Therefore, and again, you can see that with, Descartes is right there at the turning of this. And so you can see Descartes, I almost wonder if Descartes' spiritual substance isn't sort of a leftover category of this other perspective. Ultimately, these discoveries completely undermine the foundations of traditional metaphysics. Therefore, when these changes were taking place during the Copernican Revolution, the stakes were much higher than merely defending geocentrism against heliocentrism. Remember Galileo, the math is better. And you can see Vervecky's work on this. They were also preserving the spiritual perspective from a completely materialistic worldview. That's a really key sentence, because if you want to understand something of the modernist-fundamentalist split, that's almost exactly what happens. By the time you get to the 19th and 20th century modernist-fundamentalist split, divide, the materialist perspective is so completely dominant that fundamentalists basically adopt the patterns of creation, but just try to slide the Bible in there instead of science. And they approach the Bible as a form of science. I got into this a little bit in my question and answer today. That was question and answer for January 22, for those of you who are watching this video later. From a scientific standpoint, it would be difficult to justify any attempts to cover up discoveries in order to preserve a debunked model of the universe. And again and again, you hit, well, the world is round. Well, does it look round? And I often wonder if we didn't have pictures from the perspective of the earth, from the moon, if we wouldn't so much just see the earth as a thing. And that's part of what all of these pictures that we grew up with of the round earth and a round moon and the solar system with the planets coming out. If you go to a science museum, they'll usually have elaborate displays of this. And what those are doing is sort of rewiring our mental imaginaries beyond sort of this phenomenological perspective, which Jonathan Pigeot regularly talks about and sort of rewires us to say, oh, that's the real picture, but real in what way as opposed to the other? Well, the math works better and you're very much gonna want to know that math if you're gonna be sending satellites and moon launches and expeditions to Mars, et cetera, et cetera. But there's a reality to the geocentric perspective that continues to endure. And in fact, I think in the personalism that arose in the 19th century and in the really the folk religious personalism that in some ways has dominated our ethical imaginations, this geocentric model continues to hold. However, from a biblical perspective, Matthew goes on, this seems to be the proper response to the tragedy of the fall in Genesis. Okay, losing the spiritual perspective. And again, I just, when you say that to a room full of evangelicals, they are going to be thinking something that isn't gonna be helpful to the overall pursuit of the book. The reason to preserve biblical cosmology against scientific hegemony is that it describes reality at a metacognitive level. Now there's a mouthful. And I think Jonathan does quite well, Matthew's brother, when he keeps talking about a phenomenological perspective, because in many ways the biblical cosmology is phenomenological. This was one of the main points that Jordan Peterson kept making over and over again in his biblical series. Hence the story of the fall is really about the process of knowledge itself and the dangers of acquiring greater material knowledge at the expense of spiritual insight. And again, spiritual insight, Peterson wouldn't use that word, but this is a point that he made over and over and over again in his biblical lectures is a point he made very clearly in his transliminal interviews, which again are some of his best interviews. So by comparing the diagrams below to the previous ones, it's as easy to understand why the Copernican Revolution may be interpreted as a reiteration of the narrative of the fall. That's an interesting idea. That's an interesting idea in a number of ways, because if you take Peugeot's cosmology here, you definitely see the Copernican Revolution as matter first, spiritual, to use his words, second, what do I mean by that? That psychology is derived from materiality. And so if you look at the conversations between Peugeot and Vervecky, it's all of this, is it emanation or is it emergence? And again, Vervecky is very interesting because he sees, he's always seeing the back and forth in this, the transjective as he calls it. And so the Copernican, and think of it in terms of a moral valence, the Copernican Revolution is also in a sense a, well, what is it? Now remember, science, and I made this point in my question and answer as well today, science is a way that Christians pursued knowledge of God. And if we say that today, if you imagine God to be a super thing that floats out there in space, something that is within the system, it doesn't make any sense because why would science teach us about God? But if you have much more of a God, an arenic God, then science is in fact pursuing God. And I think right there in looking at those two worlds, you can tell something of the transmission. And so you can see the Copernican Revolution as one more step because now in a sense, the heliocentric models are going to be privileged over the geocentric models. And this is going to play out in terms of status. This is going to play out in terms of who has the preeminence in the social categories. And so Matthew's observation of the Copernican Revolution sort of in symbolic resonance with the fall story, I think is really perceptive and very fruitful. The story of the Garden of Eden describes a state of innocence where humans occupied the central place in a relatively natural environment. And natural, I mean all these words when you're trying to do this kind of work are just reasons to pause. This naive perspective conveniently provided humans with a full understanding of their role in the universe and the spiritual purpose of existence. Spiritual purpose of existence, what would be the spiritual purpose of existence? And again, I think you could talk about the spiritual purpose of materiality. And that's where I think again Peugeot's work is very helpful because in a sense, he's saying spirit first, matter second instead of matter first, spirit second because if you go matter first, spirit second, spirit matter has no purpose and neither does spirit and you're going to have a meaning crisis. If you go spirit first, matter second, then matter has purpose and matter has meaning. And I think it's for this reason that it's the materialist world and even Christians within the materialist world that in fact have a meaning crisis. However, the garden was also a sheltered place. It was a tiny portion of a much greater world. Therefore, as soon as humans looked beyond the limits of the garden, their eyes were opened to a strange universe devoid of spiritual meaning. And this is where he's comparing the Copernican Revolution with the story of Genesis three. They knew that they were naked and saw their previous worldview as somewhat illusory. Once the bubble had been shattered, all attempts at covering it up were in vain and humans had no choice but to wander in a meaningless universe until they returned to the ground. In the metacognitive level, the narrative of the fall perfectly matches the plight of humanity since the Scientific Revolution. So even though these technical discoveries have locally debunked traditional cosmology, see and to think about in what ways were they debunked. And you know, even C.S. Lewis at the end of the Discarodated Image says the only problem with the old system afforded enormous amounts of meaning, the only problem with it was it wasn't true. And I think even Lewis has a lapse there because well, he should get into the question of what was true and what wasn't true. And you know, as we're reaching the end of modernity here, the truth of it is reemerging. And this is what happens when we get into a worldview that has some issues with it as sort of the illusion and the imaginary of that worldview recedes, some of the truth of other worldviews emerge more strongly. In general, the narratives of the Bible are about humanity's conflict, humanity's conflicted attempts to reconcile the spiritual truth with the physical reality in the hopes of acquiring divine knowledge. I don't know if I would phrase it that way. I think I agree with Peugeot that the overall goal is in fact the reconciliation of heaven and earth. It is the, and in that you have the redemption of the man who is the stuff of earth and the breath of God. And to have the, as Peugeot says, the spiritual and the material reconciled. I think that is the story of the Bible and it's there at the beginning and it's there at the end. And all of what we're doing now is, so in a sense, scientific revolution, materialism is in some ways an attempt to an attempt to probably compensate for some of the imbalance of the previous systems. But as is almost always the case, we're swinging back and forth. And so in a sense, modernity swung as far as it can and now it will be coming back. In general, the narratives of the Bible are about humanity's conflicted attempts to reconcile spiritual truth with physical reality in the hopes of acquiring divine knowledge. Okay, what do we mean by divine knowledge? To see through the eyes of God, to see things as God sees them, a monarchical vision as it were, but not really. For that reason, the ancient stories of the Bible will survive and eventually transcend any scientific discovery. I think that's true. As long as we recognize the level, that level of interpretation. I don't know if it's a level of interpretation. It's, I think, a perspective, well, that's what interpretation is. It's a perspective into the text. Returning to the Garden of Eden. Well, maybe this is a good place to stop before I get too far into others. These chapters are pretty short. Reconstruction of the Language of Creation. Again, I already talked about John Walton. But maybe I'll leave it here. Maybe I'll keep the video fairly short. But again, I'm just sort of walking through the book. I don't know how far I'll get. I tend to lose interest in things. But I came back to it and it's something that I think, yeah, I think it's an important book. And I think the book is a really, the book, and Jonathan Peugeot continues to, so you have Peugeot with his YouTube channel and you have Matthew, his brother. I'm sorry, do you just use the English word? It's just easier, because I already know, I'm not getting Peugeot quite correct. And so I know I'm gonna brutalize Matthew's French name. But I think it's an important book. And so because my interest is in language, I very much want to pay attention to the language and to get at the interpretive key. Again, in my question and answer today, I talked a bit about, well, the world that brought us all of these commentaries and the perspective that is built within these commentaries. Now, Jonathan Peugeot has a comment about commentaries, which isn't terribly generous. And I very much understand his point, because I've spent more time in a lot of these commentaries and I've seen so many commentaries that from a pastoral perspective, do almost nothing for the people and in fact do sometimes harm. Because I think part of being a pastor, and I think this is probably true of being an artist for Jonathan, forces you to resist some of what has happened in the last 200 years with respect to the biblical tradition and because you always have to have it, have heaven and earth meet. There's no way around it. So yeah, so if I think actually I'm gonna release this now, which so it's a late Friday afternoon, I never release videos this time, but I think I'm gonna release this now in anticipation of my conversation with Marc Lefebvre. Lefebvre, those French names. My conversation with Marc is about half personal. I wanted to dig into his story and half getting into his idea of knowledge. Let's see if I'm getting better and better at OBS with this stuff too. Marc of course has this diagram. And so part of what I want to do is work together between the Verveckian, what I can learn from John Vervecki and his tribe over there, including Marc and Manuel and Mary and sort of the Peugeot corner of the internet. I mean, I'm always sort of, a Protestant is between the traditionalists, the Peugeot brothers and the scientists, let's say that's represented by Vervecki and his side. And so as a Protestant, I'm just kind of right there in the middle. So I'll leave it at that. And I don't know how long this video is, but it's long enough I suppose. And I'll post it now and we'll see where it goes.