https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-ZMwT45bQnQ

 Ron, how are you? Oh, fine. This is a big day for you across the border. Yeah. It's a, I voted last week. So, yeah, I always enjoyed going to the polls, but you know, now with COVID and everything, we used to have a poll right here in the church, but they, California a few years ago, basically in Sacramento, everyone could, could just mail in their ballots. And so most of us did that. And so it's not as much fun. It's always sort of fun going to the poll and seeing your neighbors and casting your ballot. So, yeah. Where does California usually lay in that sort of Democrat, Republican teeter totter? Heavily democratic. Oh, did that? Yeah. Yeah. Trump, the polls are almost two thirds Biden over Trump here in California. Oh, so, and, and in fact, the California legislature almost has a super majority of Democrats and of course, a democratic governor. So it's, it's, uh, yeah, it's pretty very blue state. So Biden gets all those, Biden gets all those delegates. No problem. Yes. Yeah. So I looked actually when we used to have polling here, they, they do the counting and they'd have these little sheets and they just have them out there to look at. And so I could sort of look at the way my neighborhood would vote and, um, you know, it's quite democratic, but it's a, it's a screen, extremely diverse neighborhood and people, people make facile assumptions about ethnic minorities and politics that usually don't weigh out and people are very complex and many people who move here from overseas are quite traditional. And they often vote conservative. So a lot of people don't realize that they just, they don't know anybody except people like themselves. They just watch the news. Yeah. Yeah. There tends to be usually an immigrant population. If they're fleeing war or economic conditions, their social leanings tend to be very much in the direction that social conservatism, uh, even though they're grateful to escape where they've been, obviously they bring their worldviews with them on a whole range of social issues. Yep. Yep. Yep. So, well, how are, how are things north of the border? The border has been closed for a while. How are you guys faring with COVID and Fraser Valley? Well, it's, you know, first of all, the schooling, it's probably this, I don't know what it's like in California, but all of our courses mostly are online. Uh, so I try and with my courses do micro lectures that I post on the HiTory reader website. And then I go out for drinks or coffee or walks with students. So I sort of, or telephone conversation. So I try and bridge that more impersonal micro lecture books to read with more interaction, one form or another, whatever suits, suits the students. So it's, it's not so locked down. We can't try creative alternatives. Yeah. So it's, but it certainly is intensifying and it next semester will be all online as well. Oh, really? Wow. Wow. I would, I would imagine, I don't know, I would imagine that would take a degree. If I were a college professor, I would take a degree of fun out of the whole thing because absolutely, absolutely. I think most people go into teaching just because they enjoy being with people, interacting with them, lingering with them over a drink or a deli out for coffee or something. And when that is all gone, it becomes very more, it's you're just a more, an information factory. That's all. And that's not what good education, you get monkeys to do that sort of thing. So computers, but it's the personal element that really makes education education at its best. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, we, we hadn't, I don't know if you want to, if you don't want to talk about this, that's fine too, but, um, you guys have had some, uh, you, you had sent me some emails about, I don't even remember her name. She's a YouTuber. Um, Oh, or Southern maybe. Yeah. And she was, um, uh, you made her acquaintance and she was taking some classes with you guys. And so you guys kind of got in the middle of the, all of the broiling culture worth stuff a bit. Oh yeah. No, Lauren was the one actually who helped launch Peterson in two 16. She was with rebel media with Ezra Levant. She had left here. Yeah. You FV. She took classes with me and, uh, she was, she actually ran for the libertarian party, um, didn't do very well, but she, uh, she then moved to Toronto from the, the West coast was hired by rebel media, Ezra Levant, and, uh, they were the, she particularly was the one who was instrumental in filming that controversial U of T event that Jordan Peterson was at. So I have all those notes. She sent me all, and then she did the interview as well with the woman who was doing her PhD with them on looking at personality types and whether they swung to the right or the left or the center. And, uh, to what degree does type or conditioning predetermined voting or ideological. So she has a lovely interview of that. That was back in the autumn of two 16. And then she went on to increasingly probably become one of the leading divas of the right. Um, and so, yeah, we stay in touch regularly. She's in Australia now. Uh, she's just released another, um, a video or docudrama. She's tried to move, I think wisely. So I don't know if you saw the film that came out in the Atlantic called white noise, it features Spencer, uh, Karevac and Lauren, and, uh, they came here and did a long two hour interview with me a few years ago, and it was Lauren's, uh, hope that in the interview, she would talk about why she was leaving this right. Why it didn't make sense intellectually. Why it didn't make sense practically, which didn't mean she was swinging over to an uncritical left or a progressive left. She was trying to find some sort of a sane sensible center by which you hear the best insights of both sides. Um, and a lot and encourage each them to listen in the midst of these intense, you know, cannons turned on one another culture wars. And so she's, uh, she she's moved quite a bit to that, um, center, uh, as a result of, you know, her, her own journey, but she knows what it's like on that hyper Uber activist, right? Yeah. And she's certainly received, and I don't know if you read the article a few weeks ago, it was the fellow who did the film, Daniel Ambroso. Yeah, I did read that article. Yeah. And then she responded. And I mean, she was off, I mean, she was caricatured and said things about her that he took advantage of her. So then she wrote her a response, typical feisty law. And, uh, but she was hurt badly. And, um, uh, but it's, she, as a result of that, I mean, she's, she's gone right into the heart of both that very reactionary, right? As well as the Atlantic, right? Uh, David from sort of tradition and she's increasingly seen the way she's been treated if she doesn't go step before a certain, a certain agenda. And so she's a feisty person, but she has a very soft heart. And I think it's this tension between trying to make sense of the world we live in on the hot button issues without losing your soul in the process. Well, I think also, I mean, she was obviously quite young in 2016. And I believe, I mean, you had sent some, some of the stuff over. She's, she's, she's married. She has a child, you know, there, there's a, we, we've created a culture where, um, the youth don't get to be young in terms of having an understanding that it's going to, you're going to have to do some bumping around in this world to get your bearings and to figure some things out. And if, if we, as a, if we, as a culture, don't afford young people, the opportunity to, uh, to try some things out before, you know, I, now I'm in my 50s, I'm in my I remember people complaining to Tim Keller that he wasn't writing books. He says, Hey, anything I would have written in my twenties, I'd want to burn anything in my thirties or forties was probably not fully cooked. You know, you need, you'll want some time to gain wisdom and both the, um, the, the social media and the, the food fights that develop around them just sort of lure people in, you know, to try to get them to be young and to be able to and I, you know, I really feel, I really feel for, um, for young people that get caught in this thing, especially those who are successful because that's, that's almost the worst. Yes. Yeah. And a temperament, I mean, if, I mean, someone like Lauren is, is not an apathetic, cynical sort of person. She's idealistic and passionate. And then of course people can go to the right or the left and that, but when they're young, it reminds me of, I did a longer article a few weeks ago on the Coleridge and Wordsworth and their naive turn to the French revolution in the 1790s and then of course they're living to regret that. But again, they were in their twenties. They had their criticisms of the world they lived in and they idealized what was happening across the water. They saw an overthrow of what they saw was an oppressive regime. They saw people reacting to it and they saw, you know, a better world or what they thought a better world was coming into being only to realize that, you know, those who are often oppressed when they get power, they equally oppress. Yeah. And so you get this. And so then they, you know, they, in the seven late 1790s out of that comes lyrical ballads of 1798 in which they're rethinking stuff. So, yeah, I think people who tend to do well early just because they're committed, they're intense, they're passionate people. I mean, how can you not love them? And then they go right into the center of the darkness. But out of that, experientially, they learn where not to go into the future. And so it's, it's learning by pretty intense experience. Yeah. Yeah. Well, part of, part of what brings us together today is, you know, we've spoken about Jordan Peterson in the past, and he has thankfully reemerged from his pause, his medical induced pause. And he's announced that he's going to pick up the book of Proverbs, which really does figure into this because the book of Proverbs is a, is in many ways in the Bible, a manual for young people about how to gain wisdom and, and, and learn their way. And so you had some, you had some very interesting thoughts about that. So what were your, what were your impressions when you heard that Jordan was going to pick up the biblical series again and, and try his hand at Proverbs? Well, I think his earlier journey and commitment to the role of myth, as I think I mentioned to you, myth is about a moral way of seeing the world and how we live and decisions and consequences through story. And as people allow those stories to get inside of them, the hope is that it will allow them to orient their life in a meaningful direction. So people who capitulate to bitterness or anger or go over to darkness, there are implications for that. So you look at Lord of the Rings, you know, you get Saruman is a white wizard. He makes certain choices out of cynicism, skepticism. So he'll identify himself with, with darkness. You get multiple myths really are about a moral vision and the story or a parable or a narrative that is given to us by which we sit on that egg really and see what hatches. And so whether it's, you know, Western myths of the Greek or Roman tradition or Egyptian myths or Indian myths or Chinese myths, Jordan Peterson mined that shaft very, very well. But underneath it really was his argument that there is a structure and particularly in a post structural world that argues there is no order other than what we make. Myth is a way of saying, no, in fact, there is a order. And if you use your freedom to violate it, you will lose your freedom and you'll lose any sense of identity. And so proverbs in that sense is a continuation of a sense. There is a moral order. There's wisdom and wisdom. I don't know if we've talked about before, but I did an article on the difference between gnosis or those who feel they have to absolutely know in terms of ethical issues, political issues, ecological issues, military issues. And then often those who are drawn into a Gnostic world and see the pain, the hurt, the betrayal, they often go the other side to agnosis or agnosticism, which is its own form of knowing. I'm not going to believe anything anymore. So agnosis is just gnosis as well. And wisdom is that middle way that via media of which proverbs in many wisdom books are attempting to get at that. Be careful of going too far down one direction or another. They both are dead ends. But what are the myths that allow us to understand ourselves, our journey, identity, public life in a way which is meaningful over the long run? So I think there's a natural unfolding in that sense of Peterson going from myths to proverbs because proverbs certainly in the Hebrew canon is the quintessential explicit book on by Solomon, you know, attempting to address his son. What is a wise way to live? It was interesting to me how, you know, we don't know, we know a degree about what happened with Jordan. I mean, obviously his with again, with getting off the benzodiazepine, you know, terrible time with that withdrawal. You know, it in fact had to go all the way was in the United States for a while, had to go to Russia and then was recovering somewhere in the Balkans when he came down with Covid, sort of reemerged in reemerged back at home around Canadian Thanksgiving and then and then able to get in front of his camera again. And we haven't heard much about the second book yet in terms of whether he was able to finish that. But the the proverbs to me, I think, is a very important part of the But the the proverbs to me seemed an interesting choice, partly because his his emphasis. You know, I think I think part of what happened towards the end of his time was he sort of got caught up into the overtly political realm. That's really what took him to prominence, you know, at the same time as Lauren And and I think especially the book tour sort of drew him there. So it was peculiar. It was interesting. And I think actually encouraging to me that he he comes back from this, you know, in what would be in his terminology, a trip to the underworld for for six to nine months and then reemerge with OK, we've got to do the biblical series. Didn't really announce much beyond that. And then proverbs, especially given, I think, sort of how you and I both saw him in terms of really coming, really being seen by young men often in our cultures as someone who could guide them. His book was Twelve Rules for Life, which was, you know, it had its it had its mythic elements in it, but it was fairly straightforward and didactic as twelve rules were, you know, do this, don't do that. And so it was very interesting to see proverbs come up. And I think I think a good choice for him. Do you do you think the timing will be the same, though? I mean, now looking back, we're just on Election Day 2020. Trump is the not is not the same individual he was in 2015, 2016. The times are not the same. I think in some ways it's a more cynical, jaded time. Obviously, Peterson has a huge fan base out there who will at least give him an initial listen. Do you think the do you think the times will be different? What do you think? Just, you know, of course, we don't know. How does he play in terms of the difference between 2016 and 2020? Well, as you say, I think the context historically is a little different. I think certainly the United States, they've seen a certain level of arrogance and where it can go. I mean, I know some Christians tend to see him as Cyrus. I think he's probably closer to Farrow or Belshazzar and Daniel than Cyrus. But unless something unusual happens, I see Farrow or Belshazzar going down. And there'll be a sort of a relief will emerge in the American context and the broader ripple effect from that as well. And out of that, I think, and this is where maybe Peterson factors in, but where people will identify with them also, he's to use collage as rhyme in the ancient Mariner. He's a sadder, but a wiser person. And so for those who lean on the cynical side, the skeptical side, those who've gone to places of paralysis and impotence and not knowing what to do or what to think, he can identify with them. He's been there. He's, you know, like Dostoevsky, he's been in the underground like Dante. He's been in the inferno. So his work on problems will be a little different. In the inferno. So his work on problems will not only focus on progress, but it will draw this rich literary experience as well as personal experience together. He's never been tempted by gnosis in that sense. He's always been suspicious of herdism of the right or the left. And this is what gives him a voice on the right, basically wooing people, sort of be careful. You go too far down that direction, you lose your humanity. And above all else, and as we talked a little earlier, this is the 60th anniversary of Boris Pasternak's death, 1960. And Dr. Zhivago at the heart of Dr. Zhivago, and Peterson does draw from these great Russian classics, Solzhenitsyn and Dostoevsky, people who know the darkness, no herdism or group think, or what Lewis would call the inner ring and how you lose your soul in the process. I think with his work on progress, if he does it wisely and in a nuanced way, because the danger sometimes of progress, it can be formulaic. And then if you do this, good will come, plenty will occur. And it's a bit of a simplistic view of life. And so I think he has the wisdom to not see it as cliche formulaic morals, because he suffered too much to say, if you live wisely, you live justly, that good will emerge, the family will grow healthy, the crops will be plentiful. It's sort of the success, a comedic sort of an ending. He's known tragedy too much. And I think many in the United States, obviously, have suffered in the last, considerably the last few years, just what's happened. And so I think the Americans and others are coming out of a painful period of their history. And out of that, they're going to be looking for wisdom and insight. And I think if if Peterson does proverbs, not in a silly formulaic manner, but grapples with proverbs, I think he can move into the next level of addressing people who are longing for wisdom, not just cynicism, skepticism, or let's have another ideological agenda by which we can beat others with. He can offer and you can see the suffering on his face. Of course, you follow the face into the soul. So what do you think? I don't know. I, you know, I've spoken with over the last couple of years, I've spoken with a number of people who who know him personally, a number, quite a few former students. And part of the, you know, some of the issues that we've talked about in previous conversations, to what degree does he have more? To what degree does he have more? Some students, some students had been on the Jordan Peterson ride before he ever got famous. And they had, they were either undergrad students or graduate students with him or both. And, and they came to the position that he had, if you go back over his years of teaching on YouTube, there's his, you know, his, for the most part, his stuff was there for quite a while. And sort of by virtue of his digging in about pronouns, really more about compelled speech than the pronouns necessarily, that suddenly he gets rocketed onto this stage. And I think in some ways at that, at that, that inflection point that was 2016, you know, he came to prominence, the man and the moment found, you know, came together. I don't know, I don't know if we will see that happen again. Again, there are a huge number of individuals out there who love him, feel deeply grateful to him because he really helped turn some lights on for them and put them in another direction. But almost everything he did from April 2018 to June 2019 felt, and my best word for it is decadent. Increasingly, he was sort of over there on the political spectrum rather than the addressing individuals and how to improve their lives. The mythology sort of receded, it was much more direct. And so I'm, I think Proverbs is a good choice for him. But I agree with you that I've, you know, as a preacher, I've, and I know other preachers have done it successfully. I've never really gone into the book of Proverbs because it's a far trickier book than would be apparent. People sort of go into it, they'll read individual Proverbs and sort of in their own mental space, they just kind of read through, read through, read through, find one that sort of catches for them and say, aha, here it is. But the, you know, the path of wisdom, you know, lady wisdom, there's a much deeper thread to that book. And whereas people sometimes will take an individual Proverb and say, well, here's the key. Well, the book of Proverbs has a lot of Proverbs. And I think it invites the reader to come in. And I think just as you said, sort of a balance of gnosis and agnosis where you're saying, okay, well, this seems to be true. This seems to be right. But then from over here, we see this. And so the way of wisdom is a way of recognizing that we cannot map this world to the degree of perfection so that we can own it and wield it. And the process of wisdom is a careful interchange of, in a sense, working dialectically with the world as sort of a partner. And that's really where lady wisdom comes in. And if, you know, in some ways, lady wisdom is the, you know, you know, the Lord Yahweh is very male. And lady wisdom sort of comes in and invites the young man to, okay, now learn from me in a more sensitive, feminine way, the subtleties of this world, the fact that although you may be a strong young man, you can't necessarily grasp it with both hands and make it your own. You're going to have to make your way subtly and engage in conversation and back and forth to actually learn. And of course, Old Testament wisdom, chokma, excellence. And, you know, people often, Solomon was the wisest king. Well, Solomon was the most skilled king. And so, again, I see a great deal of potential there for Peterson because he did call young men into wisdom. But it's, you know, there's going to have to be, I think, another level of nuance and interplay that if he really wants to bring out some of the riches in the book of Proverbs, it's going to take something a little bit different than just sort of the big myth, which, of course, Genesis was so rich with. Yeah, I think some of your points are very well taken in that he did perhaps get addicted too much to the treadmill of the populace tour and the big crowds. And then inevitably the fall comes from that because people can only move that fast for so long. But myth is a motherlode. It's a gold mine that there is no end, not only the myths themselves, but how the myths are interpreted and applied for people's lives. And myth is about wisdom. I think your point is very well taken in terms of Proverbs because you get two levels in Proverbs. And if people sometimes get hooked on one and not the other, they miss it. One is sort of the moral insights. If you do this, if you follow wisdom, you'll be on a good path. You'll have things will work out well. If you don't, if you're simple minded, if you're these are the so on the one that that exists. On the other hand, there's the dynamic of Lady Wisdom, who comes to us in the midst of life's complex realities. She woos, she calls, she bids, she invites, evokes. And that's a more dynamic quality in the midst of often competing goods in life. Then how do you make sense? So there is this in that sense, I don't want to keep referring to Pasternak and Dr. Zhivago, but Laura is very much the wisdom figure in Dr. Zhivago, of which Zhivago himself is constantly struggling to make sense of. And he's a Hamlet like figure in many ways paralyzed by his own doubting Thomas temperament versus the political idealists, Pasha and Strelnikov, who see life black and white, they sacrifice their humanity for the purpose of a vision and they do destruction on one and all. Zhivago sees where that leads and it's like, I'm not buying into this. Okay, so what are you buying into? Well, I can't believe in anything. So he becomes, he's the Hamlet figure. So the first poem in Dr. Zhivago is Hamlet and Pasternak was one of the great Russian translators of European literature of which Hamlet was one of his key works. So wisdom in Proverbs then, which you many interpreters of Zhivago and Pasternak see really Zhivago is a literary outworking of Proverbs in that sense. And so you get, you know, lady wisdom in Proverbs. Well, Larissa or Laura in Zhivago is lady wisdom who will not buy into simple formulas of how you bring about the good, the just, the revolution. You don't support the revolutionary cause. You don't support the czarist regime. And of course, Pasternak lived that and sat in many ways, you know, the implications he suffered just as a soul's in its and just as a soul's in its and it later be interesting if Peterson ever did Proverbs and Dr. Zhivago because it takes you into there are no simple moral maxims when you get in a historic situation like that. And even if a person, you know, the culture wars we live today, I mean, people on the left, they can shrink a vision that simplifies what justice or peacemaking is and that can happen on the right as well. And there's a longing for humans to be part of a community, but then the question, what's the price you pay to belong to this tribe, this clan. And so where does lady wisdom in Proverbs fit in beyond little moral maxims? And I think this is the tension of Proverbs. And if Peterson can draw that out, looking at yeah, there's these maxims, but there's more to Proverbs than that. It's a much more nuanced book that calls people into how to listen in the middle of a difficult public hot button areas in life and to know how to stick handle round the landmines, the tribal commitments and the implications of saying no to someone and then being as it were spit on for doing so. But yeah, I agree. There is this if Proverbs is interpreted wisely as it is about wisdom, you've got the divine feminine and you've got the much more dialogical element with the moral maxim. So it's this tension. What are your thoughts on that? Well, you know, Peterson and I usually I look at Peterson sort of October 2016 to June 2019. This is Peterson's first wave. And he of course was categorized in a certain way. And I think this framed by many in the culture war context as sort of brutally masculine. And I I've listened to far more of his content than many of his critics. And I often found him quite balanced when he would say things like what woman wants a man who hasn't grown up. And so I think in the first wave, the message was really to men, grow up, take responsibility, kind of a moralist in that way. And in that sense, perhaps giving voice to that one voice in the book of Proverbs. But I could see if he would pick up on lady wisdom now and bring out the feminine. That could be an extremely for you know, I think that could be especially for his audience, an extremely powerful thing. If he could, if he could, you know, when I started my meetup here locally, I was explaining to some people of the church what was going on. I was saying, Yeah, mostly my meetup are a lot of single, single young men in their 20s and 30s. And, you know, one of the women of my church said, Well, you know, what hat what would happen if we could draw a bunch of single young women in their 20s and 30s? Wouldn't that sort of help the meetup along become in a sense a full congregation? And if Peterson can, I think, as you said, bring in lady wisdom and bring in this, this second, you know, the first sort of the first easy layer, moral maxims for success, but the second more subtle layer, which I think as you you know, is the more feminine, drawing the attention to, okay, here's the here's the one point, let's bring in the other, if he could have his second wave sort of round out the first wave, that could do that could do a lot, I think not only in terms of continuing to educate, mature and satisfy his established audience, but also bring into it really much more respect and understanding from some women out there. Now he has a he had, you know, I'm not going to say that his initial audience was mostly men, but certainly men grabbed on to it, if he could sort of round that out. And I, you know, given what I saw, especially before his content before October 16, most of his classes had women in it. And he was a popular professor, he clearly knows how to engage a female audience. And if he could use proverbs to sort of pivot and bring the women in and put his audience together, that has, I would think, tremendous potential, and could really do a lot of good to sort of heal this men against women culture war we've got going now. And so that that would be a truly remarkable thing, if he can pull that off. Yeah, I know, I would agree if these I mean, inevitably, when you go to myth, you've got the dark sides of the male and the female and underneath human nature, you've got both aspiration and demonization, it's the shadow. But if he's overplayed, like even his sometimes constant critique of frozen, and then you get audiences laughing, and you want to say, Oh, come, come, you don't have to turn on this particular Disney film, the issues that are being grappled with in frozen go much deeper than male female issues. And, but for some, I think, many women felt this was an attack against feminism, because obviously, the men are portrayed as adults, in some ways, are quite incompetent and stumbling around. And it's women who are grappling with with the big issues. But yeah, I would agree if he can bring together his rich reservoir that he has of myth, and the wisdom which is embodied in myth, and then link up that with proverbs, and lady wisdom, that can be dynamic, it can be quite explosive, actually, in terms of bringing together the best of the feminine and the masculine, while being acutely aware that both can have tendencies to be egoistic, narcissistic, indulgent. That's just the tensions, what goes back to Plato, the dark and the light, dark and the light horse, in that sense. But yes, I would agree if his approach to proverbs emerges with a deep respect for lady wisdom, and how she calls, she woos into a relational journey, not just a maxim journey, little ethical. So, so 12 real rules is a bit like proverbs without the relational side, without lady wisdom. Right. You know, this is the road you walk, and do what you're told. And if you don't do what you're told, these are the, well, life's more subtle than that. But often that is needed as well. Yeah. So it should never be, some people's minds think in terms of Manichean either or dualism. It's always this, how do you hold together structure, but dynamism within structure and flexibility in structure too. That's much harder to do. And if he can use proverbs, and even Exodus, because Exodus allegorically is about leaving the Egypt of your false self, entering into the desert where there's uncertainty. And now who am I? I thought I was a citizen of this world, even though it was difficult in Egypt, and I was oppressed. But now I've got out of the cage, am I just going from one cage into another cage? At this time, I'm absolutely lost in the desert of non-being. I mean, he can certainly read Exodus mythically, allegorically. And if he brings together Exodus and proverbs, it could be dynamite in terms of, because Exodus is not just a moral maxims, it's people floundering and feeling their way, wanting to return to the leeks and melons of Egypt, but they're going forward into new being, new possibilities. And the price of freedom is not easy. It's easier to retreat to unfreedom in a cage, which is predictable, secure, ordered. But faith calls you to freedom from that, to overcome that longing, that need. And so lady wisdom, lady wisdom, you find the same thing in Dr. Zhivago, apologies for returning to it. But it's the same thing, you know, Laura is always calling her first husband, Shtrelnikov, to come back to his humanity. You've become a ruthless ideologue that's burning villages in the name of the perfect utopian society. But at the end of his life, he longs for Laura again. And he realizes, as the clan he has served, he's disposable because he no more agrees with their agenda. And he begins to return to his deeper longings and deeper needs, which is Laura. Zhivago does the same thing. And this is where you get the tensions of lady wisdom trying to sort out these men, you know, in terms of misguided desires, where they've sold themselves for a utopian dream. Shtrelnikov, the other, I can't believe in anything. He's the Hamlet figure, but she's the wisdom figure. And so I think if Peterson could even, I mean, in that sense, Zhivago is a far more nuanced book than Solzhenitsyn or Dostoevsky. And it's worked out in the midst of very intense culture wars, which gives it a perennial significance for us today. Obviously, we're not in Russia. But the intensity of tribes lining up, interpreting certain hot button issues, rejecting those who don't buy into a cancel culture. Well, that's just classic Dr. Zhivago. And so the one temptation is the Shtrelnikov, the other is the cynic, the Zhivago. There's the wisdom, there's the Laura. And so, I mean, if Peterson could pick up on something like Zhivago and Proverbs, there's a dynamism there that I think could be quite profitable for people wanting him to take the next step in his own journey, as well as interpreting Proverbs, Deuteronomy. What do you think about that? Well, I like how you brought Exodus into it, because again, I think part of the first wave was the timing. But I've been preaching through Exodus for the last number of months. And Exodus is this, we've been in a cultural phase of revolution where we imagine the, we identify the enemy. It's Pharaoh, and Pharaoh has enslaved us, and Pharaoh is genocidal. And of course, the Lord does this work of the plagues, and they go out, but now they're out in the desert. And just as you said, very quickly, they're thinking about the leeks and onions in Egypt. And remember back in the good old days when we didn't even have to, when they gave us straw for our bricks, and, oh gosh, wasn't it wonderful to be a slave? And so, in terms of the Peterson's audience, and I mean, I got into this partly simply because I saw he was lighting up individuals, and they were making choices in some ways to get out of their mother's basement. But I also knew that they were going to need a community to get out into. You can't, I mean, if you go in Jordan Peterson, I mean, in some ways, he was like a traveling evangelist or preacher, he would get out there, turn on the audience, people would have a vision for a new life. But you don't just get a new life out of a vision and ambition to have one, the actual creation of a new life, you know, certainly requires, as we've said that, you know, keep your room clean, you know, learn a few things before you open your mouth, do all of that, do all of those maxims. But very quickly into it, you discover that many of the bondages that have, that produced the slavery you were suffering under are not simply from Pharaoh, they're inside yourself. And so, of course, Exodus begins with the deliverance from Egypt, God comes in with this mighty work. And then very quickly, you know, we've got some, we've got some problems right away. And then you're at Sinai, and then you've got these 10 words. And so here now is the shape of the new life. And of course, they're not gonna, they're not gonna make it, they're gonna struggle, and they're gonna go to the edge of the promised land, and they're gonna panic. And the, you know, our children are going to be killed. And so no, actually, you're gonna go back into the desert and die and your children are going to take the land, which is, of course, how the story continues. So I, you know, I, again, I am, I'm just tremendously, I was just tremendously pleased to see Jordan able to make a YouTube video, a brief one, get to the point of wellness where he could say, these are my plans, I hope his health holds so that he can follow through on them. And, and I really hope that he takes the time to be able to maintain his health, and to be able to follow through with Proverbs. And again, I was so pleased it wasn't 12 more rules from life, new book tour, I'm gonna go out in places and talk about how the left is bad, and we're losing Western civilization, you know, there's, there's truth in lots of that. But the, the truly enduring work he will do, I think, is much more along the lines of this large community of men and women who on the basis of his first wave have made improvements in their life. And how can they go on work from their gains, continue to not only sort out themselves as individuals, be able to integrate into an established community, and of course, in my frame, build communities that will probably, if not be churches, be church-like, build productive family relationships, have children, you know, basically get on with building a civilization. So I, again, I see the potential there, but it's a big order. Well, I think if he, the, obviously Proverbs, you're dealing with a father-son, but the father also genuflects to lady wisdom, so you get an interesting, but then the nice thing about Exodus, which I think is a complement to Proverbs, is that you get, you know, as they're leaving Egypt, you get how the complex nature of a community and the divisive nature and people turning on one another. And so how do you hold together a community where there's division, where there's people lining up on different sides? It can be personally, it can be theological, it can be political, or we're not getting the bread, we're not getting the water, and Moses, you're not leading, or where's Aaron? People complaining and people cynical. One temptation is to just drop out and say, I'm not, I'm going back to Egypt. Okay, this is a utopian idea. It makes no sense. I'm going back to the cage, to slavery. The other is just to be uncritical entirely and just genuflect to whatever authority is. The more difficult and more mature one is how does one live together in the midst of community when there's conflict, when there's tension, when there's uncertainty, but knowing how to listen to Lady Wisdom as she guides the community forward. And so if Exodus, because Exodus is just a classic tale of community trying to find itself on the road with all the reactions people can have to that. So Proverbs is more father-son, you know, family, Lady Wisdom. Okay, now let's broaden that out to actually a community trying to break free from injustice in a pharaonic dynasty. But what's the price you pay for communal justice? What's often, you know, clashes, horn-butting, disagreements, people walking off in a huff, all of these very human aspects. And so that way Exodus is a wonderful complementary story of, okay, so how do we actually communally leave Egypt? How does Lady Wisdom, beyond just dad and son and family, the sort of the small oikos unit, when you move from oikos in the Greek sense to polos or public communal life, how do people remain loyal yet critical? Many people are critical, but not loyal. Then you can have loyal people who are not critical. But Exodus, well ex hodos, is just the path out. So the path out of our false self, our, what Shakespeare would say, being cabin cribbed and confined into our new freedom. How does that work in a non-utopian manner? Oh, it's good. That's good. I think that's probably good for Peterson and Proverbs. Any books you're writing or have written recently, Ron? What have you been working on? Are you doing something on Dr. Zhivago? Well, yeah, as I said, there's a bunch of us in Europe, in North America, around the world, because it's the 60th anniversary since Pasternak died. We're all reading not only Zhivago, but many of other Pasternak's works, not only because of the epic nature of the novel, but also trying to look at the relationship of Pasternak, Zhivago, then and now in the midst of the intense culture wars and people lining up between different tribes on the right or the left. And often those who become cynical in the midst of that, they can't believe anyone. So what can a Lara, what can a Lady Wisdom, what are the types in Dr. Zhivago we see, you know, on the stage of public life all over the place today? Those sort of actors, as it were, they're different people, but the script remains the same. Just new actors come on stage and they uncritically, you know, trot out their little role on the stage of life, often uncritically acting out of a script. So Pasternak, and also he brings in, which I think Peterson understands, and I hope he holds intention, is the whole tragic element of life. In that, because we, in the West, largely in a more popular level through Walt Disney and certain epic works, it's a comedic approach. There is the agon, there is the struggle people face, and if people are, you know, honest and try and overcome their difficulties, then the ending is generally good. So you get the great epic, say, of, you know, the last decade or so, Lord of the Rings, there's the struggle in each of the books, it ends good. Middle Earth is saved, Aragon is on the throne, Gandalf is happy. Harry Potter faces his issue, finally, you know, it ends happily. Voldemort is banished. You get Star Wars, the Jedi's finally, you know, defeat the Sith. You get Chronicles of Narnia, they're comedic in that sense. Now, obviously, Walt Disney is a cruder form of those more layered and subtle, but what they don't give us is what happens when there isn't a happy ending? What happens when the women and men who try and live wisely and well, the son who listens to the father, those who listen to lady wisdom, it ends in tragedy. And so just to sort of maybe retell a tale, what Pasternak does with the St. George and the dragon one, most of us, when we think of St. George and the dragon, we think of St. George fighting for injustice to the dragon that has to be slain so the land will be pure and clean. There's usually a lady who has the dragon has stolen. So the myth unfolds in a way. If you're going to live your life meaningfully, like a St. George, you have to engage the dragons and there are different things in your life. You have to save people who are victimized, in this case, mythically, the divine feminine. Obviously, that can be reversed, but the St. George and the dragon does end happy. So there's the notion that the good is victorious over the evil, the real even the dragon is slain, you get this and Lord of the Rings smog is slain, Nibelungen lead Siegfried kills the dragon. It ends positively. Now what Pasternak does with his story of this fits more into a tragic side. And it's not that he's only tragic, he tries to hold together comedic and tragic. So, you know, a more cliche or simplistic or formulaic life is not done. So St. George is going on his horse, he hears the dark breathing of the dragon in the cave and the smoke and the poisonous fumes that come out. He knows he has to deal with the dragon of injustice or brutality or bitterness or anger, all of these things that can be internal or external. So he begins to engage the dragon, but what happens is he falls off his horse, the horse kills the dragon, then the horse is killed and St. George himself falls on the ground, the woman falls on the ground and what Pasternak does, he says, you have at the end of the fairy tale, do they both die and there is no happy ending or are they both? And so you have an ambiguous future open. So out of the desire for justice or what is right or facing into injustice of the dragon, the mythically the dragon, which you find in many places, within the standard mythological read, there's victory, it's overcome. Pasternak lives through the Russian Revolution. He sees good people, it doesn't work out. He himself obviously suffered as a result of Solzhenitsyn suffered, a Dovstoevsky suffered like this. He knows it. He's much more tender in his writing and more lyrical and poetic than his Solzhenitsyn and Dovstoevsky. But he wants to say, don't slip into formulas, you know, and just because you want to do the good doesn't mean the means you use or the end you're going to live in is necessarily going to be a health and wealth prosperity, which you get in Proverbs a little bit. And this is where I think Lady Wisdom, because Laura and Zhivago and Strelnikov and Komarovsky and I mean, all these people are grappling with the comedic, but they're living in a tragic. And so how do these two come together? So maybe we could even call this little dialogue Pasternak-Peterson in Proverbs. That would work. Yeah, I don't know. But how do you bring together this? And I just mentioned the St. George one, because that's of these poems at the end of Dr. Zhivago. He rethinks a myth and of course, Peterson deeply appreciates myth. But then he reframes it in a way that be careful when this myth is told St. George and the Dragon, you don't do the comedic. Pasternak's life story like Solzhenitsyn's Dovstoevsky is not necessarily materialistic health and wealth. These people live in immense tragic elements and even when Solzhenitsyn gets out of Russia, these psychological dynamics that he lived with, I mean, you read the writings of Alexander Shmemmon and Solzhenitsyn, you know, very painful what he had to live with. When I was on staff with Amnesty International, some of the best women and men and, you know, politically had to work on their behalf. They'd been tortured in prison. So I mean, now when we'd managed for those we did manage to get out of these tragic circumstances, these people psychologically for the rest of their life where, you know, they'll never overcome those things. So physically they're out of torture, they're not prisoners anymore, but their internal souls have been damaged for life and there's a tragic side to that. So I would think if, you know, the Pasternak-Peterson proverb, as long as that tragic comedic side is lived in tension, because you could go too far down the tragic, you're just into cynicism and what's the point of doing anything and life is, you know, short, nasty and brutish and it's just a world of wolves against wolves and I can't trust it. Well, that's the agnosis, that's cliff edge. The other is naive comedic. If I just do this, I follow this formula. If I do these little aphorisms in the Proverbs, there'll be things will work out well, no, not really. And then people become cynical of the Bible or of God if they're presented this particular worldview and then they have deaths or illnesses, you know, even something is like families or, well, I thought if I serve God then there, you know, the family would be healthy and wealthy and, you know, many children and have a good job and the house would look well. So what happens when life doesn't work that way when a curveball comes, which is tragic and it's said, so how then does a person process wisdom, the relationship to God, the relationship to faith. So Pasternak to his greatness as he's drawing on sort of Greek tragedians like Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides or Shakespeare, you know, Hamlet, Lear, Macbeth or say Robinson, Jefferson, a great poet in California, Carmel, Hardy. So it's these, and I think if Peterson, and he certainly has lived suffering, he understands tragedy, he knows the myths. And so to the degree he can read Proverbs in a dynamic way and not a comedic formulaic way, I think he will reach a whole new level, a whole new audience in that sense. What do you think? Well, I agree. I'd throw another P, pastoring, because, you know, as a pastor, pastor of an older, an aging congregation, which is mine, you know, one of the things in my 20-some year tenure here is that you're walking people into the later stages of their lives, which is for almost everyone a period of loss. You begin to lose your health, you're losing some of your agency, you're losing your influence, you know where this road is going, but you have no idea exactly the passage it will take. Maybe there'll be a sudden heart attack and life will be lost. Maybe there'll be cancer and you'll have to walk this road of not knowing, and how do you do this? So no, I think that's, Ron, I think that's really a good word. And it's, I'm not, I personally, I'm not familiar with Pasternak at all. And you've kind of, as you so often do, motivated me to pick up yet another book. But the, and I think that's especially helpful for the second wave for Peterson, because again, a lot of the people, my life has, you know, Jordan Peterson put me on a different trajectory in that, you know, I not only have this local congregation now sort of pulled apart by COVID, but I have this online congregation, which is considerably larger than the in-person congregation. And now two, three years into it, sort of energized by Peterson's vision, but okay, now people are in the trenches. It's in their relationships. It's in, it's making life work with one another. We have a Discord server, which is sort of a focal point of the community. And it's, you're, you're exactly right. And it's, it's figuring out the tension because you, you have to have both visions and you have to work both visions. And a life well lived is in fact, working both of those visions. And again, I think Peterson has, if there's, if we've learned anything about his life since he's been on the big stage, it has been both of those visions. Suddenly he, he takes off into the stratosphere and his book sells 5 million copies and he's terribly in demand. And then, you know, oh, the doctor, you know, was stumbled up on, you know, an anti-anxiety medication. And, you know, he who gave advice now is the, is the patient. And of course, there've been plenty of, of that type of thing out in the cruel social media. It's not a blogosphere anymore. We don't have a new word for it yet, but so, so yeah, I agree completely. And I, I would love to see him, you know, I, I've never read him, but I'd love to see him include, he does have a sense for the Russian, the Russians. So maybe picking up Pasternak and, and, and weaving this in because Peterson, obviously with his emphasis on suffering has never been one for a Pollyanna view of life. That was never Jordan Peterson. So, but to see him, to see him piece this together and especially, you know, I don't know the, the medical situation for his wife or himself, but he, he is facing a time in his life where his daughter is, you know, she's married, has a child, his son is now married. He and his wife have had some serious medical issues. You know, you and I get to the stage in life where, well, what will the next 20 years look like? They might be healthy. They might be, we will certainly age. What, what do we, how do we live well in the midst of those tensions? So no, I think that's a, I think it's a really helpful and good word. Yeah. And I think Proverbs and Exodus would be, if they're brought together as dancing partners, I think some amazing familial, public communal dynamics could be thought, could be thought through if the books are, you know, held together in unity and, and hopefully it's handled wisely and well. And that's always, it could really advance what he has to offer in terms of the table that is spread. There'll be, the food will be more nutritious for the soul. And I think more people will come to it. And if he matures into this next stage, I think he can bring a level. And it's always good when you draw from great texts of the past so that you're not just making it up. And of course Proverbs and Deuteronomy, well, the Bible is, I mean, one of the foundation texts of Western civilization. So to, to make it, to, to articulate its relevance for us today is a, I mean, it's a noble calling. It's a noble calling. It's, it's, it's ongoing pastoral existential relevance. And if he unpacks it wisely and well, I think we'll see him drawing more people and also his own life will be deepened as a result of that also. I agree. I agree. Thanks. A good place to wrap this up. So Ron, thank you again for your time. Okay. And maybe, maybe you can do Pasternak Peterson, Pasternak Peterson and Proverbs. That may very well be the title. And you are going to bring pastoring. So the fourth one. That's right. Yeah. So I think the pastoring one is very important. Very, very important in all of that as well. I agree. Thank you much, Ron. Okay. It's great to see you. Okay. Chat later. All right. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.