https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CF3wIf91yC0

 Here we go. Well, John, so I'll do a little introduction. So for those of you in the UK who have been blessed by the fact that I've been able to get around the UK and stay in the UK, this man, he and Tayo really are the two guys who put everything together for the UK. And this is John Lumgar. And his brother was a big help last summer too. I stayed at his home with his wife and his two amazing daughters. They were so much fun. I didn't get enough of a chance to see them. So, all right, John, what are we going to talk about? So it's hard to just start, isn't it? Well, why don't you tell us a little bit about yourself first? And then we'll go where you want it to go. So I live in London, and I'm an animation director. I've been doing that for many years. And I guess my connection to this little corner of the internet was I, like many people, saw Jordan Peterson. And I was like, ah, I wonder if who's commented on him? What are people saying? I actually googled Tim Keller and found you. And then I was like, oh, this guy's really interesting. And one of the things that I found interesting is that you weren't just talking about Peterson, you were talking about other stuff. And then started finding all these very interesting people doing all sorts of heterodox, but not in the political sense, which was quite nice. It wasn't all politics. So is that? Well, then you got connected with John Vadonk too. And ElseNet, which is the estuary leader support host network. That's a terrible name, John, but it's not your fault. It's the other John's fault. John's got to work on his branding. Well, and work on his planning. Well, and part of why I so I was at the art conference this past fall, and John was there too. And John was a super help to me because John and his brother were there on sort of a work capacity, but John could look around the room. And that's where it was. It was because of John that I began to get the sense that England is not like America. John looked around the room and said, this person here and told me about them and this person there and told me about them and this person there and told me about them. And then I started talking to these people and they all knew each other. And I thought, this country is networked in a way that America is not, at least if America is, I'm not anywhere near that network and I've never seen it. But so John was a super help in terms of giving me background on all sorts of people. And then you made a super interesting observation during arc two about John was able to sort of see who was talking to who, which then suddenly we begin to see kind of a social map growing there. So I don't know, what were it's a few months past, what were kind of some of your reflections after that conference, John? Yeah, it was fun being on the sidelines. I mean, in many ways, you want to be in the middle of the action and when you're working there, you're not. But being on the sidelines, you get to observe and just see the relationships. And it was quite interesting to see some people that I would say are kind of fairly politically centrist. And then you see some people that were leaning pretty hard to the right and like, oh, that's a little bit not as I'm not that totally comfortable with where they are. And then some more apolitical people, but it was too political, I'd say the whole thing lent a bit too political. But almost everybody I bumped into was an incredibly interesting person. It was a bit like Peterson's, Peterson's friends or friends of friends get together. Yeah. Yeah. Well, not only Peterson, but I had zero idea about the other hosts of this. And of course, when I saw Baroness on an invitation, it was like, we don't have those in America. And if you are a Baroness in America, you probably wouldn't say it just because people would start to wonder how that but the Stroud's and there and of course, then after talking to you, you mentioned a few other things so I could do a little digging on the internet and find that they are seriously involved in Christian and humanitarian concerns. And very wonderfully so in many, in many respects. Yeah, they get the kind of compassionate conservatism kind of thing, which had kind of gone out of fashion, but they they've been pushing in that direction for years. Yeah. So okay, John, so what are we going to talk about? So I'm, I'm launching a animated sitcom on Kickstarter. And it's about a jazz playing cow. It's called Jazz Cow. And Jazz Cow is a resistance leader. So he's got poets, creatives, misfits, musicians, all these kind of guys. And they are the resistance movement against algorithms and fake filters and what Paul Kingsnorth would call the machine. So they're, they're off the grid. They don't use modern tech. They don't even know they wouldn't know what to do with a smartphone. They, they're not even caught up to CD players, they're definitely using the old vinyls and they live in their community, but they're being the world of kind of convenience and safety and a functioning society are kind of encroaching on them because they, you know, they would just park their car anywhere they like. They, they don't do safety checks on their houses. They're, it's just chaos, but it's a happy chaos. And so you've got the tension of those two worlds and that's the setup. And we're trying to raise money for a heist film. So we would, we're doing, want to do a 22 minutes episode or 20, probably 20 minutes with credits, 20 minute episode and trying to fit the kind of space that The Simpsons has been in where it's for adults, but it's not an adult thing. It's got a big heart. It's not the kind of cynical, like a lot of the more modern things are and hopefully rides above that kind of political stuff where it's a bit more fun, but also social commentary. Yeah. So that's the kind of space we're aiming at anyway. We'll talk about who we is. Yeah. So it's got a bit of an interesting story. So about 20 years ago, me and my brother, and then a couple of other guys were kicking around ideas and laughing. And we ended up coming up with this idea that of a jazz playing cow, because most superheroes, they always ended up like, you get bitten by a spider and then you can do jump from building to building or whatever. And it's like, why is it always that kind of glamorous thing? And then we thought, well, cow is like the dumbest creature, right? And having the superhero ability of playing jazz is great. It's like super sophisticated for this dumb creature. Especially with hooves. I mean, you'd think on the piano. No. We did swap to do hands because it was just like, that was going to be too difficult. So that was the original thing. And that was, so that was four of us. Then we ended up pitching it around studios and got some interest, but it didn't go anywhere. And then it kind of stayed in a draw. And then sitcom writer, James Carey, who's written quite a lot of sitcoms in the UK. He was like, you've got to make this happen. And I started reworking it. And then a guy said, look, I can pitch this around studios, around streaming services. And so that was exciting. And then streaming services were like, well, we only make stuff that's based on existing IP. And you're like, and that's why it's all the same. And then you go like, what are we going to do? So James Carey was like, well, let's get this on Kickstarter. And so it's mainly me, me and James, but we've got a character designer who, Ceylon, who has done stuff for Disney and all these kind of different platforms has come on board. There's a storyboard guy who's worked on Animaniacs and Rick and Morty, all sorts of different things. He's going to be a kind of advisor on it. And then we've got all sorts of different people, various actors, one that I'm hoping that she will sign on the dotted line so we can move forward and announce that that would be exciting. Francis Foster from Trigonometry. Oh, yeah. He's going to play the voice of the one of the characters. What amazing voice actors actually, the guy that plays the drama is incredible. The guy that plays the villain, Dr. Pop, he's such a good voice artist. I mean, he's just hilarious. So getting all these guys in the room should be absolutely brilliant. But we'll see. All right. All right. So you're going to send me a link to this Kickstarter and I'll put it down in the show notes. So the Kickstarter page isn't there yet. I don't know what stage you're allowed to put up the, or you can do it in advance, but we've got a landing page, which is jazzcow.com. No, not dot com. It doesn't exist. Jazzcow.co.uk. And you can sign up and that puts you on our mailing list and you can see the characters and see the development. We'll also be on all the, if you search for my name or Quirky Motion, which is my company, you can then find all our, our, you'll begin to see some stuff come up on social media. But I don't quite trust social media shows people very much. So yeah, the mailing list is where we're really aiming at. All right. So jazzcow.co.uk and anything else you wanted to talk about? What'd you want to do, John? I don't know. You usually just ask these really interesting questions and people talk about all sorts of different things. All right. Well, okay. Well, I'll, you know, people have, people come to the Rando's conversations for certain things. You're a Christian. I am. How did that happen? So I grew up in a Christian family. In fact, my dad was a pastor and in a, and the kind of church tradition I grew up in was a kind of, it was Anglican evangelical in the kind of John Stock kind of mode, but more charismatic. So it was kind of straggling those worlds a bit. And usually people have this story of how they drifted away or they deconstructed or they felt they had to become Orthodox because evangelicalism was just a joke. But I, that's not really my experience because I ended up with a kind of something that had a fairly strong intellectual basis. So I had questions. My dad would give me piles of books. And so I'd be reading people like Schaefer and C.S. Lewis. So it didn't, and I think things kind of worked. And I think when things work and you don't have a big identity crisis and you're not, I didn't have those things like a lot of, it seems like most people in the corner have deconstructed and reconstructed as something else. Something usually Christian, normally Orthodox. These Orthodox guys have given me a lot to think about. They've really stretched me. It's been good. And you realize actually some of the things they say, you're like, oh, actually, yeah, we believe that. And we've always believed that. And it's not quite as far away as maybe you think. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Terminology for the same stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's like theosis. We have theosis and it's like, I don't know, union with Christ kind of sounds a little theotic there. And so what's that? You read the John's little letters and it's like, it's all over it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's in the Bible after all. And, and, and, you know, Protestants really like the Bible. They make it, they really make their kids learn it. And the symbolism stuff is like, I mean, Jonathan Paget has blown my mind and opened my mind up to all sorts of new things. But I've been very used to kind of top, top, top, whatever the word is, where you see types of Christ's and being used to that kind of, that kind of theology. And it's just been fairly normal. So it's not been, it's not totally, it's not totally new. Yeah. Yeah. Paget's just, the guy just stretches everyone's brain. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that, you know, that one of the things that I did a lot of reflecting on and thinking about when I was in the UK this fall, and we talked about it a fair amount was to me, how different, I mean, this was sort of at the art conference and it was also sort of in Paget's speech, the strange, the strange way, you know, for me as an American, of course, you can't see the American stuff because, you know, just like I have difficulty saying the stuff in the UK, but it's a strange situation. Christianity is such in such a strange way in the UK where on one hand, you know, I was watching some of the coronation stuff and even before the coronation, you know, King Charles is, you know, making these, reading through these things, how he's defender of the church and yada, yada, yada, and there's churches all over the place. And, you know, from America, you look back at the UK and all this Christian history and all of this. And then when you get to even the art conference and Paget has all of the Christians raise their hand, but yet when I talk to the Christians, there's always this sense that there's just always kind of undercover. They're always, I mean, it's kind of like your cow. They're always just sort of beneath the surface. They don't let anyone know. And then there's this, I mean, it seems like almost everyone except Justin Briarley, well, there seems to be two kinds of Christians in the UK, those who will talk about their personal Christian faith in public, you know, so then you have ministers like Justin Briarley and then you have people more like Tom Holland who and others who will just kind of, you know, yeah, you know, they kind of, you know, maybe they'll have a, maybe they'll have a newspaper and they'll have to tuck their Bible in between because they'd be too embarrassed to let people know that they actually read the Bible or believe this stuff. I get that vibe all the time from you Brits. And to me as an American, it's like, and it's not just, it's not just the UK. I mean, I got this story from when we did the German breakwater event and in the German events have people from Germany, the Netherlands, and then you know, parts of the former Soviet block too. So what is the freaking deal in Europe with your embarrassment about Christianity? It's very low status. Okay. It's very, so, and it, so there's an article that came out in a website called Evangelical Focus that was spotlighting my project and I noticed it's come up on the Google ranking because I think it's number three now for Jazz Cow. It's great article. And I'm like, Oh, if I come up as like on a Christian thing as number three, will people automatically just try to stop it happening? Like that's the instinct that we have and I'm not, yeah. And I guess it's the thing that I, I'm not shy. I don't tell, I'm open about being a Christian, but I don't really want to get judged or people think I'm some kind of Trump enthusiast or whatever the, whatever, whatever the thing is. You don't even get a chance to vote for him or not vote for him. I mean, that's a whole nother thing. The Americanization of Europe is just shocking to me, but please go on on the Christian thing for a while more because it just confounds me. It's just that it's, it's a way to not do well in a way because it's seen as, it's seen as a bit, I think people think you're bigoted if you're a Christian. They, so there's a lot of political stuff going on in the background. I think there's always been a suspicion of people who are too enthusiastic about stuff. I think in British history anyway, might go back to the civil war or something like that. I'm probably just making that up. It's probably nonsense history, but it doesn't sound like nonsense, but, but it seems kind of your culture. Don't be, you know, stay calm and, you know, beneath the surface. But then we've got, it's interesting because you've got large immigrant groups who are very loud and proud and Christian or loud and proud of Muslim. And we see the tensions of that. And it's Christians who are very open about their faith that get themselves in a lot of trouble. And often through doing stupid things, but sometimes through not doing stupid things, sometimes they're just living a normal life. And, and yeah, so, and we're probably, I think secularization has just happened a lot more strongly here. Well, and to figure out what exactly that means, I mean, it was Tom Holland that kind of secularization to me had always meant non-Christian and that has transformed in my mind into Christian value smuggling without ever having to say the word Jesus or think about a church. Yeah. It's Christianity that's so deeply, elements of Christianity that have been so deeply digested, they've become part of the body, even though the brain hasn't thought about Jesus in generations. That's absolutely true. It's the, it's the, it's the Christian ghosts or whatever the phrase, the phrase is, but then you've got Rene Girard's observation about how we, people have kind of used Christianity against itself. And then it's the, it's been kind of outflanked by a caricature of Christianity. And I think that's happened here more than maybe in the States, or maybe you're just so big that everything can happen all at the same time. And it's. Well, and America, if I say America is diverse, a lot of people's imaginations immediately go to racial diversity, but America has so much cultural diversity and competing cultural groups that Christianity, you really, part of it is, when I look at this sort of labeling of Christian nationalism, what happens in terms of when, when they tried to label certain kinds of Christians as Christian nationalists, they just absorbed that label and used it as a weapon to go back at the other group. And so there's, there are, there are strong cultural Christian movements in the United States that just won't be put into a corner. And if someone tries to put them in a corner, there's going to be a price to pay at the ballot box in the marketplace. And so that kind of power, social power that Christianity still wields in America, it just seems to play different. I mean, you told them, you don't have to mention any names, but you told me some stories of people who, they couldn't get jobs because it became known that they were, and they were the kind of Christian who reads their Bibles, prays, goes to church. This in a nation with a state church, which is, you know, and again, for me, trying to wrap my mind around what on earth the church of England is, is just, I mean, you, you definitely have sort of the Anglo Catholics, you sort of have the Anglo evangelicals, you sort of add the, the Pentecostals, and then you have sort of the upper crust. And, and it's like all of that, and still people have to keep their faith, you know, keep their faith undercover for fear of not getting the job they want, because people will pigeonhole them in a particular way. It just astounds me. Yeah, I know at least three people have lost their jobs. And, and it's always, and they're the ones I know about. And people, most Christians just say they don't want to talk about it. They're not, they want to get on with their lives. It's that phrase where in somewhere in the New Testament, I think it's Peter talks about having just a peace, peace of all life. Yeah, yeah. Actually, you just want to live in peace. It's not a, to be left alone in many ways. That's what we want from our governments. So I don't know, John, if, if your idea of pitching Jazz Cow on the channel of a, you know, Christian minister is necessarily a, you know, a wise move for your efforts. I mean, you could get, people might imagine that, you know, Jazz Cow starts out playing the piano, and before you know it, he's handing out little tracks of hell and damnation. It's not going to be doing that. We want it to actually be good. You've just lost, I don't know how much money by offending the Americans who, who thought that's exactly what Jazz Cow needs to do. No, the, the, the cultural, you know, I, I've had obviously since starting the channel, you know, more, way more contacts. I knew one couple, one family in the UK, to any degree, who live, you know, up in Northern England, and who were, you know, evangelicals who were missionaries. I met them in the Dominican Republic, actually. And, you know, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was in the Dominican Republic, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, but it just, the, the subtle dynamics in your culture just fascinates it. What do you, what do you think about Justin Brierley's, have you listened to any of his podcasts? Yeah. Do you think I think there has been this shift? It's, yeah, things are so different to how they were a few years ago. I mean, we had a young guy, 17 year old, just walk into church, and he said, I want to be a Christian. And that just was not thinkable a couple of years ago. There's just all sorts of different types of people than, than the worst. So yeah, I think Justin's, I think Justin's right. Do you think that this will be enough to move the needle on what we were just talking about? Or, or, I mean, how's that going to play? This is a, it's hard to know because we're seeing the shifts mainly happen on those that are on the politically conservative and who are, it's the civilizational Christianity, they're worried about a collapse of a civilization. And whether that transforms into confessional faith is whether that transforms into confessional faith is, is out for debate. I think some of it will, and I think some of it is. But if it's only people who are on the conservative side, then I think we're, we're going to end up with some problems because actually Christianity is not conservative. It's not liberal. It's not socialist. It's not anti-socialist. It's all, it's all and none of all those things. And if it becomes lopsided or just a certain type of intellectual, I don't think it will move the needle, but if it starts to be a lot broader, I think it will. Is there a fear? So I made a video about Dread Christian Nationalism again this week because Rob Reiner reaches out and gets Phil Vischer. I mean, you're into animation, puppets and animation are sort of cousins. You know, it gets Phil Vischer to be on his podcast. And I think among, even among Christians, there's a fear, I think, of, of civilizational Christianity, of sort of going back to the 19th century, because that's when, that's when there really was Christian nationalism. I mean, what they're talking about today, it's like looking at lemonade and calling it stew. I mean, it's just like, are you serious using this label? Because they're worried about, they're worried about Christian tyrants, I think. And so there's, there's a lot of that skittishness and anxiety in the culture. I wonder if that's part of it. I think that is. And so there's, it's interesting when there are political movements that are clearly not Christian. So we have the, they're an incredibly small group called the British National Party, which are basically like a little fascist group. And they're nasty, but no one votes for them. And they're a bit ridiculous. But they were, they were trying to use the phrase Christianity about 10 years ago. And within, within a few hours, I was getting invites to Facebook groups, or Facebook pages saying, these people don't stand for us. And of course, every Christian I know wants to sign up to that, because we don't want to be associated with those nasty, nasty people. And so I fear, I think that the kind of Christian nationalism thing, we're like, okay, you want to rewind the clock back? Where to? What year? 1950? For the civil rights movement? Is that where you want to go? Because I don't want to go there. I mean, where, where, where is this going? And what, what does it look like? Yeah. And, you know, the people like the main guy in Moscow, what's his name? Putin? No, no, no, no, no, Moscow. Oh, not that Moscow, the other Moscow, Doug Wilson, Doug Wilson. Doug Wilson is smart. He understands all these subtleties. And he's not the kind of what he's too intelligent to kind of get drawn into any of that stuff. Now, that doesn't mean I'm persuaded by him, but it's, it's, it's kind of not what people say it is. I mean, you just have to listen to him go this guy's, he's no buffoon and he's no, he's no Hitler. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it, it also, it also makes me wonder about this stuff is so hard. So I was just before this, I was, you know, I pushed this back a little bit because I, the, the, the women's Bible study, I call it coffee break. And then that triggers some people in the comment section is like, Oh, the women get coffee for the men. No, there's no men out there at all. It's, it's, it's, it's women having the track thing. Yeah. It's been named coffee break in the Christian reform church for 30 years. It's always been, it's always been an organization by women run by women. In fact, there was one poor guy before he had the men's Bible study in church that he was just dying for a Bible study. He is a widower and he asked if he could join the group. And they said, no, you can't come in here. They let me into, they led me into chit chat and maybe open with prayer. And then I get out. So, but, you know, my church, you know, a lot of African-Americans and so they started talking because I've got two sons getting married. And so they started talking about their weddings. And then it came up that one of the women over there, she was the first, her and her husband were the first people to be married in this building. And they had their reception at a lion's club out in a, in a little town near here. And at that point, the lion's club, 1968, weren't accepting African-Americans members. And so then they basically said, this is a private party, you know, because they went to this church, they had a lot of black friends who were coming to the wedding. I mean, so, and many of the women there grew up in the Jim Crow South. And one of the women sat that she grew up in Ohio. And she said, yeah, we couldn't, we weren't allowed to swim in our city pool. And that was, you know, that was not that long ago in the memory of many of these people. And so there's, just like you said, with respect to the past, we always see the past through these filters. And we never, we never can fully see the past because the past is just as vast and as rich as the present is. And so I think part of the struggle with sort of receding modernity and secularity, and then say a movement like ARC, which wants to say, we are going to, well, even ARC, you know, wasn't, it didn't have a big sign, you know, make England Christian again. There wasn't that sign out there. But I mean, this is a really tricky dance that Christians are trying to sort of find their way through. Because we don't want to control, we, well, I say we, the majority of Christians I ever run into have no interest in making the average non-Christian behave like a Christian. It's just not, I would be surprised if Doug Wilson even wants that. There will be lines that we, where we draw the line, because in different places, we don't want anyone murdering one another. That's obvious. And society kind of agrees on that. So it's not a problem. But where those things get more blurry, starts to become a bit more difficult. Well, and I think a lot of this has risen around sexual ethics, because I just, I woke up this morning and, you know, I'm doing a bunch of things. And then I opened up Twitter. And one of the first things on is Elon Musk has retweeted a little video, which is basically denouncing, you know, sexualized drag queen story hour, explicit, explicit sexual educational materials for grade schoolers, which probably 10 years ago, just probably could even today be listed as child pornography, because it shows underage children and, you know, and so, so that has in some ways provoked this question of, and what was funny is I saw that right next in my stream was someone complaining about Netflix new series on Alexander the Great, where right away within the first two minutes, Alexander is doing something sexual with a man. And of course, what's that? He did that. Exactly. That's exactly right. And so when we say, well, how Christian is this going to be, you begin to recognize that all of this, what continues to be at least broadly, broad consensus about protecting children from adult sexual predators is a fruit of Christianity. And Tom Holland has brought that fully to the front. And now when Netflix shows Alexander the Great, well, you know, we're not too far away from Hadrian or, or Nero or, and, you know, in the 19th century, maybe scholars understood the sexual valence of the ancient classical world, but in its portrayal in popular media and Christendom was quite sanitized. I mean, Alexander was going to be a man's man who would conquer and you'd be a sort of a Captain Kirk figure. But, you know, yeah, you know, the kind of, the kind of stuff that, well, if you actually say, read the symposium and understand Roman sexuality, where are the lines in an open society? And I mean, these are, these are the conversations that we're having and especially sort of moderate Christians who on one hand would say, boy, I, you know, I think it's, I think absolutely what's happened in terms of the kind of open society that has afforded a level of pluralism that we have has been good. But there are still some lines that we very much do want to enforce. And when it comes to something like in America, public education, which means something a little different than in the UK, is a very big deal. And how that's administered, is it central from Washington? Is it by the states? Is it by a local school board? To what degree in Texas can you still have a prayer before a Friday night football game? It's a big, and football meaning American football, not, you know, not real football. So these are, you know, these are the issues that we're really sort of, sort of sussing out. And, you know, as with I and Hersey Ali, these are some of the issues that are provoking this reconsideration of Christianity that Justin Briarley is pointing out. Well, we've got a school story in the UK with Catherine Bilbao Singh, who runs a school in West London, and she's been taken to court because she's not giving the Muslims a prayer room. And you listen to her talking about it, and you're like, okay, this is Pax Romana. She is, it's her school. Everyone has to bow to the authority of the school. And so it's like, no Muslim prayer room, no Christian this, no, no one, everyone has to just toe the line of her school. And, and what I found quite interesting is, she does this blanket thing. And, yeah, she's not distinguishing between religions, because actually, if Christians were doing prayer, it would be less political. Right. And I'm not saying that she should or shouldn't allow that, but it was just, it's just very, very different. And it's kind of, we all know it, we all know that there is something very particular about the way Muslims do their prayers, right? It's, it's not, it's not the same as the way that Christians do it, or this way that maybe another religion would do it. And so you've got this competing worldview that they're having to work out. I mean, the case is going to be fascinating. Well, and for you, who obviously have been bringing in immigrants from the former empire, and beyond, and beyond. And you're exactly right. Christians pray, everybody sort of, you know, closes their head and close their eyes and stands there. There's no mat, there's no call to prayer, there's no being, you know, with your butt up in the air. And then you do do that. And that's been rather fun. I remember going to that. Well, but then you're having the conversation about civilizational Christianity, and many Christians are like, yeah, well, you know, we're happy sort of, we're happy sort of keeping a degree of pluralism and keeping it toned down. And then you've got some elements of Islamic society that we're happy to take over and run the place. Thank you very much. And we're just biding our time until we have enough people here and we'll we'll move the needle and we won't care. Yeah, there's definitely elements of that. And you've got all you we don't have that in the American scene in terms of nobody's worried about the Islamic vote with maybe the exception of Michigan. But in the UK, it's a it's a different story. It was a statement by Muslim groups and an opinion poll was saying a lot of them won't vote labor, and most Muslims vote labor. So they're the left wing party that is going to become the next government almost certainly. And it's what they're not going to go to any other party. So they'll probably either not vote or go to Islamic Party. I'm imagining but it Yeah, so I can I can almost imagine the where our conservative parties have been kind of outflanked on the right, that the Labour Party might be outflanked by the Muslim vote, but we'll see it's going to be interesting times ahead. Wow. We live in a very interesting world and very interesting times. So Yeah. And we don't know what's gonna happen next. We really have no idea except for jazz cow. Yes. The people say we've got the people have the Benedict option. They've got the the Christian Nationalists one, I forgot what they call it. And but we've got the jazz cow option, which I think is the best of all of them. Although I must say that there's you know, jazz is American. Yeah. So is this a Dutch cow singing American jazz? So he's a saxophone player. He's a saxophone player. Yeah, he's an he's played by an American. He but had an interesting talk with someone today and we want to really get the kind of UK jazz scene seems a little bit more exciting than the American scene at the moment. In London, it's it's like really buzzing amongst the kind of 20s, teens and 20s. There's a real growing subculture and they're doing some amazing stuff. And American stuff, maybe I'm wrong, but it feels a bit stale in comparison. Well, it's I mean, well, there's a there's a lot of tradition of you guys taking, you know, American stuff. And I mean, you took rock and roll and gave us the Beatles and the Stones and so maybe you'll do it with jazz. I think it's the immigration has been the actual core thing. So as they bring in things like Afro beats and just bringing all the different styles that we hear in London, they kind of integrate that and it becomes a lot more porous and there's a lot more creative inputs, I think, that we have, particularly in big cities where everyone is mixing with everybody else. Yeah. Well, I certainly mean, I've only been to the UK twice, but going to London, it was like, I mean, that first night we came in, you know, not this past year, but the summer before and and it was just like, I, you know, I could have been in the New York subway, except your subway is better. Sorry, New York City, it's just true. You've got a great, you've got a great tube. But I was just, it was just like, wow, this city is the whole world is in this city. It's an incredibly vibrant place. And there's this whole debate that you hear people talking about, or beginning on the right, lots of people are talking about, oh, we've got diversity is not our strength. And they're really pushing back on the slogan, the diversity is our strength. And then we need unity. And I'm like, we need both. Because if we don't have diversity, there'll be no energy and there'll be nothing to you. You need to be around. Yeah, you need unity and diversity. And I feel like we've people are opting for one or the other. And our society will break if it's just diverse, but we do need diversity. And I think that's the thing. But we do need, we do need the energy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's a, it's a fascinating. Every time I go to, I mean, obviously, when I go to the UK, I have a less filtered experience, because there isn't a language barrier. Whereas if I'm in the Netherlands or Germany, and those are really the only three countries in Europe I've spent any time at all in the summer, going to be in Italy for a little while, which will be interesting again. But that'll mostly be as a tourist. So we shall see. We shall see. All right, John, anything else? Anything else we ought to get in? I don't think so. Yeah. jazzcow.co.uk. I'm rubbish at the plugging thing. I'm learning to do this. jazzcow.co.uk. All right, there it is. So click on it below. And if you've, if you want to see a, if you want to see this jazz cow, then contribute to the Kickstarter once it's up. And bit by bit, we'll see this thing come to fruition. Brilliant. Thank you for having me on. Oh, it's always good to talk to you, John.