https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FLKy7W2W9DM

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my Sunday sermon. And I'm going to start this week talking about Crazy Rich Asians. This is a very popular movie right now. It's grossed 170 million worldwide and I expect when it gets to China it'll gross even more. It's a very traditional story of a rich guy and a not as rich girl. She's not exactly poor. What the story is really about is the clash between eight American and Asian cultures in terms of who to decide who you marry. And this is very interesting because China is a very big country and there's still quite a bit of tradition in China. In fact, it was just a couple of years ago that my daughter's friend in the band of my daughters got married and my daughter said, yeah, she had an arranged marriage. And I thought, oh, that's really interesting. This girl graduating high school here in Sacramento, California of Chinese descent, marrying the man that her parents arranged her to marry. Now the movie is really about the conflict between expressive individualism, which is what Robert Bella in Habits of the Heart called American culture versus generational duty, which is something that traditional Chinese culture values. And so here this rich son of a huge business empire is expected to make a match according to his status with a woman that will give him additional business or political ties. And that's the game that the parents and grandparents are playing. And here in this picture, the grandmother is looking over this woman and it doesn't matter that she has a PhD and teaches economics in an American university. She's not from the right family. And so you have this conflict set up. And of course, the threat is that if the son doesn't marry the right girl, the family will disinherit him and he won't inherit any of this money. And what gets set up then is this idea, this conflict between what makes me happy now versus family well-being for 100 years from now. And I'm sure it wouldn't feel real great to have someone say, yeah, grandpa gave up his fortune to marry grandma because she was young and hot and now I get to drive this. These questions often have a dimension of time in them. And we wonder, well, how to make the best decision? Is this Chinese practice of intergenerational planning? Should the son submit to the family well-being generationally or does whoever he feels he wants to be with for his life, I mean, this is expressive individualism and the goodness of the now versus the family duty for generations to come. And then what gets elevated in the movie is the question, is this girl sufficiently Chinese? And so that raises the question, what does it mean to be Chinese? Is it enough to have a Chinese passport? Does that make you Chinese? A while ago I read an interesting article, I think it was in The Economist on the relationship between being Chinese and being Han, which is a particular ethnic group within China. The physical features that match the profile, the grandma was sitting there looking at her nose and said, oh, you have a nice nose. Born to the right family, do you have money? Now early on in the movie, Rachel Chu, who is the female protagonist, is said that the mother of the son says, you're not Chinese, you're Chinese American. And Rachel Chu's mother had told her, she said, well, you're Chinese here in terms of on the outside, but you're not Chinese in here in the heart. And in fact, the plot of the whole movie focuses around, is she sufficiently Chinese? Does she need to be Chinese to marry? What's the proper norm? What's the proper goal? What's the truth? Is it the wealthy family's multi-generation business interests that are most important in a match like this? Or is it the feelings that the couple has? And this also boils down to the question then, what is marriage? Contemporary American marriage is all about expressive individualism and expressive internal emotional state, being in love. You make me happy. This is the criteria for marriage in America. pretty much around the world was for a specific goal. And it was often in places in the world, well, you could have mistresses and concubines and flings and yeah, everybody understood the needs of the heart, but marriage was about money and heirs and family and business and politics and all of those things, which last considerably longer than one's feelings towards a person of the opposite sex. It was how to create a family out of someone without a blood tie. And often in some cases, like Abraham marrying his half sister, often there was one of those two. You wanted to marry someone within the family, but not too close in the family. And this was a multi-generational project and people were planning three, four, five generations ahead. Americans tend to like to live in the now. Now if you read the Bible, you begin to notice that the Bible is a very traditional book and the Bible pays very close attention to these blood tie things. In fact, after the flood, you have Noah and the table of the nations, as it's called in the book of Genesis, and you have Shem, Ham and Japheth. And the descendants of Ham are those in Egypt and Cush and Canaan. The descendants of Shem are those north of Canaan in Mesopotamia in the Fertile Crescent. And descendants of Japheth are a bit further away and so they don't come into the story much. Abraham, who was the father of the nations, and his nephew, who he brings into Canaan where he leaves Ur, is Lot. And Lot's two sons that he had via his daughters in the cave outside Sodom were Moab and Ben Ami, who was the father of Ammon. And if you look at a map of the 12 tribes of Israel, you can see them there. And so you see Edom, and then Abraham's son, Isaac, has two sons, Jacob and Esau. And there again you can see Jacob, whose 12 tribes become Israel and they fan out throughout the region. And you have Esau, who is Edom. Now one of the things that we Americans don't pay much attention to, that the Chinese are paying attention to, the Hebrews are paying attention to, traditional people throughout human history have paid attention to, is the relationship between individuals and peoples. In fact, in Plato's Republic, which is one of the most important books in all of human history, the entire book revolves around, in many ways, it's about justice and righteousness, because this word that they use is for both justice and righteousness. But it's, Plato is, or Socrates is having these dialogues with people, these debates with people, and he's saying, well, to find justice in individuals is too hard, so let's blow up the individual to the level of the city. And maybe because a city is bigger than an individual, we can see what justice is by looking at the city. So then Socrates and the brothers of Plato talk about what the just city would be so that they could discover what justice is. An individual is too small. So you need to look at the city, and what the city is, is in many ways the magnification of the individual, and the city takes on the culture of the individual. And in fact, in the ancient world, cities would take on the names of the gods who were the patrons of the individual, or the political gods that founded them. And Alexandria was founded by Alexander, Antioch was founded by Antiochus, and so this relationship between the individual and the communal, or the nation, or the city is something that is built into the ancient world. Now what begins to happen then long term is the question, well, who is a true son of Israel? Who is a true member of this community? Israel is the younger son chosen by God to rule the older siblings, and we see that in the stories of the Old Testament. It comes through again and again and again. And well, this is heard in different ways, and here's the thing, when we listen to this as Americans, we evaluate it with American ears. We evaluate it within the framework of the value system of our culture. Well, is that value system right? Now obviously people from different cultures have different value systems, and so when we hear the idea that Israel was to rule over her neighbors, well, this is really an extension of the story of Joseph ruling over his brothers, and then Jacob ruling over Esau, and all of this stuff is built into the Genesis stories. And so if you keep this in mind when you listen to the Genesis stories, you'll hear these themes begin to develop. Now the Book of Obadiah is, it's debated in terms of the date of the book, but many scholars believe it. The book is addressing the period after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, and this is how the book starts. The vision of Obadiah. This is what the Sovereign Lord says about Edom. We have heard a message from the Lord. An envoy was sent to the nations to say, rise, let us go against her for battle. See I will make you small among the nations. You will be utterly despised. The pride of your heart has deceived you. You who live in the clefts of the rocks and make your home on the heights, you who say to yourself, who can bring me down to the ground? Though you soar like the eagle and make your nest among the stars, from there I will bring you down, declares the Lord. In that day, declares the Lord, I will not destroy the wise, will I not destroy the wise men of Edom, those of understanding in the mountains of Esau? You warriors, Temin, will be terrified, and everyone in Esau's mountains will be cut down in slaughter. And again, this is a type of book that really offends and annoys Americans in our sensitivities. But now pay attention to the family ties in the book. Because of the violence against your brother Jacob, you will be covered with shame. You will be destroyed forever. You hear in this the assertion that, well, this is a family assertion, that here within the family we might fight like cats and dogs, but if someone's going to come from outside the family and fight us, well that's a whole different story. And so the message under this was that when Babylon came down and destroyed the temple and destroyed Jerusalem, it was Edom's responsibility as a family member to stand with Israel. And she didn't. Now someone could say, yeah, but Israel had dominated Edom, and Edom had dominated it. You know, there were long-standing tensions within the family, but in a sense what is reinforced or at least assumed in here is a certain amount of family loyalty, and this loyalty would be built into the relationships between the nations. On that day, now every time you read on that day, you have to get a sense of this theme in the Old Testament called the Day of the Lord, which you can find in the book of Joel, and you can find in another and some of the other prophetic messages. On that day you stood aloof while strangers carried off his wealth, and foreigners entered his gates and cast lots for Jerusalem. You were like one of them. In other words, you didn't uphold the family ties. You should not gloat over your brother in the day of his misfortune, nor rejoice over the people of Judah in the day of their destruction, nor boast so much in the day of their trouble. You should not march through the gates of my people on the day of their disaster, nor gloat over them in their calamity in the day of their disaster, nor seize their wealth in the day of the disaster. The story goes that the Edomites on the heels of the Babylonians came in and finished the looting that the Babylonians had started. And so you'll hear the Lord says to Edom, you're going to pay for that, and I'm going to destroy you because of that. And again, this triggers us. We say, well, God shouldn't pick and choose. God shouldn't act. God shouldn't behave this way. Certainly God shouldn't play favorites among the nations. God should transcend all of that. You should not wait at the crossroads to cut down their fugitives, nor hand over their survivals in the day of their trouble. The day of the Lord is near for all nations. What does that mean? That's judgment day. The day of the Lord is near for all nations. And see, judgment day isn't just one day. It's many days. The day of the Lord comes like a pre-echo. It comes and the final day of the Lord is coming. But often in the Bible, we are pulled into the future by the future, by its gravitational force. The end pulls the now in the Bible. And so in a sense, the day of the Lord, these are the first fruits, the harbingers of the day of the Lord. And Edom is going to face judgment for the sins that she did against her brother Jacob. As you have done, it will be done to you. Your deeds will return on your own head. Just as you drank on my holy hill, so all the nations will drink continually. They will drink and drink and be as if they had never been. Drink of what? Drink of the wrath. Drink of their destruction. They are drinking to their own destruction. But on Mount Zion will be deliverance. It will be holy. And Jacob will possess his inheritance. Back to this theme of Jacob ruling the nations. Jacob will be a fire and Joseph a flame. Esau will be stubble and they will be set on fire and destroy him. There will be no survivors for Esau. The Lord has spoken. Now again, a number of people will read this and say, well, this is exactly what we expect to find in the Old Testament. This is Hebrew nationalism expressing itself in poetry. And every nation did this. Edom had poems that imagined their own supremacy over its neighbors. Moab did. Babylon did. Egypt did. This is just what nations do. Okay. But it came true. Edom was destroyed. In fact, today people flock to see the ruins of Petra and they think, oh, look, Edom. Well, it wasn't Edom. They were the Nabateans. They were from Arabia. They were the conquerors of Edom. They came in and supplanted the Edomites and they built a prosperous, thriving nation there. That too had its day and fell. They invaded and replaced the Edomites and their culture. In fact, Herod the Great had Edomite blood, but the Edomites were no longer much of an effective people, just like the Nabateans are no longer an effective people. So the day of the Lord comes and the day of the Lord destroys. And again, as we said last week, people say, yeah, but every nation, every empire falls. And when we say that, we should think, yeah, every empire falls. And then we think, well, I hope it doesn't fall. I hope my empire doesn't fall when I'm around. But Obadiah doesn't stop there. People of the Negev will occupy the mountains of Esau and people from the foothills will possess the land of the Philistines. They will occupy the fields of Ephraim and Samaria and Benjamin will possess Gilead. In other words, the Judah remnant will go out and possess the land. This company of Israelite exiles who are in Canaan will possess the land as far as Zarephath. The exiles from Jerusalem who are in Sepharad will possess the towns of the Negev. The leaders will go up on Mount Zion to govern the mountains of Esau and the kingdom will be the Lord's. Obviously, if you read this from certain perspectives, you see certain things. The contemporary state of Israel will read this in a certain way. And this will be read in a certain way that, as I'm processing the Sam Harris video, he would have particular objections to. This is exactly the kind of thing he is objecting to. Now pay attention, as I mentioned in the book of Nahum, when prophecies went out, they were recorded and they were kept and they were tracked. And probably some of the prophecies we find in the Bible are the ones that people said when Edom fell, they said, aha, Obadiah, the Lord must have been speaking through him. And there are probably multiple other prophets, and in fact you can find it in the narrative books, lots of prophets around saying lots of things, but these are the ones that rang true. And so that's why these get encoded, recorded in the book, and these get seen as canonical as being a righteous word of the Lord. But what does the word say? Was the word fully exhausted by the destruction of Edom? Well, a lot of this has to do with this question of identity, because this question of identity goes through a major shift in the transition from the transition that Jesus inaugurates. What gives you identity? Over what does that identity govern? Who says who's in and who's out? Is it bloodline or is it behavior? And you can see in the Old Testament there's roots of this, that those who are not from the bloodline of Jacob could be grafted into Israel. So what does it mean to be Chinese? Does being Chinese mean to have a traditional Chinese wedding where the colors are predominantly red? Today, Wikipedia says these kinds of weddings in China are popular with the white dress and the white tux, and any American looking at this would say, well, this sure looks to me like a Western wedding. So what is it to be Chinese? What is it to be Western? In our own contemporary culture here in America, especially this melting pot, we say, well, to be a true American is a national thing. But what does it mean to be a Christian? John the Baptist comes and he says this, But when he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees coming to where he was baptizing, he said to them, you brood of vipers who warned you to flee from the coming wrath, produce fruit in keeping with repentance. And do not think to say to yourselves, we have Abraham as our father. I tell you that out of these stones, God can raise up children from Abraham. The axe is already at the root of the tree, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. In other words, what John the Baptist is saying is the true sons of Israel are known by their behavior, not simply by their blood. John says, I baptize you with water for repentance. And after me comes one who is more powerful than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire. His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will clear his threshing floor, gathering his wheat into the barn and burning up the chaff with unquenchable fire. And we see in a sense all the elements here gathered, breath and earth, water and fire. Who does this? Who is this? Now we think, well, this is Jesus, of course. This is Jesus who he's talking to, who he's talking about. John the Baptist is an interesting individual. He sees an aspect of Jesus' ministry. In fact, like all the other prophets, he sees long. He sees far away the day of the Lord that is coming. And so when you listen to John, you hear him reflect the prophets of the Old Testament. He is preaching the day of the Lord and he is warning them. But what he had more trouble seeing is the ministry and the mission that Jesus had close up because Jesus in that moment was coming to bear judgment, not to bring it. He was coming to bear the sins of the guilty, not to unleash judgment upon the guilty. He was coming to be that kind of Messiah. American culture gets this by demoting the bloodlines from Christianity. Your ethnicity is no barrier for entry to becoming a true child of Abraham. And this then gets into American culture and you can find this expressed even in this, even in the movie Crazy Rich Asians. Now it's very interesting at the beginning of the movie where the mother who is so opposed to the daughter, at least initially, is having a Bible study with her friends. And if I were doing a movie review, I'd probably pick up on that a little bit. But the mother is also like, don't want to give it any spoilers. So you can, I don't want to spoil the movie for you if you watch it. But you'll notice in this conversation that is going under the surface, this is what gets into Rachel Chu. And even though there's no evidence that she's a Christian in the movie, this gets carried on in the culture right through to her. And so what Christianity does is promotes the message that is found in Genesis 1, that all human beings are image bearers. And this is in seed in the Old Testament. It comes out to full flourishing in the Apostle Paul. And this is where we get the, this is where we see that Jesus is not just the Messiah for a particular nation, but he's the savior of all humanity. But at the same time, in this world, the grass withers and the flower fades and its place remembers it no more. And God raises up children of Abraham from the stones. And then the question for you is, do you believe he can raise you? And can you act like he will?