https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pDOXIhdFyi8

 Hi, this is Paul. My friend Pete Van de Beek, who was on the first day Synod livestream that I did with David Salverda, has done a response video to the video that I did about the Wednesday night Synod video. And for a channel of 46 subs, his video is doing very well. Pete makes an argument in his video about sort of two camps, the relational camp. Now I'm going to adjust this a little bit. The relational camp and the order camp. Because I often see people sort of putting these two things against each other. It's like, well, some people are all about order and they're all about dogma and they're all about propositions and they're all about all of these structural things. And there's very much sort of a counterculture vibe that says, that's all basically morally suspect and wrong. We value not rules, but people. We value not order, but relationships. And there is a distinction that you can feel, but the relationship between these two things is I think quite a bit more complex. So I wrote this little thing for CRC voices that Pete has read and maybe we'll talk about it a little more. The contrast was made in that little clip that was the clip of delegate Rita, who's a CRC minister lamenting the fact that if Synod tightens up on these issues too much, will her children and her grandchildren continue to be a member? And this is actually the second of two videos that I'm making right now. Clarification on that, which I have always believed and actually Eric Dirksen and Cedric Parcells went back and forth on this a little bit. Not really back and forth because they were in agreement as am I. Eric asks, every conservative progressive and moderate on sexuality in the CRC and a should should want to clear answer to Rita's question. And Cedric, who you can find on the abide videos and you can I've referenced his work on their platform about Gravamen. What the reporter and the chair should have said is that Synod 1964 ruled that the church that churches can allow disagreement with the confessions provided that the members remain teachable, do not seek to undermine the confessions and were otherwise reformed. They just can't be office bearers. Eric writes, thanks for the reply, Cedric. That was my sense as well. I suspect the floor of Senate would have benefited from the clarity you display here. Thank you. Unfortunately, the reporter and the chair of the committee weren't as knowledgeable as they probably ought to have been. It's very frustrating to watch. Ken DeBoer then asks, but can they make profession of faith? Cedric responds, I should clarify that Senate 1964 was addressed whether someone had to have complete agreement with the confessions or become a confessing member. In other words, to make profession of faith. So in other words, you can be a member in the Christian Reformed Church in good standing under the supervision of your local council if you differ from the confessions of the Christian Reformed Church. And that is basically Rita's question. It gets more complex, of course, as you get into office bearing and that opens up the whole Gravamen conversation, which we will be talking about this year. The communion felt that committee seven was testified to on the floor by a number of people. You heard that, I think, at least three times, and I have heard it privately from others that were on that committee, that what they felt in the advisory committee. Now, synodical advisory committees are not necessarily known to be transformative religious experiences. It doesn't mean they can't be as witnessed by this one. Person after person said that they had had a spiritual experience that ranks in terms of their top ever spiritual experiences in that advisory committee for Senate. That's a remarkable thing. Number of people mentioned it on the floor of Senate. There in the recordings, others who have been on that committee have told me that privately as well. Also my friends, more than one delegate spoke of the fellowship enjoyed in that committee as one of the most incredible spiritual experiences of their lives. This is a synodical advisory committee, my friends, to feel God's, the felt God's presence in that room and God's hand upon them. They still couldn't arrive at a fully unified advisory report for synod. The intensity of that fellowship and its rupture broke out in Steve's wort, going to that sports bar and crying and Rita sobbing for her family on the floor. I think that moment, I want to do a video on how technology is changing synod. As a kid, there would be table talk about synods that could be around the family. You would hear these things sort of story, sort of like the committee seven. We just hear testimony from it and it's general testimony, but testimony from it that this was a really remarkable experience that they had. There's no recording of it and there's never going to be, hopefully, never going to be of advisory committees, its work process and it's supposed to be confidential. There's a debate as to whether that confidentiality then is released after the report is given or what. I'm going to leave that debate alone right now, but I don't personally have, conservatives and progressives display emotion at synod because they care. I don't see anything wrong in shedding tears on the synod floor. I don't. Lance, a very interesting guy, a very knowledgeable guy, in that little corner, I wrote that on Voices, in this little corner of the internet, wrote a sub stack on the thoughts, reflections on synod 2023 and our cultural divide. One of his main points is that synod is a business meeting. Where you are in a business meeting, you try to park the relational at the door and there's truth to that. I know some of you will say, you've got to keep, but you've got to keep the relational and that's a very, that's a corner of this corner in this little corner, right, Luke? You've got to keep the relational relational. It's personalism and that's true, but we've got a long history of valuing that parking. For example, do we elect people to office of synod because of relationality or competency? Do I vote for people because they're my friends, because I have a great relationship with them, or because I think they're the best person for the job? In other words, relationality and order actually live together. I wouldn't say they're opponent processing, but they live together in an economy that is actually designed to strengthen them both. The old adage, it's not what you know, but who you know, still holds true, but there are always limits on both of them. I think it's something similar to opponent processing, but I wouldn't say the relational and order are actually opponents. I think they actually need each other to fully flourish. Same goes with many things at church, who we hire should be about competency, etc. When we let the relational supersede competency, then we say we had a conflict of interest and I had to deal with this all the time in bringing out your bingo sheets in the Dominican Republic. We worked with the church and often through the church, but in one of the endemic issues is what we called corruption, because corruption in many cases is actually the relational trumping the order. All you people who are team relation, well, you're also team corruption if you take that to its fullest extent, because it's basically the definition of bias. I like you, so I am going to use my position, it's also basically something about abuse of power. I'm going to use my position of power in an organization to favor you because you are my child, because you are my son, etc. These things live in tension together. The church is the friend of the mission, so all the income generation projects done by what was then the World Relief Committee, or now World Renew, then must be in the hands of the pastors. The pastors should run everything because the pastors and the missionaries are very close. If you're my friend, I'll use this friendship to make sure that my family members benefit directly from this income generation project. Whereas the compassionate World Renew wanted to sort of lift the community and not just the pastor's family. Haitian culture, this is where we get into these cultural issues too, because people are like, well, you know, multiculturalism, okay. Well, in the West we have this culture about order, and we say that's a conflict of interest. In Haitian culture, it's like, no, these are your family members. You should definitely use your position in government or the church or business to make your family members flourish, regardless of competency. These are the things that basically are often below the surface, but it's not relation against order. Relation and order work together, and the way in which they work together actually is a part of the culture, and there are better and worse ways of doing this. Part of the damage done by Thursday at Synod was the breakdown of order done by the relational. David Strzok prioritized the relational over the business on walking out in protest. Now you might say, well, that was legitimate, and you might sympathize with him, but that was the decision he made. He decided at that moment to be father to a son instead of delegate to Synod, and so he relinquished one. My point is not to judge him on this necessarily, but to point out the two worlds. We regularly deal with this. A judge recuses himself if a family member is involved. We see this all the time. People recuse themselves because they say, this person is my son. I can't do the business of the body if this involves my son. That move that Dave Strzok made that Jake Tapper applauded on CNN, that's a very complex thing, because, well, I'll keep reading. I touch on a bunch of these things. In our culture, we have a well-developed tradition of managing the relational and the business. Synod practiced, synod's practice, polity, order, et cetera, in order to establish something of an impartial, meaning non-relational realm in order to do the business of the church. This is what we do. As a pastor, I in some ways have to park the relationships of my family to one side, but there are times when I have to park the needs of the church to one side for the relationship of my family. The dance between those two worlds is very important. You would argue that, in fact, order is fundamental for relationships. Relationships in fact only flourish when there is order. Relationality can have everything to do with bias or moments of passion. Tim Keller used to have the greatest lines about adultery in that, well, let's say you see someone that you would like to sleep with and order says you shouldn't. We call that conscience. Well, there's order in relationship. In fact, many of your relationships flourish because you keep them in order by certain fixed lines. The same ecology happens at synod. The harder question is should the church do business? This is where Ivan Illich comes up. Certain individuals in this corner like Nate, a Christian anarchist, this could be a very interesting conversation. Maybe we'll do this Friday. We talk about relationships in order. I'm not dismissing that question. Ivan Illich, the former Roman Catholic priest, asked that question with about as much force and seriousness as anyone in the 20th century. That's a real question. Part of the reason to have a church beyond the local, in other words, to have a denominational, to have theological systems and to have accountability as we call it is an understanding of the fact that the relational and the business are in relationship with each other. Part of the point that I've been making to a lot of people, Ben Van De Zand, who I used was the director of whole missions for a while, just an immensely wise, thoughtful, beautiful man. Taught me a ton in my life. Used to have this great saying, you can't suck and blow at the same time. It's kind of, I remember the first time he said it, I was thinking, what does this mean? What he's saying is that there are all sorts of ways in life that, well, we're doing these contradictory things. So on one hand, what Synod did was with the code of conduct. Synod, by virtue of a lot of safetyism and a lot of things that are coming from the perceived left of the denomination are all about tightening and control and rules, all of this order stuff. Now all of this order stuff is for the sake of relationships. And when you have a rule such as clergy, if a Christian Reformed clergy has an extramarital affair with a member of his own congregation, basically the church says he's violated two things. One thing that he's violated obviously are his marriage vows, but the second thing that he's violated is the trust that he has by the order of the church. Now he can't say, oh, you mean people have these rules. This is the love of my life. This is what I must do. I'm going to prioritize my relationship with my mistress over the order of my relationship with my wife and over the rules that I have with respect to the church. And the rules in the Christian Reformed church are basically, if you do this, you're done because you violated not one rule but two. So these two things live together. Every cult leader tries to establish a highly relational community. Donald Trump wanted his relationship with Director Comey to prioritize the relationship. He sits them down and says, I need to know if you're loyal to me. Well, fair enough. Are you more loyal to me or are you loyal to your oath to uphold the Constitution of the United States? The argument is that if you have a well-structured order, the relationships will actually flourish. And if you somehow prioritize the relational over the order in an unhealthy way, you actually lose both. This is part of the point that I made in the video with Jonathan Pigeot about nested or stacked relationships. These relationships have an order about them and the order has to be recognized and followed. I'm not disagreeing with Pete's heart with respect to the relational, but it's a very complex thing, particularly when we get into questions of justice. The business and the relational don't really live in different universes. Their relationship is very complex in ours. And in fact, if you just simply say, oh, I'm about relationships, not about rules, you're going to have a disaster. And that's why a lot of what we do is to actually figure out how to order our relationships in the way that relationships flourish the most. So this is just a little video that I wanted to do in response to this to make some of those points.