https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xBrxAO-eHA8

 Hi David. Alright, we are live. Yeah, two live streams in one day. It's a bit excessive, but my channel is a bit excessive. We have Pete Van de Beek. Both these guys have been on the channel. Pete, I did a Rando's conversation with you a long time ago, didn't I? Early days. Early days. I've known Pete for a number of years and David has been on the channel. I met David in a Rando's conversation not that long ago. Yeah, a couple of months ago. Why don't you guys introduce yourselves a little bit. Where are you from? Where do you serve? What do you do? And why did you jump onto this thing? Want to go, Pete? Sure. I'm Pete Van de Beek. I'm CRC born and raised in the Canadian scene. I was a called pastor for a time and then moved to being a specialized transitional pastor. I'm in a place where I'm looking for a new contract right now. Is this a way to get advertising? Yeah, I'm only doing this to network. In fact, I just saw a list that there's a church in Sacramento looking for an STM. So I'll be sending you an email about that. That'd be fun. I'd love to have you right here in Sacramento, Pete. That would be awesome. I actually already looked at airline costs. Anyway, my interest is multiple. I'm a sociology theology guy. And so I just love watching the dynamics of sports and the dynamics of synod. And I've often imagined being a pundit and this looked like an opportunity to be a pundit. Yes, there will be punditry, I think. Yes. All right. How about you, David? Yeah, so I'm David Silver. I'm also from Canada, like Pete, born and raised in Cambridge, Ontario, and was ordained in the Christian Reformed Church in 2011. And I spent the first 10 years of my ministry on Vancouver Island, Victoria, out west in Canada. And I spent the last two years now in Aliston, Ontario, New Takamsa. It's basically just an hour north of Toronto. And why am I here tonight? I sent Paul an email. I've been feeling kind of chatty, which is maybe unusual for me. I'm probably more of more thinky than talky. And I spend a lot of time just ruminating in my own head. And every now and then it just kind of bursts out. Either I write something like frantically or I just crave conversation partners. And so I'm in one of those moments where I'm just like, oh, I need to I need to find people to talk with. And then I remember you talking, Paul, about doing stuff about Synod. And I thought, well, maybe I want to talk about this, too. And so I thought I'd just drop the line and see what happens. So I just finished dinner and left my wife with all the children. And so I'm here tonight and happy to be here. OK, well, I wasn't even planning on doing this. I actually just finished up recording an hour and a half Synod orientation and first day where I what's a body, a spiritual body, history, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. So I played about 15 minutes of Synod and an hour and 15 minutes of commentary and background, which is typical of me. But then when I got the note from I got the note from David, I thought, oh, heck yeah, we could do a live stream and we can pull in some people. So I sent a note to Pete, put one on voices and then Terry. Terry is a blast from my past. She I met her through a friend of mine, another CRC pastor, Calvin Friend. And Terry, why don't you introduce yourself? See if your sounds working. Can you hear me? I don't know if she can hear us. She's trying to get working. Sure, that'd be fine. So Terry, I'm going to leave you down in the other room until you sort of figure out your sound. And then there's a private chat button over on the left. I can't hear anyone. What did I miss? This is a new platform for me. So once she figures it out, hopefully she'll be able to join. But I got I got David's note and I knew Pete would want to talk. So I've got an hour again, I've got an hour and a half coming. So Pete, of course you're going to want to talk. And we've been talking on CRC voices about synod. And Dave, you're bursting. So let's start where you want to start. Why have you been wanting to talk? What do you want to talk about? Well, I mean, I guess I would. Are we talking about synod? Is that going to be the major theme? OK, great. So I did tune in for most of this morning's session. So I caught the worship service, the sermon. I caught the training there. Was it power and privilege training? I caught that. And then I tuned in for the election of the office bearers to or the leadership. I'm not sure what you call them exactly. So I watched it. I listen most actually I listen to it. I was doing other things. What struck me? Well, I mean, I don't know. It struck me actually as a pretty typical start. Right. Like and I felt actually the sermon. I was really great and good. And I actually really liked that he didn't necessarily dive into the controversies, but kept it to the topic of joy. And I felt like that was really a great way to start. I mean, we could talk about the power and privilege thing. I actually didn't know that Sina did that. So that was I was like, oh, I know a little more triggering triggering the content actually. Right. Right. And then the woman from COS, I can't remember her name, but when she said power, it sounded like I didn't know what she was saying. What a word she was saying with her Irish accent. It sounded like power, power. And I was like, power. It took me a second to kind of put it together. And then as soon as it struck me power and privilege training. I don't remember this. And and then when it we jumped into it. Yeah, it was less. I actually felt like Sean Baker did a great job of pointing people the right direction towards how to do it. Towards how to be and how to kind of check in with themselves and notice how they tend to show up and tilted everyone the right direction. So I actually felt like that was a really, really also a great way to begin. So, yeah, I was triggered a bit by the power and privilege training thinking, why are we doing this? But then when it actually happened, I thought, no, actually, this is actually a good way to start. It also helps that, you know, Sean Baker is one of my my best buddies and we were roommates. And so I've got lots of, you know, I'm kind of I as soon as I see his face, I just I'm filled with love, essentially. So, yeah, I mean, we could talk about that for a bit. What are the people's experiences of of that part? How about first impressions, Pete? Any any first impressions watching day one? Yeah. See, I know you wanted to talk. Well, I'm afraid to talk now. Anyway, so how have I made you afraid? What are you afraid of, Pete? Oh, I'm not. I'm never afraid. I didn't think so. That was just a ploy. So the. In his book, Blink, Malcolm Gladwell gives a couple of examples of people who are expert at recognizing something immediately. And one of them that I remember that most of them had to do with art and fakery. And but one of them I remember was a tennis pro who once he saw a tennis player video of a tennis player throwing the ball up in the air, he could tell whether they were going to hit it in or out before they actually hit it. Right. And that's what I think of when I think of watching this morning's proceedings, because we've talked on CRC Voices. I'm also promoting that for you for us. You know, we've talked on CRC Voices about how the selection of the leadership is already indicative of the direction of sinning. Right. So so if we were experts, which I'm not, we can now predict how it's all going to play out. Well, I think we're going to have to talk about this because I spent a fair amount of time in the video on this, actually. No. OK. There is stuff to talk about in terms of the spin of that ball. So there are indications there are two Canadians on there who I experience as I'm going to call it centrist, which I consider myself as well. And and I don't know the two other other men, except that Paul DeVries has a lot of experience in leading meetings, because I remember he was president of COD or something for a time. And so so that's already indicative how that played out. And so thinking of Blink and thinking of that thing I learned in recent years that you could predict some things from from the selection of leaders, that was interesting. Then I also this afternoon watched your video with Sean and the group of pastors that took part in that circle thing, because I'm very interested in that. I see that as and I'm I'm I have lots of thoughts about that, too, in terms of what if Synod was sitting in a circle smoking a peace pipe, which was which became the talking piece. And anyway, so I have all of that in my mind. But it was then interesting when the objection was raised to know exactly which box that came out. No big surprise. Right. And it was like Sean had predicted it in a sense. And and then I so I heard Synod saying we're not going into that box. I mean, the the chair ruled it out of order and Synod agreed we're not going into that box. So that was those were just interesting frameworks to watch it through. OK, well, let's let's to sort of order this. Let's all please explain the seating of delegates. So there's a lot of questions about Senate that you might have. I answer a lot of questions on my long video. I think I'm going to release that tomorrow. I usually release the rough draft at six a.m. I might release the other video either going to release it earlier or later. I'm not sure exactly how I put out a lot of content today. The channel can only actually take so much. But let's let's go back in terms of for both of you. I don't know if anybody else is going to try and pop in. Terry was having some trouble with her settings. Nick, who's been on the channel before Nick was in a little bit, I think, wasn't quite sure what to do because I just dropped the voice. I just dropped the link and voices. So anybody out there is on CRC voices and you want to participate in this. You have to go through CRC voices to get the link to come into this. I'm not going to put it in that. I'm not going to put it in the live stream. More subscribers. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm not sure everybody in voice is really happy with all the new subscribers to CRC voices. Bring in more chaos to that little estuary. But let's let's for both of you, let's talk about going into this Senate. What are your thoughts, anticipations, fears, expectations, hopes? You guys aren't shy. I'm doing well. So, so I, my hope is that Senate does not act as drastically as last year. I find after it's taken a year of of talking about this and thinking about it. But I realized in the end that technically there's not much to argue with what Senate did except for the confessional piece. But I mean, the even sexuality report and I'm not one that's going to argue all of those things. But it was the atmosphere that was ruling the decision making that was very troubling for me. It took me a year to kind of start to understand what was going on. And that's why I was paying such close attention to the opening today. So, so because there is a contingent that wants decisive action that wants a door closed decisively. And the shock for I'm going to just call it my generation, maybe my generation in Canada was that that's not how we work things normally. And so I, my hope is that this Senate is different and I have high hopes based on already what we see. OK, OK. David. Well, I resonated a lot with your I listened to that video to of Sean and the three other pastors talking about that retreat. And I thought to myself that is going to be really important. We need to do more of that work. Now, Synod can't do that work in that way, right? It is. It's just it can't. And so I'm I'm of a couple of different minds here. At this point in my own thinking, I'm a pretty committed traditionalist when it comes to the HSR and how to understand marriage, sex, gender. And so I do hope that there is some reaffirmation of what happened last year at this Senate. But in a way, there's there's that. But what I'm most what I what I long to be a part of longer term is how do we. How do we move into generative conversation? Because I'm really what I'm really against. What I really don't like is. Control in the sense of like, let's batten down the hatches. Let's plug every hole. Let's put a solid dome over this so that we can get a better understanding of the whole thing. Let's put a solid dome over this so that there's no way of talking. On the one hand, it's like I think the denomination needs to make a decision and then actually stick to it and enforce it. But I think a lot of space needs to be given for those who can't abide by that and can't agree with that. And how do we offer that space in what context? Like, I feel like we need to get some time. And then I also feel like we need to have some sort of process for. I guess maybe you can put me in the gracious separation camp there. Like we need to find a way to graciously. Let those people go in. Maybe that's not the right way of saying it, but. I want there to be a place for conversation and I don't want it to be like, like, for instance, the the breakup, breakup Grand Rapids East. I'm just like, no, no, that is wrong. That is wrong. That was an audacious overture. That is that is no one responds to that kind of action in their life. You know what I mean? Yeah, that kind of like something's coming over over top and we're going to just bust this thing up. It's it's it's it's just going to be awful. And it really dishonors, I think. The journey that the Grand Rapids East classes has been on. OK, like. I think that journey needs to be honored. But then I also think the nomination needs to make a decision. And so then the big question is, what does that mean for classes like Grand Rapids East? And I would say classes drama as well, which I'm a part of, which is. Well, by and large, well, it's a it's a class that's in transition because there's a lot of vacant churches. And who knows what the next two years will bring? But generally speaking, we'll vote more progressive on these issues consistently. But one of the one of the things that I continue to try to remind people is that they might see this, they might hear it on the news and the whole filter for this is yes or no with respect to same sex marriage or something like that. What happens with a body like this? This goes all the way down to the roots. I mean, so you just mentioned this classes classes, Toronto. They've got a lot of vacant churches. There's transitions. All of that detail matters in something like this, because all of that stuff, you know, not all of it, but a lot of it sort of bubbles up. And every denomination is a is a body of incredible complexity that there's there's even though people see it through this binary lens. Boy, and what happens with a synod like that is a lot of that complexity is going to sort of bubble up and and people are going to feel one way or another for it. Any last year at Synod, one of the one of the points I made Pete in the video that I just made that I'll put out tomorrow is there's every Senate has a spirit, but watching it on YouTube is very different from being a part of it. So and but and every single person at the Senate is going to experience that Senate in a different way. And these big issues will definitely color how things are felt. But I think last year, Synod felt it. I think they really tried to strike a nuanced balance, even though a lot of people looking at their judgment with respect to Heideberg catechism was dramatic and drastic for a lot of people there. The way that that advisory committee was worded, it was it was very clever. So it's it's going to be interesting to see the way this goes. Let's talk a little bit about the so Church of the Servant was the is the convening church. I explained on my video what it means to be a convening church. They're in charge of worship. One of their pastors sort of worked the work the election. The other pastor gave the sermon. Lovely, lovely group of women. They have a they have a big refugee ministry that their church has. And it's really nice. I'm really happy with I don't actually on my channel get much of a chance. I know Phlebas was over in the comments section. He's CRC. He gets really frustrated with me because he really wants to meet me to be the CRC advocate and cheerleader. I don't really think that's my place on my on my channel. I could do it if I wanted to, I suppose. But I think this is I like the way the CRC really tries to balance all of the layers. And that's deep in our polity. And so synod is convened. This broadest assembly is convened always by a local congregation. And you get a sense of that local congregation. Part of the reason Church of the Servant convenes this year classes is that this year synod is that it's their 50th anniversary. And they thought that this is a nice way for them to interact with the denomination. And Church of the Servant has a very interesting history. I mean, they were. And did you worship a Church of the Servant, either of you, when you were in Grand Rapids? No, but they were they were explorers with respect to liturgy. They're a highly liturgical church, but they met in a gym because there's a certain degree of counterculture in them. They didn't want to have money in bricks and mortar. They eventually built the place. So there's a lot to this. So what were some of your thoughts of I actually haven't listened to the whole message. This started before me and I've been running around all day. So I've just kind of dropped in and gotten certain parts. What do you think of the worship? What did you think of the message? I missed the actual message as well. Right. I tuned in just when he was finishing. But the African women's group gave me both chills and tears, even though I could I always ever since Emily Brink told us the story of how African people refer to white people as people who can sing without dancing. So so I always see a choir, a group like that as restraining themselves for our sake. When I was at the seminary, we actually had a choir from Kenya or somebody where came in and there was a guy that got up and acted like a director when they when they did their songs and stuff. And we later found out that what he did had nothing to do with the singing. But they knew that we expected somebody to direct. Right. So I've always think of experiencing through that and just that especially that kind of refrain that they kept hitting was was just powerful for me. But that's all I can really, really say about that, except that it is interesting in the sense that Church of the Servant in this multi ethnic thing I think represents a certain part of the future of the CRC. And that then feels appropriate to bring that in. And I loved when they finished their I was in Grand Rapids living there at seminary when they built the new building. And of course, I can do the whole scoffing thing of you know, all those ones that had to kind of were in a gym and were and vowed never to have their own building. They all fail and at that in the end. But the I love the design of their building to write this marketplace. Like it's like you're worshiping in the marketplace. There's all these storefronts kind of things the way I remember all around the space. And I just found that said a lot too. But that's that's all I can say about about the opening. Okay. David, any thoughts on the opening? Yeah, so I mean, I did listen to most of it. I and I also I attended TOS for three years. So I participated in that way. I live close by and I didn't have a car. So I walked basically. Both of you were Canadian students and it's a little different experience than American students because of some of the restrictions on you. Yes. So the sermon. So he was all about flipping to and I think that was part of a prayer theme that had been leading up to Senate. And the preacher focused on the then make my joy complete by being like minded. But he really focused on the joy. And, yeah, I guess I liked it because when I look at that text, I don't always see that tend to hone in on the joy aspect of this. I think, yeah, the multicultural aspect was fitting and great. From from a distance, I think being in the room would have been, of course, a lot better. I think the real question will be what happened Sunday and what kind of showing, right? Because the host church basically host people on the Sunday. Am I right? Yeah, there is a special there's usually in the morning people can go anywhere because there's a lot of churches to pick from in Grand Rapids. And then usually in the afternoon, I haven't looked at the schedule in the afternoon. There's usually the special synod worship service, and that will be done by C.O.S. They'll probably do it in the chapel, though, because last year the special service, I forget what, which was the convening church was one of the church plants. And and we actually held the service in the chapel. OK, yeah. Well, I just thought maybe that would be a source of like you might see some some people like, no, I'm not going there just by virtue of their being in the Grand Rapids East. And yeah, usually the worship service isn't a bone of contention. There might be issues of, you know, is a woman preaching or women serving communion or something like that. But usually there's not a lot of drama around the service. So. All right. Well, OK, so you had the yeah, the opening worship. And then again, you had the power and privilege presentation. So you had expressed interest in talking about that, David. The I thought they did it a lot. Nothing against the people, my friends who did it last year. I thought it was better this year in terms of, again, the the title is going to trigger some people. And I have a problem with imagining I've been watching the so I've been watching the Duggars, that documentary. And it's like this guy abused his daughter and we sat him down and gave him a stern talking to. And it's like. You know, these these these trainings that we're subjecting people to, I mean, these ways that we relate to one another are really deep in us. You don't just sit down and talk someone out of their racism or their power or their privilege. I mean, it's just not at that level. It's it's something that, you know, we have to deal with at a much deeper level in terms of ongoing patterns in our life. And so, Paul, you know what you need? You need more training. That's the thing. That's the thing. It's like you're proving it. This is this is the answer is just keep loading training on and eventually eventually you will be catechized, you know, in the ways. And I'm being a little like, I know you are. But that's I feel like that for me, the big question I have with with that kind of thing is like, oh, I wonder, I wonder when this will stop. Yeah, that's got to be an issue. And not and not like not the power and privilege thing. But I'm like, I kind of see things getting bundled onto that. And I wonder where I wonder where the end is. And I I don't know if that's the right channel. But. Yeah. So. So it's it's one of these things. And there's always in an organization, you're always going to have things like this and there's a season for it and the season will pass. And at some point, there'll be another synodical process committee that says, boy, that thing's not really doing it for us. We're going to get rid of that. We're going to try this new thing. And I mean, that's just always part of an organization. But no, I really I don't know Sean that well. You know, obviously, I worked with him on the video that we did. And I really like him. I know he did a great job at Creston. I have a niece who goes to Creston and she was he was leaving as she was coming. And he did a great job in that church. So there's if you work for the denomination, you get some thankless tasks to do and said it is part of that organizations are like, we should do this. And then suddenly the staffers got to do it. Kind of a thankless job. But. But I will say I will say, Paul, like, I mean, I've been kind of negative there. I was immediately like, man, I know what this is going to be. And I don't like it. And then it wasn't that. Yes. About about halfway through, I thought to myself. This is it. This is important. And it's actually there needs to be a time. Where actually these kinds of conversations are had. So I guess I feel mixed in myself. So I was surprised. OK, I'll just say that I was surprised that as it was happening, I was like, this, this does need to happen. And I don't want too much more added. Like it's sort of I don't want the bundle effect where you basically. Yeah, spend. Well, and when you're at Synod, and this is what I talked about in the video I made, you sit in those seats a long time. And there's a lot of tedium and being a synodical delegate. And this kind of direct presentation that really takes a toll on people very quickly. Look, they have their hands. They I mean, because you just that's I think you're right. There's a question of format and forum. And I also think that I one of the one of the real issues. And this is a long time conversation with me that Pete knows. We really have to find ways as a community to process things in other ways than business meetings. We need business meetings to conduct business. But just like the video that we had, if you're going to do other kinds of processes, and especially with something like this, it's like getting a group of alcoholics and saying, you know what? It's really dumb the way you drink too much. Why don't you? You know, it's sort of like stop it. You know, it's like it's the wrong kind of approach to something. It's not how human beings are wired. So anyway, what are your thoughts on this, Pete? I mean, you're a you're one of these old liberal types, even though you say you're a moderate. You're making me afraid to speak again. Oh, yeah. So lots of stuff. Yeah, I find I liked what Amanda presented in terms of calling for consideration. Right. But the thing is that for most of us white folks, especially older white men. So I'll just speak for myself in that category. I won't put either of you in that. But let me backtrack out of my Jordan Peterson meetup group that I had years ago. I became acquainted with a sociologist who had done her major research in the Netherlands and whose mother had actually been, I think, at least Dutch, if not CRC. But she was doing research on white privilege. And she asked if I would be part of that. And I was I thought, yeah, you know, I'm going to show them it's not real. And I was astonished how it made me aware of assumptions that I make about speaking and and and just, you know, the freedom of walking into a room and engaging that others do not have. And so it was it was a profound learning for me. And so I'll tell that and then I'll move to another story. I remember when we first had ethnic advisors and there was a Navajo on the floor of Synod. And it was either and it was a person, an ethnic person. And they started this one, the three minute limit was first put in. Right. And they started with a formal greeting to all the categories of people that were there. And their three minutes were up and the chair stopped him. And and he got like 10 seconds to speak. And I thought, OK, like, I think back to that story. And I think if that happens at us at this in it, for instance, the learning opportunity is in somebody else standing up and saying, you are you. I feel that the chair has abused their power and privilege in not respecting this man's ethnic approach to making a speech to a gathering like this. That would be it would be tense, but it would be a true learning moment, even better than being handed a sheet of scenarios that you discuss at the table. Right. This is real. So what we need, then, is somebody to be there and point those things out as they happen and have the freedom to call time out. Right. Yeah, that's tricky, though, because then that's you're giving power and privilege to that. You're privileging that aspect. And all of these aspects are in competition. It's sort of like the parliamentarian, as even in this first one, you know, a couple of people. I want the parliamentarian to, you know, make sure what I don't want happen happens. And so, you know, this this is this is tricky stuff. Right. I mean, when you walk away, if you walk in, if you're a minority in a majority culture, do you expect that majority culture to to do things your way? No. So, so, I mean, the reality, I'm not saying that nobody I've never been I've never been unclear growing up when and where I did that there isn't such a thing. That especially in many communities that there isn't white privilege. But I also know that there's majority and minority and all these little cultures are nested because I've lived as a minority in just about every place I've lived my whole life. OK, I'm also majority. So it's it's really nuanced all the way down. So so I'm not undermining anything you say, Pete. It's just no. And so let me tell you what actually would happen. I have I have very, very little chance of ever ending up a delegate at Synod so I can say brave things. But but I would seek that personnel if I was there and say, I saw what happened. Yeah. And I feel for you. And if I were chair, I would I think I think it's incumbent upon a chair to understand. And and Paul as much said that we have this three minute clock. But you know, you get the chair. The chair has the ability to read the room and we won't always get it right. But yeah, it's how to love one another well. So and anything else on the power and privilege? Go ahead, Dave. You know, as Pete was sharing, I do. I know every time I've gone through some sort of training. I begin with resistance in myself and then about halfway through, I'm like, oh, yeah, it's like it's kind of important that I'm doing this right now. So I have that moment. I think what I'm I'm worrying about or thinking about there is it's start. It's starting to feel like exposing us to these things is actually not. It felt like maybe in the past, like bringing awareness was a big part of that. And now it feels like it's bringing awareness. And here is a whole bunch of beliefs you now have to hold. And so that's coming with power, which is a tremendous irony. Exactly. And all of a sudden, this isn't awareness anymore. This is this is this is power. This is indoctrination. And, you know, I'm I'm one human doctor, you know, cataclysis. So I do that. Right. And so I know that there are times and places when that is important. I'm starting to worry that it's moving far from awareness and more into. And now this is what you need to think. And this is how you need to speak. And this is what is expected of you. And although, oh, by the way, you're a white male and you shouldn't speak. It's like, well, it's like, hold on. I'm a person, too. You know, and I have thoughts and ideas and I kind of want to be in a group where everyone's allowed to speak and share their point of view. So anyway, that's the that's the concern I have. We're moving from awareness to some sort of I guess indoctrination is the best word that I have to share. I did exactly that. So I was part of a Zoom meeting that was looking to organize a Canadian edition of the middle way or the third way or better together. And so as they were coming to the, you know, the ask, are you willing to be part of this? The conversation turned to making sure we had lots of minority representation, which is a fair thing to bring up. But that immediately then I said, well, then I'm not going to volunteer. And then at least one other person in my age category did the same. Right. So because then I'm afraid of abusing my privilege by by volunteering for that. It was just an interesting process that comes out of some of what I've I've learned in fairly recent times, actually. And yet the having it on the Senate agenda made us talk about it, didn't it? So in that sense, this should accomplish. I mean, if you really hate it, the thing you should probably do is completely ignore it and don't give it any airtime. So it's just so many ironies in life. Fleabas. So Fleabas is a Christian reform member, is a Canadian Christian reform. Everyone is allergic to strong leadership. Let's accommodate everyone until no one is happy. Think it's true? Think it's fair? I don't. We're willing to make you unhappy, Fleabas. There you go. We're being strong leadership. Make Fleabas unhappy. I got a good enough relationship with him. He's he's heard me plenty. But these are but these are the tensions that people are feeling. And so that's why I say there's a tremendous amount of nuance where then you have the Canadian American dynamic as well. And I'm not going to speak for the Canadians, but, you know, some of those tensions are in American society. On one hand, you want a strong leader who's going to make the path clear as long as the path they're making clear is the path that you think should be made clear. And which is exactly why you have all of this procedure, all of all of this stuff that we go through to let's have as many be heard. But in the end, not everyone is going to get their way. And in all likelihood, everyone's going to have to compromise somewhat. And in order to move forward, especially with a conflict like we've got now. So all right, let's talk about the officers. So Paul DeVries, I when I looked through who was going to Senate, I said Paul's going to be chair and I think he's going to do an excellent job. He's been he's been chair at he was a chair at a Senate that I was at, did a great job. He's he's been president of a variety of he's a variety of boards and the COD at one point. And so he's got a tremendous amount of experience running meetings, which is really what you want from a president, especially at a Senate like this. So and I've known Paul personally since college, too. He actually grew up in the house I now own. His father was in this church. I mean, I say these things on my channel because the CRC is likeness in some ways. Hey, my oldest daughter went to school with David's wife. Bingo. There you go. There you go. Yeah. And I was best friends with the power and privilege guy. So crazy. Yeah. You know, I, you know, when I was hearing you, Pete, talk about who was elected, you kind of saw sort of a centrist. And I actually I that actually wasn't my first thought. But I will say that I don't know. I wouldn't I wouldn't be able to put Paul or even three Cranenberg. That was his name, Henry Cranenberg in a box. I couldn't figure out where they where they are. You know, Chad, of course, is part of abide and has been a leader in a lot of that kind of that realm. And then Richard's part of classes, Toronto. And I know him a little bit. And I think I know where he's where he is on this, too. But yeah, my first thought for ethnicity, that Bodini last name. But I was the he's the he's the diversity higher on the on the ground. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway, so but my first thought was actually, oh, this looks to me kind of like more of a traditionalist group. But then again, I don't I don't know where Paul is and I don't know where Henry is. So Paul's a moderate. He's four women in office. I would imagine he's more or less conservative. I don't know if he's in a better together camp, but he's sort of a pragmatist, too. But you're not going to in Paul's leadership as chair, you're not going to get a sense of where his personal opinions lie. He will his his goal will be to facilitate the running of the meeting. And he's trusted and true on that all the way through. He has had medical issues in the past, which has affected his hearing, which is something that does affect a chair. But with all those other people up there with your vice president and your clerks that really don't have a lot to do, you know, you can always check with them to see if a vote is close. And you can always has to do it. So I think Paul's election was in many ways not ideological, but rather, you know, you look at his resume for being for being, you know, Senate president. It's like, yeah, nobody's even close. The interesting thing was that the initial vote was like 60 some 40 some. And in the 2022 election for the for the for the executive, that's when I really knew that Senate was going a certain way, because it was very clear that there were camps. And so when I saw 6040, I thought there's Paul and there's Chad, because the 40 is probably you're looking at most Senate delegates are not terribly political. They've got their convictions. They're well-meaning people who I mean, half of them probably a little less than half are not clergy. And many of the clergy don't pay a lot of attention to politics either. So and then often people when they elect the executive, they're like, well, let's do the second place person because we feel bad for him because he lost it. So let's give him the job. And so there's a lot of that kind of sentiment. So it's not that it isn't a very ideological body in many ways. No, I was puzzled by the naysayers about when they would recommend the top four top three. Yeah, that's just a playfulness or was that actually kind of protesting something because she had to talk. Well, one time she paused and then called it. But they were they sounded pretty close from where I was sitting. And then the other time she asked for it to be repeated. And I thought, why would people be doing that? It could there could be some ideological political movement that they suspected that someone didn't make the cut and they really wanted them. But usually the pragmatists, if you've got looking at the numbers, most people just want to kind of get on with it. And that's where tedium is an element of sin in. On one hand, people are going in there. They want to make a speech about something. They want to have their voice heard. They want to participate. But there's a lot of tedium on the floor and they want to keep things moving. So, yeah, there's some of that. But again, it was very interesting that no women and no well, Bodini Bodini's Dutch. You can ask him how we got that crazy name. But all all Dutchmen, which to me says that there is ideological and political anxiety that there's more attention to getting the people in and getting competence instead of sort of filling out the representation platform. Because in many synods, that's that's sort of the way it goes. OK, now we're going to elect a woman. Now we're going to elect a non-Dutchie and the other two slots. Then they're going to elect a Canadian to make sure the Canadians don't feel bad. And yeah, it's in 2022 on the exec. Right. And that was not lost to some people. Especially that Senate, if it hadn't been for human sexuality, the structure and by nationality issue would have been the big issue at that Senate. Right. Right. But our committee did an excellent job. Yeah, I didn't, you know, I was listening to the names as they were being read. And there was I know there was one woman up for Rita Klein-Geltink who want to show the continued connections here. I grew up friends with Rita's children and she babysat me sometimes. So there's more connections there. But yeah, I didn't. There wasn't actually on what you could vote for. There wasn't necessarily a lot of representation there either. I recall it was pretty much mostly CRC Dutch votes. And, you know, as someone who has always worked in congregations that have been predominantly minority, it's I've often, you know, gotten my deacons and elders to Senate. It's usually pretty easy to get them there because I've sent them to classes and oh, here's a woman of color, you know. And for many Senates, it's, you know, especially here in Sacramento, we've got a lot of people who are political. And so when they walk into something like Senate, there's a whole nother frame of reference when some of the people in my church, they work in the legislature, they walk into Senate. It's like immediately they understand this animal because they've been working in legislatures, even though they might not know a lot about the CRC and ethnically, they're a pretty small minority. They understand that animal. And that's why there's so many different levels of what exactly are we talking about in terms of being comfortable? But there's a long history of so in both in Northside to a degree and in my church, I'm careful what I send my people to because of these racial dynamics and we call power dynamics. I'm not sure that's the best way to frame it. But, you know, people, especially in the 60s and 70s, this was a much bigger issue. But you have a hierarchy and, you know, you act in a certain way. Someone like Tim Blackmon, who's a delegate to this, this is his first Senate. Yeah, he's there. But here's a guy who, I mean, how do you categorize Tim? He's Dutch. I mean, I'm not Dutch like Tim's Dutch. But Tim's also got dark skin. His father was African American, left the United States during Jim Crow, went to the Netherlands, married a Dutch woman. So, you know, there's so much complexity in this stuff that but Tim, I think this is Tim's first Senate. But subsequent Senates, I expect Tim to be, Tim knows how to run a meeting. He's tremendously charismatic, charming. I expect Tim to be in the Senate exec. So, and he's in a he's in a Western Michigan class. I mean, there's just all of these layers to why Paul DeVries has served. Part of it's giftedness. Part of it's his location of the church. Part of it, he's a second generation minister. Part of it, he's interested in this. There's a lot of very capable ministers that look at CRC policy and hierarchy and are like, you'd have to put a gun to my head. Last thing I'd want to be is on that stage. So, oh yeah, it would be tough for me. It's way too much pressure of and I'm not, it takes a skill set of to be able to be articulate, decisive, but also kind of discerning what's going on. Reading the room. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's, it's fun to watch someone do that very well, I find. I'm like, oh, you're good at this. Yeah. Yeah. I'm glad you're here. Clip this note, it's no Korean. The Koreans, that's an interesting case because, so I'm a synodical deputy. So I regularly go to the two Korean classes in California. They have their own hierarchies and they're very attentive. They pay a lot of attention to status and age. When I walk in the room with no hair and a big white beard, you know, I get status. But it's also English language and I mean people when they're when in a lot of these conversations we're talking about African Americans or Hispanics or First Nations people. The Koreans are playing an entirely different game with this because also if you want to talk about how we run our meetings, it's very opposite Koreans. Koreans will want to have all of the big decisions made behind closed doors with the top hierarchy leaders. And then basically the purpose of the meeting is to unveil what has been decided behind closed doors. Now a lot of our groups that are really sensitive to process and inclusion, they would hear that and they would say, this is exactly what we're trying to undo. Avoid, yeah. And what's so funny, so I go to the Korean meetings as a synodical deputy and I get there and I'm an older pastor. I've got a big white beard. I'm tall. I have a YouTube channel. You know when I come in, so when we sit there as synodical deputies, we're often sitting there and our job is to concur with decisions made by the classes. And often we play this little dance with the classes. The classes wants to hear from us with particular things, usually things that are CRC and not stuff they care about. Stuff they really care about? No, they're in charge. But the CRC procedural stuff, they're waiting for us to tell them what to do. And we're like, we're synodical deputies. We're supposed to concur with your decision. But they're like, well, but we'd like you to tell us what the right decision is and then we will agree because this is in fact how a meeting should be run. Deference, yeah. The deference. And this is, I mean, it's this whole other culture. And what's so amazing is that, okay, so we're going to come in and everything's going to be transparent and we're all going to follow the rules and we're going to make it pay attention to everybody's different ethnicity. And the Koreans look at that and say, boy, that's imperial domination of our culture right there. If you really want to know how to run a meeting, we'll run it for you. So, Paul, I got a question on that. Yeah. What do you find attractive in what you've experienced at the Korean classes meetings? Oh, it's like, and about their besides their food because the food is all that's good, you know, their, their way of making decisions. Specifically. Well, it's again, it's a it's a completely different system than our own. And, and just like every system. So part of the, so I did that video on kayfabe a little while ago. There's a lot of kayfabe at Synod. And I said, before Synod, and like you said, Pete, too, with this spin of the tennis ball, before Synod ever got started, I could just look through the list of delegates and tell you a number of things about what's going to happen at Synod. Because I know the people I know the systems I've seen them behave. That's all baked in. There's a beauty to that. The Korean system, there's a beauty to that too. And, you know, one of the things. So one of the things that we run into in our classes so we have one of the most amazing flourishing Christian reform churches is the Golden Gate Church, you never hear about it denominationally. The Chinese Church. So again, Koreans, Chinese. I mean, this is really complex stuff. So our system works is that when you bring in a new pastor to Golden Gate, they go before classes, we have a theological conversation. Part of our culture is like testing. I'm going to ask you a hard question. We're going to, we're going to sort of butt heads a little bit. And you know if you if you make a good show at classes, boy, then you know we're sort of Vikings that way. Good meeting. We kind of duked it out on the floor. Sounds like hockey. That's exactly. You do this with. From Korea or China, you are confronted in a public meeting. They're, they're saying, I don't want to be part of this I understand where we are in this pecking order and you know you're just trying to humiliate me. So, people like multicultural okay square this one. But the Koreans. So hospitable. How many of you when you went into a class this meeting received a gift, and not a small gift from the host church. I mean, to be money. I mean, cash. I mean you're synodical deputy and, and you know, you know, they're giving a cash gift, I've gotten clothing. And, and they're extremely hospitable they're extremely deferential, they're extremely welcoming, but they very much have their own systems. And, and so then as I as a synodical deputy, and they're in, I mean it's, it's. I love I love going to their meetings. But it's, and even, you know, let's say okay, they're very traditional women in office, no way, I'm sitting in a class this meeting and this woman comes in sits down, usually a younger guys translating for me says, she's a woman pastor, I said what she's a woman pastor, I said, this class this is against women pastors. Yeah. What's with her. You know, it's so funny we had a we had a meeting where we had Koreans and Hispanics, the Hispanic said to the Korean. Yeah, we've got status and hierarchy like you, it's just your people submit to it. Yeah, that's right. So cultures are so complex with this stuff. And, and, you know, I've always been a person who loves cultures because a lot of attention to it. And I absolutely love going into another culture and learning all of the ins and outs and subtleties because you can learn and learn and learn but you will never learn at all. You'll never be part of it. So, yeah, so the Koreans are Koreans are a whole nother element to this. And, yeah. Well, I asked it because sometimes I feel in myself. A desire. I would love to know what it feels like to be in a system where there's a bit more hierarchy. You think there isn't in ours. Well, when I see it, it really does come down to the vote. I mean certain people might get to Senate more readily than others and so in that sense, the people we select to represent us typically often end up going more like the ones with high status get elected there more often most likely. But sometimes I look at like, oh, we just decided that by vote. Sometimes I'm like, I feel like someone wiser, more godly should make this decision on our behalf. I'm like, I'm very Korean. Right, or maybe orthodox in this little corner. That's right. And so, and I know there are trade offs there. And you concentrate that those decision makings and you end up with corruption or, or awful things happening. And I know that that's a, you know, sometimes I wonder, oh, we're just just voting a like, I feel like I want to submit to somebody who is smarter than me. Or that was fleabuses comment you know strong leadership. I know. Yeah, and I wouldn't necessarily see that a strong leadership but that maybe moral leadership or Yeah, I don't see it as like someone coming in like a CEO and remaking the nomination, more like somebody almost like a pillar like like a, I don't know. I guess bishops the word maybe I don't know. To provide some sort of stability in the midst of our deliberations. Every classes that I've been part of does have almost a person like that. That's true, often fairly quiet. But if you watch the room, when they speak, people pay attention right. And now there are others that try and do the same thing in a manipulative way, but, but there are others that that everybody pays attention when they speak and so they have that weight of influence. And, but yeah, whether that translates to Senate or not. And in a sense, maybe the leadership that was chosen reflect some of that were there might have been some political element to some of the choices, but like, as, as Paul said, Paul DeVries's resume speaks for itself. But here's the question I'm, so I'm imagining myself I need to write a report on this that's supposed to catch eyeballs. My headline would be something like, Synod defies the power and privilege doctrine of the church by the leaders it selected. I don't understand. How? Colonizers. You said yourself, right? So, okay, well that's my headline. I have to write the piece yet. I didn't see that this year Synod, I thought so Henry Cranenberg. Like I, I'm trying to forget what I said in the video I just recorded what I said here, Henry Cranenberg, I was, I was secretary for one of the, I was secretary for one of the committees one year. And I don't know that secretary is my best gift but you know I got a little guidance from the staff what I wanted to do. And Henry took me aside, I never met him before I don't know about anything but he's obviously one of these pastors that really pays attention to detail and like structure and institution. No, you didn't do this right. It's like, okay, how would you like me, how would you have liked me to do it. Would you like to do it instead of me, I'd happily relinquish it to you. But no, he's, he was a super sweet guy very smart, very capable. And again, part of what happens in terms of these hierarchies are that people's whose temperament, like, you know, I think about one of my best friends in this church and elders been an elder for a long time now because we haven't had enough to sort of cycle, but my friend Reggie who works in the state of California. I remember him going to a classes meeting and it was like, he loved it. He just walked into that place and he had never been to one before but he very quickly read the room, sized things up, and knew exactly how power worked in it, because he understands that kind of system, because, because of California politics. So, but no, I, there are, there are all these different kinds of leaders in a structure like this. And, yeah, and, and you know, and even, you know, and let's be, I mean, Thea Link, Thea Link was, was Senate president a number of years ago, I thought did a great job. Now, she just retired from one of the more progressive, if not the most progressive church in the denomination. She had been denominally, denominational involved for years and so it isn't just a matter of, oh, here's a person with this background. No, in any hierarchy, you work your way up the ladder one way or another by paying your dues and a guy like Paul DeVries has, he's, he's done the work. And it strikes me we have actually just like a really capable group there. Yeah. You know, it's something to be thankful for, I think. But we elected four bishops. Yeah, we really did. We really did. We elected four guys. They don't make decisions on our behalf. They facilitate the decision making of the body. People that we trust to lead us in making decisions. Right. But it's also the case that sometimes you don't want to put your leaders on the executive team. Right. Because where the leaders really are needed is in the advisory groups because that's where it's all put together. Yeah, that makes sense to me too. And we'll see that product. I mean, Monday, some of those reports will start coming out. The really big ones won't come out till Wednesday or Thursday. But all right, so let's pivot now. Let's talk about the one moment of drama in the day. Classesman Cota clearly came prepared. And because you don't write that, you don't just sit down there quickly write that, that motion. And this was a and people get upset by stuff like this, but they shouldn't because there's a structure. There's an order. And to be a little savvy with the order is with an organization like this, the way you actually can get a few things done. So you said this. They had a lesson on power and privilege and then voted in an all white male team. That's exactly what I was saying. That's exactly OK. That was your point. Yeah. OK. It's like that. All thanks for hearing me. Please. So clearly classesman Cota classesman Cota. For those who don't know, the Christian from church for the most part has geographical classes. The Christian from church allowed some flexibility in the classical system. And then Cota has become sort of a classist with a particular. I mean, they're a little bit more pure in that they have less diversity. They're in some ways the opposite of the Zealand overture. Maybe if Zealand wants to look for more diversity in classes, they should write an overture to break up men code. So so so Minn Kota comes. I need to bow out. OK. It's been fun. All right. Thanks, Pete. I have things to say here, too, but I need to bow out. All right. No problem. How do I log out of this? Can you dump me? I you're dumped. There you go. I dumped it. Not that. No, no, no, no. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. You should. There's leave studio way down in the bottom. Oh, OK. Press that button. Yeah. But I I wanted to give you that power for a moment. That was I could tell we enjoyed that. I have the privilege here. I really do. Yeah. Yeah. You are your bishop of your own channel there, Paul. That's right. That's right. I have all the power. So then Cota has obviously this planned and I knew there was going to be some kind of move with respect to seating because there well, Classes Toronto was mentioned. Did Classes Toronto require subscribing to attend your classes meeting? I heard that there were some classes in Canada that had sort of loosened those, which then certainly puts the delegates kind of like, hey, wait a minute. All these delegates should be able to stand up and say amen without any problem. Yeah. Yeah. So I can I can speak. I think I can speak to that. But I will say that I don't like what Cota tried to do was kind of lost on me. Like I didn't understand what was happening there. OK. And so could you just explain that real quick? Sure. Yeah. So a number of a number of overtures. So an overture is a community, an official communication to Senate asking for action. Communications are just communications. Overtures are sort of asking for action. They have recommendations. And basically there are a number of overtures that challenge the seating of people or classes that aren't fully in subscription according to the rules of Senate 2022. Right. That would put Grand Rapids East directly in their crosshairs because they have this statement on their classical website and also, you know, how well, in fact, did they respond to the local committee sent by Senate 2022? The difficulty that you have with an overture is that goes into the advisory committee process, gets processed, and then things come back. You're not actually going to impact the procedures of this classist meeting. So then you have a parliamentary challenge. How can we get this to the advisory committee and onto the floor for recommendations early enough so that all the other subsequent decisions will be impacted by this one? It's a really sly move. And I know some people, I mean, some people were annoyed that I platformed Classist Zealand and one of the most audacious overtures I've heard my whole life long. I'm still waiting for someone to overture to break up Minn Kota. I love it just for the audacity of it. It's just brilliant. And I like creativity. And so, hey, my hat's off to Minn Kota because it's a rather sticky parliamentary problem. And they clearly thought this through. And instead of like, how on earth were you going to put this in the beginning of Senate? And they tried it. And wow, kind of a cool idea. Now, I still don't understand. Like, okay, if you don't want the delegates from Classist Toronto to see and vote on items that are coming, how do you stop it? That's right. Yeah. Now, you might stop it for next year at this Senate. Right. But how do you stop them in this Senate? Right. And I knew somebody was going to make a play like that. But in terms of the order and the rules. Now, the CRC is a very young denomination. There's not that many rules. There's not that much precedent. A lot of CRC rules sort of emerge like case law. So then the challenge is, how do we get Toronto, Grand Rapids, Classist we don't like kicked out from this Senate? It's a real challenge. Yeah. So they got creative. I agree that fits into the sort of the power plays or the control mindset. So I'm part of Classist Toronto. And yeah, I mean, I won't say too much because I feel a little weird bringing what we decided into this. But we did decide to suspend stating the covenant for office bearers together at the beginning of our meetings. Now, and I think people that passed, I was in at the Classist meeting where that passed, but I'm part of the executive. So as part of some of those discussions. And I think probably there is a multiple people had probably multiple reasons, their own reasons for why they voted for that. And there was a few negative votes, but not very many. Okay. And if I don't know what I would have voted. I feel strongly that people in churches need time to really digest what this means for them. And I don't think the solution is you actually have to remain outside of classes until you decide what this means for you. I think we need to figure out how to stay together to talk through this as you figure out what this means for you. So that's my angle, generally speaking, on this. And we are supposedly restarting it in September. We'll see how that goes and what happens then. I don't know. But yeah, and then so that but then there's there's all this overlap, right? So to become an elder or deacon, you sign the covenant for office bearers. Then on your credentials form, it's on there, too. And then you get to classes and you've got to stand up and say it. And then you get to send it and you probably have to do the same thing. And so there's all these levels of like agreement. So it's just the repetition. But I guess it's I mean, this is what bodies do. We continue to place before us. These are our fundamental values, our principles, our teachings. This is our our North Star. This is what we follow. This is what we are agreeing on together. And there is something powerful about just like stating the Apostles Creed in church. It's like you stand up and you say it and you're like, yeah, it's repetitive. But man, that really hit me to be able to say that with other people. And now we turn and face each other and you're like, OK, we're in this together. And I suppose that's the function, right, of of doing these things. But yeah, I mean, then I was going back and forth with the you know, we kind of had a hunch that this might come up on the floor of synod. You know, we probably should have like shared why we did what we did. So that there's not just kind of all this wondering about, you know, what's going on up there in crazy Toronto. But yeah, it could have been an issue, but I guess it wasn't right there. They are allowed to be there and they're seated and they'll have their voice and their vote. Yep. Yep. Yeah, it was ruled out of order and the chair was sustained. It's a very legitimate ruling by Paul. Yeah. And but what happens when the chair really makes a ruling like that, it usually will be tested and then it was sustained. So, again, basically, synod gets what synod wants. So we got someone else coming in here. Hey, Frank. Hey, Paul. How are you? I'm well and you? I'm doing well. Good. David. Hi. You just come in kind of coming here at the end. Oh, sorry. I just got home and we started reading the post. Oh, okay. I had CRZ voices. Yeah. And did you watch any synod today? I have not. That's kind of why I was kind of going to drop in and see what I could hear. Oh, okay. Well, yeah, this is this is your you're on the Internet right now. You're live here. Just so you know where you are and what you're doing. I do. You're thinking this is a Zoom room. But no, synod synod got started. Maybe it's a good way sort of to close the live stream. Synod got started. There's a little bit of drama, but nothing that sort of disrupted everything. And from from, you know, today and Saturday, they'll do their advisory committees. Most of the advisory committees will probably finish up their work Saturday. Some will get to finish it up Monday and probably the the two that have to deal with all of the hot button issues. They'll probably go into Wednesday. But but yeah, so the denomination is still in one piece. So that's a good thing. What's your view on the person's chosen for the president and for Paul and Chad? And well, Paul was, I think, the best choice. He's got a tremendous amount of experience. He's got a lot of trust in the denomination. He's a moderate, so he's got allies on both sides. He was, I think, very definitely the right choice for president. The irony, again, as someone as someone made in the comments section, they got a they got a lesson on power and privilege and they voted in all white male team of all touch men. So I think they're all the I don't if anything, if you if you have to look at who was elected and sort of figure out where it's going, probably moderate, which means I would think there's going to be some move to in some way do some sort of disciplinary thing to Grand Rapids East and Nealand, but nothing draconian. And so I think I think it'll probably be a fairly moderate Senate. The difficulty is you're trying to keep you're trying to keep wings together. And so it's all about nuance and signals. Don't do enough. The conservatives get nervous. Do too much. The moderates get nervous. What the progressives want is to completely overturn 2022. I don't think that's I don't think anything like that's going to happen. Do you feel, Paul, that people are sitting on the floor, making those calculations? Yes. You think so? Oh, they're making them before Senate. They were going through the lists, speculating. No, but the calculations meaning like, well, if I really want to vote this, but if I vote this way, that's going to drive away this group. And if I vote this way, that's going to, you know, make this group upset. Well, you feel like, yeah, I don't know. I don't I don't get that same sense that that it's always a calculation or something. Not by most delegates. And, and the tricky thing is you vote on what the advisory committees give you. Right. So it's not like good, bad, yes, no. Your votes are always tiny. Like the decision what to do with sort of Minn Kota's attempt to preemptive strike on the seating of certain delegates, that vote came down to sustaining the chair. Right. So once the chair was sustained and and usually it goes like that when the advisory committees come. If committee eight winds up with a single report. Most of that report will go through, if not all of it. If they come up with a majority and minority report, the majority report gets read, and then people from the minority report will move to table. And then the majority will go through to whether the thing will go through. I mean, it's that's the way it goes with synod. Right. So there are procedures, but most people sit there and sort of vote their conscience and their heart. Right. And then you get into the weeds where you do the word smithing of the of the overtures and the motions and and the progress of those motions and who says what about what. Yeah. And then as almost always happens, they get themselves into a procedural dead end. They kind of flex the rules to get out of it again. And that's why I say it has rules. But in the end, Senate usually gets to do what it really wants to do. That's kind of how it works. So. All right. Anything else that you guys would like to touch on before I shut the live stream down? Yeah, no, I'm good. Yeah, I'm happy to do this again, Paul. I'm still feeling chatty. So all right, David, in the loop. I do have some time next week. So, OK, yeah, there probably won't be like I said, there probably Monday, the way they schedule it Monday is a bunch of things that are pretty much, you know, presentations. And every Senate has like one ministry that they highlight. So you'll get and a lot of that stuff is easy to just kind of get out of the way on Monday. And a few advisory committees will skip those and do the work behind the scenes. And they're pretty savvy at fitting it all in. But the real there'll be some other news that comes out on Tuesday, which will be of interest. But Wednesday is when things start to get interesting. And for those who are watching the advisory committee reports which come out on the website, that's really where you know what's coming out. Now, the advisory committees are our executive session by default, which so you know, that's where there's sort of a backroom thing. But that again, I don't know who concocted how we do Senate, but it's really quite brilliant. So, right. Yeah, there's a lot of wisdom in there. Yeah. Okay. So thank all of you who watched today. And I know Bill Viss from Voices said, if some of you out there saw this and like David, you know, I posted the link to Voices just to see how many wanted in and Pete sure wanted in. But if you're out there watching this and you say, hey, Paul, I'd like to get in on some of this, you can DM me on Twitter. That's an easy way to get my attention and or send me an email. If you're in the Christian Front Church, you can just look up my email in the yearbook. It's in there. And yeah, I'm interested in again. And what's my point of this is because I need to fill the internet with more of my opinions. I've already got plenty out there. I would like to help the church see itself and hear itself. Obviously, a little sampling like this is by no means a fair sample of anything but except sort of motivated. So. All right. Thank you all. Have a good night. Have a good evening. Yeah.