https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lNu4-38ST3k

 Hi, this is Paul and for my regular viewers this is going to be a little something different. I am going to be talking about Synod and the Synod of the Christian Reformed Church began this morning before, well I guess I got up kind of early, but began this morning quite early for those of us on West Coast time, began at Calvin University and I'm going to be doing some talking about Synod, at least some of the things that I've seen. The first day is sort of a flurry of activity and then it sort of goes quiet and I'll talk about the structure of Synod and how this works and let me first give a little background about why I'm doing this. In the summer of 2017 I was already sort of playing with YouTube a little bit. I've been doing the Freddie and Paul show as I had said to a bunch of people I had, you know I'd been thinking about book writing but I pretty much realized that if I had been writing books probably not a lot of people would read them and so I'd been playing with YouTube a little bit and I decided in 2017 to do what I call the Synod postgame show and it sounds a little flippant and some people might be put off by this, but I remember as a small boy when my father was a delegate to Synod and my grandparents lived in Grand Rapids, Michigan, I would go to Grand Rapids and I remember once as a boy sitting in the gallery at the Fine Arts Center, today it's called the Covenant Fine Arts Center, then it was just the Fine Arts Center, and watching it and got quite bored quite quickly as a little boy and my grandmother didn't like to sit still either so she took my hand and we took a little walk around Calvin's campus and I think the Science Building was fairly new then and so I remember walking with her around the Science Building because she's giving her grandson a little way to stretch his legs. Of course we had gone to Synod and gotten to the gallery so I could see my daddy down there on the Synod floor doing the Synod thing. So then in 2017 I thought hmm there's a lot going on in this Synod, I'll put a link to this video below. Already I had been blogging for a number of years and I hadn't really figured out how to do YouTube with slides and everything like that so I actually sort of set up a computer and it was the same kinds of things I do now as I did then. I blogged and I made this little video and I posted it and I was looking at sort of the history of the Christian Reformed Church assimilation into North America, some of the various elements in the Christian Reformed Church with respect to that and doing this. Well why do this at all? Another memory from childhood was growing up around the dinner table at my grandparents' house either in Grand Rapids or Whitenessville, Massachusetts and listening to the conversation about the Christian Reformed Church. They would often talk about ministers in the Christian Reformed Church going here or going there. The Christian Reformed Church was sort of like a large family and we all paid attention to each other but as a little boy, you know, I couldn't really understand a lot of it but I wanted to. Now as I've grown into a man and I'm a minister of the Christian Reformed Church, I noticed that a lot of people don't understand what's going on and that's absolutely natural. They're even within ministers of the Christian Reformed Church. There are some who pay close and careful attention to this and some who don't. Recently I made a video about Andrew Kivenhoven's burning the wooden shoes article that came out in November of 1980. I love history and I love the Christian Reformed Church and so I pay attention to these things and I want to help the Christian Reformed Church understand itself. And we are in a time and at a synod which will be quite consequential in all likelihood for the Christian Reformed Church. I was a delegate to last year's synod. I have my youngest son is graduating from college this year so I didn't think it appropriate to stand as a delegate and so others have gone from my classes. And last year I couldn't do a lot of it. I did a couple of videos after synod which you can find on my channel. YouTube has playlists and so if you go into the playlist on Christian Reformed Churches, you'll find all of the videos that have done over the last five years that relate to the Christian Reformed Church. So I want to help make people, help people understand synod. Now obviously all of my comments are my own. They're from my own perspective. Put four or five Christian Reformed ministers in a room and you'll get four or five different perspectives. So that being said, whatever I say, your mileage may vary. But especially for people who are kind of interested in what's going on in the Christian Reformed Church, partly because this year the Christian Reformed Church is sort of participating in this great dispute that's going through the church in the west with respect to human sexuality and same-sex marriage. There's a lot of attention being paid to the Christian Reformed Church. It may very well be that the events of this synod cause a division in the Christian Reformed Church. We're going to have to talk about that along the way. So I thought maybe I'd give, just as I gave in 2017, a post-game show. I thought maybe via YouTube I could give a little bit of color commentary on what I see happening at synod that maybe will help people to understand synod a little better. And part of my job with this is again to provoke conversation. For longer than my YouTube channel, I've had a blog. I started this particular iteration of the blog in 2007. I actually even before that noticed that the denomination never registered the domain crcna.com. And so earlier I actually registered that domain and had a blog and had some talk about the Christian Reformed Church. And then when I wandered into some more controversial territory, I got a letter from the board of trustees, basically a cease and desist saying I had to relinquish the domain, which I was happy to do so. It was a little annoyed that the Christian Reformed Church wasn't sort of using the internet as much as it could to facilitate conversation. Before I started my YouTube channel, one of the things I was known for in blogging was trying to encourage the Christian Reformed Church into what I called confessional conversations. Because I could see early on that the Christian Reformed Church was very much heading towards a division that some very deep differences in approach to church, understanding scripture, were manifesting different minds and different orientations and different trajectories in the denomination. This voice calling in the wilderness for confessional conversation was heard by some, but nobody quite knew what to do with it. Last year at Synod, we had a confessional conversation and I usually try not to give too many speeches on the Synod floor, but the one speech I very much did want to give was to point out that while Synod was really feeling itself sort of racked in travail in last year's Synod, I said, hey, we're having a confessional conversation. How can we do this and how can we do this better? Now just this morning, I posted a little earlier than I usually do just so the East Coast people could have the video earlier. I posted a conversation that we had, Sean Baker had developed a way of encouraging pastors to speak with one another over the difficulties of this issue and then we had a little video conversation where they reported on that meeting. And this for me is something I'm very interested in because regardless of what happens to the Christian Reformed Church in the future, I want us to at least be able to speak productively and have productive conversations with each other with respect to what we're seeing, what we're feeling, our differences, so on and so forth. I made this little slide of what if there were in fact silos in the church and here I sort of concocted with these new AI graphics engines a church inside a silo and with other smaller silos within it. I used that as a thumbnail for this. But this is what I've looked for in terms of confessional conversations for the church to help the church move into the future more productively by not speaking past each other, not always yelling at each other, not closing our ears to each other, but speaking to each other and have them discerning the body as we have these conversations. I just in fact finished my rough draft for Sunday on that text from 1 Corinthians 11 about Christ's admonition to discern the body. Now I've been making videos for the last five years exploring lots of different things. Last month we had a conference in Crosspoint Christian Reformed Church in Chino where we had, it wasn't a Christian Reformed conference, it was what I call an estuary conference. Over the last five years I've been working with a number of people to on a whole range of things. John Vervecky is in there, he's a cognitive scientist from University of Toronto, Jonathan Peugeot is in there, he's an icon carver. All of this sort of downstream from what Jordan Peterson sort of broke open in 2017 which you know there's a lot of political and culture war stuff that's kind of over to the side. We're talking about how modernity is receding and how we are going to need to have better language in the modern space to talk about spirit and spiritual. We're very accustomed to talking about synod as a body and it's important to understand that synod is an example of an extended body of multiple human beings around which there is a structure, there are boundaries, it has a consciousness, it has agency, this is a body at work and this language we inherit and it's absolutely the appropriate language, the difficulty that we have is sort of connecting it with the other kinds of bodies. Part of this when we think about body we think about our physical bodies, of course the Apostle Paul in the book of first Corinthians talks about the body of Christ and part of what we've been working on in this space is to revive a sense of consciousness and language and how we can communicate with respect to these bodies. Many things I've used often the analogy of school spirit because a school will have a spirit and the principal, the student body, the cheerleaders, the football or basketball team, the teacher, the faculty body, many of these bodies are basically nested bodies the way you have Russian nesting dolls and the bodies have consciousness, the bodies have stories, they have boundaries, they have limitations, they have times, they have impact and so part of the purpose of these is to apply a lot of what I've been doing over the last five years in this example of synod in the Christian Reformed Church hopefully to help us understand each other better and help us have a sense of okay what is a synod, how does that function with respect to the Christian Reformed Church, with respect to the body of Christ, what is the body of Christ. We will often bring in the church realm bring this language into our into our meetings but part now with the recession of modernity part of what we're going to have to do is figure out again how to reappropriate this language, use this language, use this language effectively as we not only try to do our work within these bodies but also the Christian Reformed Church. There's a lot of history to this some of which I'm sure I'll get some things wrong and you can correct them in the comment section. I if I might do some live streams similar to what I've done on my channel with other things, one of the things I want to do with my channel is to continue to build community. My desire for confessional conversations is to help the Christian Reformed Church do better at being a body, to help synod act better at being a body. Now the body of synod is not synonymous with the body of the Christian Reformed Church. In my second conversation with Jonathan Pujo, this is a conversation I did with Jonathan four years ago, we're just starting to get at some of this stuff and understanding what he was saying. A little bit later Jonathan Pujo would say something like, well you know every human interaction sort of creates an angel and a lot of let's sort of push back on that language but I sort of an angel I think that's a little bit confusing. We're going to get into those conversations more and more I think but it's very easy to talk about the spirit of a conversation or the spirit of a committee or the spirit of a committee meeting or the spirit of a particular synod and if I first say angel and say no that's not exactly right but then I talk about a spirit then suddenly that spirit has a little bit more instantiation because I've sort of put it next to the word angel and synod 2023 is going to have a particular spirit. I was at synod 2022 and it had a particular spirit and that spirit was a little bit distinct a lot of commonality but a little bit distinct from the spirit of the previous senates that I'd been to. I was in the advisory committee in synod 2023 that looked at the question of structure and so that advisory committee also had its own spirit and I thought the advisory committee had a healthy spirit. I think overall synod 2022 had a fairly healthy spirit as well. There are sometimes when you have a meeting and it seems to have a very unhealthy spirit. Other times meetings have a sweet spirit. There's a lot of differentiation between meetings and spirits and sort of sensing what's going on with this language and how we can talk about it. Part of what I want to say right off the bat is because I am thousands of miles away and watching this via YouTube on a 20 minute delay I do not have a sense of the spirit of the meeting as people who are there will have and so after synod I'll probably talk to some of my friends who are at synod and get their sense of it. Every individual's take of the spirit of the meeting will also be different and that certainly was true of synod 2022. After synod there was quite a bit of reaction as I think there will be probably after this synod no matter what happens. But part of this is going to be to see to one degree or another if we can get a sense of its spirit and how it works. Now one of the things about synods in the Christian Reformed Church unlike something let's say like the House of Representative or the US Senate or Canadian Parliament, synod only exists within the confines of the meeting let's say. Synod begins and synod ends. Synod 2022 is one distinct thing. Synod 2023 is another distinct thing and in the Church Order of the Christian Reformed Church that's recognized and there's some advantages to that and some different disadvantages to that. It recognizes that every single synod is made up of different delegates and all of those delegates will contribute to the spirit of that synod. But just like school spirit whole other things will contribute to the spirit of that of each particular synod. The year, the politics, the fashion, the technology. One of the differences in this year's synod is it is being held in the chapel building at Calvin University. It used to be held in the Fine Arts Center. I've heard that the reason for this is cost. Now the chapel is cheaper for synod to rent out from Calvin than the Fine Arts Center. It's a smaller room. Now some of you will say well doesn't the Christian Reformed Church own Calvin College? Yes, but it's not unusual to have for budgetary reasons to keep the money in the family to have money exchange hands within the family so that Calvin College doesn't abuse synod and synod doesn't abuse Calvin College. Synod can say these are the services we pay for from the college. You should make good on your services. Not that Calvin needs that. Calvin is always a gracious host to synod, does its best, and hopefully synod is a gracious guest to synod. But synod pays for it and the chapel is a little bit cheaper. As you can see from the pictures in the room, well let's get a view out here. Oh come on. There we go. The structure is the same. I think the chairs in the chapel are better than the chairs that they usually put up in the Fine Arts Center. I always call it the Fine Arts Center. I'm an old guy. I don't call it the CFAF. I call it the FAC. Some of you insiders will know what I mean by that. But here you have in the front of the building, in the front of the room, the head table and you'll have the, used to be the executive director, now the general secretary. Kathy Smith is the parliamentarian. You'll have the executive of synod sit up there and these are the delegates and they're sitting by classes. A classes is a regional assembly and each classes sends four delegates. There are also other delegates or advisors that go. You have visitors from other churches that have ecclesiastical relationships with the Christian Reformed Church. There are youth advisors. There are multicultural advisors. Past years there have been female advisors. There was a discussion when synod was open to female office bearers. That's again part of the conversation. This came in. You sit there and a lot of the stuff now is done through laptops and if you don't have a laptop they will provide one for you. It's done through sort of Google docs, Google pages, the voting. They have little applications that run through there. You have screens in the room. There are PTZ cameras so that they can sort of watch the voting process. There's a lot of different they can sort of watch it. One of the differences between the Fine Arts Center and the chapel is there is a lot less gallery seating in the chapel than there was in the Fine Arts Center. That's not necessarily a big deal. Most of synod there aren't a lot of viewers and there are in fact fewer. There are both more viewers and less fewer. Less people in the gallery now that it is live streamed out via YouTube. People all around the country can watch it via YouTube and get a sense of it. You don't have to go to the watch it from the gallery. Now the live stream is on a 20 minute delay and that's important to note because they don't want they don't want they want people in the body in the room to have their consciousness focused and concentrated on the body itself and to not have people texting in oh talk to this and make this speech or make this point or vote this way with the with the advent of modern communication all of that brought a new dimension to the body at synod and so in the last few years they have worked hard at saying if you're a synod delegate don't do social media don't tweet things don't read twitter they obviously can't necessarily have you not reading twitter but keep the consciousness of the body within the confines of the body now synod is a church assembly and the christian from church tries to balance so you have local churches you have regional church that is the classes and then you have the synod which is the binational church between us and canada and the christian from church tries to balance those basically the christian from church is a protestant denomination says local church councils that council local church councils are sort of the the foundation of the authority and it's and then it goes up from there and actually christian reform church policy tries to balance this dynamic up and down and back and forth and what that means is that every synod is convened by a local christian reform church and the christian reform church this year that is convening synod is church of the servant in grand rapids michigan i have friends who are in church of the servant church of the servant is a a church very near to calvin college it is sort of it's a very it's a church of the very interesting history in the 1960s and 70s they were very much experimenting with liturgy it's a very interesting congregation i should bring someone from their church in and talk about the history of their church they experimented with liturgy but it was during the 60s and 70s so it's had in some way some countercultural vibes to it so they were quite a bit more intentional and liturgical before that was really fashionable like it is now but they also didn't own a building they met in a gym they did that for a number of years there are a fair number of calvin college faculty that were part of their congregation a number of years ago they decided to take the step of moving out of the school the christian school gym where they had been meeting and to build their own building which they did on i can i can sort of show you how this lays out so this is google maps of calvin university now i know for some of you you're going to be like i came here for synod commentary and i get all this historical background well yes um that's true you can always zip ahead through the miracle of youtube to where you figure i'll start talking about the politics and all of that stuff but all the politics again this body is nested in a lot of history and that history is important and for most of the watchers of my channel many have sort of derived kind of an interesting fascination with this strange thing called the christian reform church now let me zoom out this is grand rapids michigan and grand rapids michigan down here you see holland michigan this area was settled by dutch immigrants in the 19th century holland michigan look at a bunch of the names of these towns uh nordaloos zealand borculo um they took their names directly from the netherlands the migration that produced the christian reform church and a lot of the reform church of america in this region um grand rapids is as sort of been the center of the christian reform church calvin college used to be up here let's see there's east town there's wealthy street uh i've lived in these neighborhoods where's there's hall oh they named they renamed oh my they renamed franklin to mlk junior street oh that's interesting oh that's interesting my parents um my parents went to calvin college on the old campus and in the 19 calvin in the old part of the city very quickly saw that it was growing the baby boom was expanding the christian reform church and there wasn't going to be enough room for the college and so uh they got they got a hold of the knoll crest farm and they began to build first dorms here on the campus and then more and more buildings and eventually the college moved lock stock and barrel to the corner of burton and the east belt line a number of years ago they created they got more land on the other side of the east belt line and they have some a nature preserve over there and they have some ball fields and i was talking about church of the servant and when church of the servant built their church they built it right next to basically on the same block of calvin and as i said before even before the church moved there much of the church were calvin faculty they're deeply tied to the church and they that is the convening church of this senate well what does that mean well if we go back to you see all of these people leading in worship they are basically beginning the senate of the christian reform church with worship and church of the servant also has a um a vibrant immigrant african immigrant and refugee program and with this they clearly have a number of africans that are in the congregation and so they are taking part of in leading worship at calvin and beginning the senate with that and so the first while of the live stream you will see they are they are going to be worshiping and in prayer we're almost half hour in the i forgot well okay so church of the servant has two pastors and so one pastor will usually give um or there'll usually be a admonition to senate they went a little long today and scheduling is a really big deal at a meeting like this because they've got a lot they've got to get in senate used to be two weeks and now it's one week and um you know i'm sure there were plenty of personally i think the church might still be served if they had two weeks and a little bit more leisure time and community building time but that would limit the the number of people who could come and in fact lose two whole weeks so said in now senate now has one week but when we become stuck in that posture we lose a positive sense of what we're for and more importantly of what god is for and what the struggle we are in is ultimately for so there'll be a sermon and there'll be some admonitions to the delegates to um about about what to about senate we hate in common is too often all the rage and it also happens to be a very big business noticing what we love in common and studying that might help us survive i don't know about your congregation but church of the servant has had its own sorrows and struggles this past year but we're serving here today for the sake of joy the lord's joy it's the 50th anniversary of our congregation our jubilee year an echo of that 50 year rhythm in the life of ancient israel the year of the lord's favor the sabbath year of sabbath years the year when debts are canceled when slaves are freed when folks return to their homes when property is returned one way the lord's jubilee joy has arrived for us is in a house in the front of our church property right here on burden street we call it the welcome home it's a refuge for newly arrived refugees and while raising funds to to purchase this home our church happened to be hosting a blood drive and we do this periodically and a community member came in to donate blood and he was speaking with a church member and asked how things were going there i'll leave you with a cliffhanger the the the link to this whole thing is below so you can certainly catch the sermon catch different parts of it now that's one of the key differences in this and in terms of the body is that when you're there of course you're there in person there's the atmospherics there's all the relationships there's all the networks it's a very different thing than watching it on watching it on a screen if uh somebody made a comment on crc voices that you know synod's like kfabe there's this long periods of monotony and then and then moments of crisis and tension and then and that very much is true about about synod it goes back and forth and back and forth and when you're there you're there for the whole thing you're there for all the plenary sessions right now they're in advisory team meetings you're there for all the advisory team meetings you're sleeping in the un-air conditioned dorms you're eating the dining hall food which isn't so bad but it's not home cooking you're um you're sleeping in a bed that's probably not real terrific um you're separated from your church or your family and but you're there with new friends building relationships so it very much has a big part of body life and again it's important to recognize that um you're there as part um a local church is convening it so there's more worship um usually worship goes about a half hour they went quite a bit they went a bit longer and so there was talk about talk about synod you have the the greetings from the president there's a new president at calvin university and so he had never had a chance to greet them he's the son of a missionary again back to the the video that i made um no not that one the denomination is a much more diverse place than it was when i was born almost 60 years ago and those issues of diversity you know okay so if you don't have sort of ethnic commonality that holds you together what holds you together is it confessional unity is it something else is it something a little harder to put your finger on because all of what makes a body is is usually we're not we're not adequate to sort of describe it even our own physical bodies where it's inadequate to to finally describe a physical body as it is an ecclesiastical body or a spiritual body in terms of holding it together church of the servant has co-pastors and um and this pastor is is irish and part of what's fun is listening to her her irish accent as she reads president of calvin university dr weber boar who is going to welcome us formally and officially to the calvin university campus welcome and we have part of dutch last names um when you grow up in the christian firm church you learn how to say dutch last names because these are the names of the people that are around you now it's interesting you have kathy smith over at the end of the stage uh smith not really a dutch name but she's the daughter of a former general secretary a longtime general secretary lennard hoffman uh dutch name um and but not everybody here is so good with dutch last names and so every now and then they'll say one but you if you look around the if you look around synod floor two you know there's a there's there's a fair amount of diversity there in terms of uh people from other ethnic groups i mean it reflects america and the christian firm church has gotten enormously more diverse in the last number of years and again the work of my father my own storyline the work of this church that's been a big piece of the diversity that is now part of the christian reform church and that diversity is of course both a blessing and sometimes a challenge now this part is going to get a reaction from some of you we need to prepare for synod and um this goes to exactly what uh karen said about a couple of years ago the synod synod review task force made a series of recommendations for improving how synod would function in order to create a really healthy and the best possible environment and culture for synod to conduct its deliberations so synod they noted is a deliberative body it's the broadest assembly of the crc whereby delegates from all over north america come together to listen to the variety of perspectives and insights and voices present and in this conversation that you're going to be having over the course of this week to discern the leading and the prompting of the holy spirit so for synod to work well all delegates need to feel empowered and encouraged and supported to participate in the conversations that happen here regardless of age or gender or ethnicity we are one body with many parts as paul notes in first corinthians 12 and we need all the parts of the body to participate and work well together if we are to flourish and so to this end paul actually goes on to say in first corinthians 12 now if the foot should say because i am not a ham now if the foot should say because i am not a ham and i do not belong and if not an ear has different spiritual gifts that people bring different made of the body notice again all the body language here are not sure this is what happens if i don't you know prepare slides delegates to better understand the power with which they are privileged especially with regard to gender ethnicity position and age so the goal of this brief training this morning is to make us all attentive to and curious about each other and about what each of us has to contribute to the process of deliberation and for those of you who feel like you belong like these are your people and who feel confident that your contributions and your words will be received well and carefully considered we hope that you recognize especially that not everybody who comes here feels that way and that despite paul's clear teaching there are those in our midst even here this morning who wonder whether they're really part of this body so we want to equip you this morning with a simple framework a mindset you might say you might say that you can use to help you and this body live more fully into the vision of first corinthians 12 and to do that i'm going to actually turn it over to sean so some of you might recognize sean so sean got this duty and you know i think i think i think this is well meant i don't know whether you can how much progress you can really make on on sort of helping the body function with this admonition but that's now a part of of every synod and um again part of synod is is they talk at you a lot at synod and there's just a certain amount of presentations there's not a lot of training things um but my guess is that this will go for a few years and i i doubt it will go on forever but you know i i listened to some of what uh sean did i thought he did i thought he did a nice job um but it's it's difficult to sit in those chairs just hour after hour after hour and you know if you can get up and sing that kind of keeps you awake um but it's yeah so so that's that so some of you will be triggered by that but from the hr departments that are making you do things um and then after that let's jump ahead zach king is the general secretary of the denomination that's that structural stuff that has been migrating you might remember if you watched last year's senate that i have the the privilege of doing the the senate interview with him and so he's been he's serving in that capacity now there's a little bit of training for um there's a little bit of training for using the voting system that comes in and they first vote on flowers and then they then they vote for officers and that and again the convening let's see if i don't want to jump into i would find it here okay now about officers of senate officers of senate have a role in helping the body function that's their main role they they have a little bit of duties after senate they become the program committee for the following year's senate and the program committee helps with a bunch of details that actually became becomes a thing a little bit later on with this senate um but they but for the most part their job is to help function and there's a president a vice president a first clerk and a second clerk now in the days before you had staff and computers and recordings and all of that it was the job of the clerk to take the minutes and that would have been a big job in something like this now there's a tremendous amount of staff around who are recording things and this whole thing has been systematized i held up the i held up the agenda for synod um in a previous live stream it's a big book and basically once they have the agenda set well that agenda basically goes to the advisory committees the advisory committees bring things back to the floor as i do more of these videos you'll get a sense of how synod operates in that you get a sense of pacing and and everything that goes on um and part of so okay so now they're going to elect officers now i'm going to talk about body politics and politics are always a part of a body politics are sort of the way that things function who gets selected for what role before senate a list goes out basically you get all these questionnaires if you're a synodical delegate one of them is would you be willing to serve as an officer yes or no um i think most people say no it's being an officer senate has its own rules and there are if you go to the senate website you can download the book of rules for senate and read those if that's the kind of thing that interests you but because senate only happens once a year and many of us only go to senate a handful of times in our lifetime uh most people a little foggy on senate rules the senate officers especially the president and vice president they're in charge of making sure the senate rules are followed the parliamentarian is there as well and we'll get into that a little bit later because that will come in that discussion that we had on this first day but the people are going to make comments about the length of this video yeah there's you got about 15 minutes of real senate action and vanderkley took two hours to talk about it you know typical for me but people on my channel like this sort of thing so you can always listen to that listen to it at 2x speed if you want to so people then say yes or no whether or not they'd they'd agree to be an officer and then those lists go out and the lists of all the delegates go out and those who have agreed to stand for office are in another form they list how many senates they've gone to what their roles have been at those other senates what their roles have been denominationally maybe on denominational boards at classes maybe on classical boards in terms of running classes meetings and the point of this is to try to give some assessment of competence because the real business of the officers of senate is to facilitate this meeting as best they can to have the spirit work well to have the spirit of the body work well to have to basically to do for it to function and that means knowing rules and procedures they're working on senate while all the rest of the delegates in that sense are working in senate and so experience is a really vital indicator but experience is not the only thing because of course there are factions of sorts in the christian reform church there are let's say confessionalists if you look at i actually had a slide of this in my 2017 post game show there are there are confessionalists in classes mancota we'll hear from them at this senate they tend to strength they tend to emphasize the antithesis the reformed faith tries to balance the antithetical which is black white right and wrong and common grace which is a little bit more analog so you have the binary and the analog so you have the confessionalists and they tend to be the conservatives you have the crc evangelicals that are sort of like they sort of a common spirit with many evangelicals the christian form church is sort of assimilating into the other christian spirits and cultures in north america you have the progressives and they are they tend to be more social justice oriented classes grand rapids east this is 2017 and i talk about the emergent sacramentalists they tend to be church of the servant are they progressive are they emergent sacramentalists the sacramentalist faction is interesting in the crc because some of them are fairly conservative and some of them are fairly progressive and when i talked about the history of church of the servant they sort of have both things going and so the particular struggles within the christian reform church are really felt in a church like church of the servant so you get the list of you get the list of people who are running and people are going to pick now at synod maybe a year like this you're going to have more people who are sort of politically motivated in the denomination when i when my grandfather was going my grandfathers were going to senate i think my i i'm gonna i'm gonna hear from this because my mother's gonna watch this i think my mother's father only went to senate once if at all and he had been an elder in his christian reform church but you know in the middle of the 20th century in the early part of the 20th century to be a delegate to senate was a high honor and you know people bumped elbows to try to you know be found worthy as as climbing those status hierarchies and being delegated to synod these days it can be tough to get enough for classes for some classes to get enough people who are willing to not go for two weeks that was two weeks plus travel in some cases before air transportation now it's one week with air transportation paid by the denomination you're housed by the denomination you're fed by the denomination and still some classes out of a much larger church have a more and more difficult time getting synodical delegates and women are in ecclesiastical office and so the pool is larger but getting those delegates is more difficult some of the people in a senate year like this where there's controversy there'll be more activists let's say on both sides of the aisle that are motivated to get to senate but at every senate probably the majority of people there are not politically astute in terms of the christian form church yeah they know that stuff is going on but the level of interest that you are demonstrating by watching this video the vast majority of those people do not have they have their own experience with the christian form church they have their own set ideas about good bad right and wrong and they might not know hardly any ministers in the christian form church beyond those in their own congregation much less in their classes much less in the denomination and so they're different the the election of officers sort of tells you different things about the consciousness of the spirit of senate and what's going on let's see where we're at here to be considered for senate officers so i am going to read the names i'm we're going to start with the president and the vice president nominees and then i'll also do clerk and second clerk now there is some overlap you know there are a number of the similar nominees and also we have like carol was saying we have a few that aren't here so i will note that so i'm going to begin with the president and vice president nominees we have richard bodini richard can you stand thank you we have ryan bram ryan can you stand there's ryan thank you we have paul devries paul can you stand there's paul we have rita cline now i have to say that when i looked over who was going to senate i already knew who was going to be president and he in fact is president of this senate paul devries was a friend of mine in college and seminary this will give i only say these things to give you a sense of how the christian form church is especially among the clergy paul devries was a friend of mine in college and seminary paul grew up in the home i currently live in and own his father was the minister of this church he has he married a a girl from whitensville and so there's lots of ties one of is i don't know if it's his first church or a second church but it was it was second crc in prospect park i i'm trying to remember what there we still call it we still sometimes some of us who have been in the christian reform church long enough still use the old names of churches and so he lived in prospect park for a number of years he eventually took brookside church in grand rapids which if i pull up the map so here's calvin university if we go down to 28th street also called 11 and if we look at kalamazoo avenue here is here is are the offices let's see we can we can bring in here are the offices of the christian reform church and where's brookside it's it's it's pretty close here his church is his church is quite near there his church is in kentwood which is this area here and his church is in classes thornapple east paul is we all have reputations and so you know people if they want to challenge my characterization of where they fit on the political map they can do so paul i would say is a moderate in the christian reform church he's not a progressive he's not a conservative it obviously would have some conservative tendencies and some progressive tendencies and a lot of this would depend on well if you you agree with women in office yada yada yada that's so i'm just going to use rough categorizations um he's served many many times in places he's been the chair of the board of trustees has been the chair of the council delegates he's been chair of board the board of calvin seminary and a number of other boards and so paul has an extremely an extreme pedigree in the christian reform church in terms of serving at this level and one of the things people look for he's been senate of he's been president of senate one senate when i was there uh probably a few more times and so there was no question in my mind that he would be elected to this office because a bunch of people are going to look he's been president of senate people are anxious about how well the senate is going to go so they're going to elect paul the other questions are going to be okay who else because you can sort of note the faction that these people are on now again most synodical deputies are not thinking in these terms they're looking at a name they don't know any of these people they're okay well they've served a number of times they've been here maybe there's some predilection of they come from a conservative classist or a conservative part of the country or a progressive part of the country progressive classes so there'll be some of that but it's it's not strictly any of these things it's a mixture of all of these things so here are all the names that we're we're going to stand and gelt nick rita could you stand thank you geltink sorry see struggling with those dutch last names zack reking who didn't grow up among the dutch thank you for that correction we also have timothy cuparis timothy thank you over there we have chad steenwick chad thank you we have mary stedgink there's mary right there thank you mary we have david struck david struck grew up with me in new jersey um went to the same high school as a year ahead of me there's david right there thank you great guy you david elizabeth is not able to be here this morning so we're removing her from the list we have scott vanderplug thank you scott and we have steven zwartz steve see what i said about tedium you're sitting there and you're sitting through all these people have been sitting they got the training you know worship at least you can stand up and sing you've got the sermon that sort of grabs you but there's a lot of tedium to be a delegate to senate thank you and we have john canoester john thank you all right those are our candidates for president and vice president now i'm going to move on to the candidates for first okay and and i'm going to speed this up because there is tedium and my time is limited and here especially with the first vote this is the first time they had a little practice thing but all the delegates are trying to figure out exactly how to work machine and how it goes and i can tell you that we do not have a simple majority and the number of votes i'll read from down and then i'll entertain a motion from the floor now notice 67 41 now i don't know which one it is but right away hearing who was voting i knew right away paul has 67 uh chat has 41 and then the rest were small numbers and they're going to vote between them and paul is going to be elected now then they vote for vice president and if you go to the senate live blog um senate has a variety of things going on right now you can go to the live blog and you can see basically everything that happened during the day uh zachary king was the um is the general secretary so chad steenwike is the is the vice president uh chad is part of the abide organization and so that's part of what people are watching so that's the conservative group that's been um that's that's i've talked about abide quite a bit um henry granenberg another canadian was served as serving as clerk and richard bodini uh voice er is second clerk now what's interesting this year is that last year it's become in the last number of years sort of practice that they try to have representation on the officers and so they'll usually uh usually when people are looking for president they're looking for someone with a lot of senate experience and especially someone who's had experience as an officer of senate because that's really useful they usually try to get a female delegate they usually try to make sure they have a canadian representative and they usually try to make sure that they have a representative that doesn't have a dutch background or last name last year it was interesting because the president was a hispanic gentleman a conservative man from classes arizona and the vice president was from the abide group and the first treasurer or the first secretary was another person from the abide group who was up for secretary again and didn't get elected this time and then the the final person was a woman from my classes who was a deacon delegate and so they were able to sort of fill that out except they didn't have a canadian last year this time you don't have any women in the you don't have any women in the officer corps you don't have any people from non-dutch backgrounds in the officers and you have two canadians richard bodini has made some noises with respect to his position on some issues in certain forums but i don't know how many delegates would have known that richard was on for a number of things richard's been a minister in the christian firm church for quite a few years but arron vriesma was not elected and so some people are looking at and saying well maybe this senate is a little bit more moderate because paul is a moderate chad is from the abide group henry crannenberg has been around the denomination for a while he's sort of he's a he's another canadian um well you know fairly well known as sort of a academic he's often been on the education committee i'll say it that way when i was secretary of the of the or was the education admissions committee i remember one senate i was secretary of of the advisory committee and he had some he had some critique for my work which was absolutely fine henry if you're watching this um so it's an interesting mix it's much more sort of a conservative to moderate um conservative to moderate executive that we have at this senate so again part of watching senate is to get a sense of where's the body at you learn something by seeing who was elected um to the chair but it doesn't tell you everything you still have to go through and see what comes okay so that that takes a while and that's basically what i saw from the election that i wasn't in any way surprised that paul was elected and i'm really happy he is he's um got a tremendous amount of experience at this he's a moderate in the denomination he's going to be fair and right away um things were tested today but i think he's i i if i would if i was at senate i would have voted for him for president because he's gonna he's got a lot of experience for this he's going to handle the meeting well one other thing he's had some health issues in the past and that has affected his hearing um and that that does in some ways impact the chair because there's a lot of voice votes and you have to sort of listen but he'll have he'll have the other executives there and if a voice vote is close they'll look at each other and you know if you can avoid electronic vote it just saves time if it's really close then they will go to an electronic vote but that'll be something that you'll see as this gets going because um the the difficulty with hearing will sometimes mean well well actually it'll help the live stream because he will make everyone talk into the mic speak loudly speak clearly and that will help us hear it when you watch senate you'll notice that they go for a while go for a while go for a while and then they break and then the real question is okay you take a break you got to get people back from the break you want the break to be just long enough so people get a chance to get out of those chairs and stretch and go to the bathroom and get a cup of coffee uh senate runs on caffeine fat and sugar um because what what you really need is a whole population of people my age who who just need more caffeine fat and sugar right but um they they've the recent years they've tried to add how have healthy snacks so they have fruit and water and all of those things but if you want caffeine fat and sugar plenty of it will be available during breaks so then there'll be these long breaks and and senate will sort of put forward this thing and they'll go away and then they'll come back and then they'll they'll begin to gather again and i'm just going to shoot ahead to there was a lot of it so that's paul there's a lot of question about will the seating of everyone go smoothly because as i mentioned in previous videos uh what senate 2022 did was sort of nailed down the confessionality of certain beliefs with respect to same-sex marriage and as again the videos and the conversations have gone about what about gravamen and in other words can everybody be seated there and there has been at least one classes that didn't require for their meeting that everyone there at that classes signed the form of subscription that classes sent delegates to senate and so what that opened up was a question are those delegates actually properly seated and so i and a few others wondered if we were going to have a basically a credential fight about seating certain classes at this senate now the way it works is and i had this wrong actually in previous the way it works let's so paul takes over let's give you a sense of paul um again exactly exactly the right guy to to lead this senate in my opinion still not um short passage from scripture and there's uh there's richard bodini he's a friend of mine from voices a view from the camera behind he wore shorts uh it's often per fun you often get a little lecture at senate to um yeah business casual please because everybody's mom is watching and and you don't want to be seen at senate and richard was there in shorts another friend of mine i noticed he's going a little bald i could see on the top of his head and um i'll call out some of my friends during this so henry crannenberg is standing next to him uh chad steenweig is there he'll be coming up and this is paul de vries again this is zachary king the general secretary of the senate earlier this morning this was a verse in my own personal devotions came up in the the reading it's from lamentations three verse 24 and when i saw lamentations three i said oh i know the one that's going to be but it's not the um great is thy faithfulness new every morning it's right after that lamentations 324 says i say to myself the lord is my portion therefore i will wait for him so my encouragement to you this senate is to remember that the lord is our portion our position is not our portion our right to speak is not our portion um our unhappiness is not our portion our frustration is not our portion the lord is our portion and in my experience that often means waiting and with the waiting comes the listening the thinking the reflecting so the lord is our portion delegates to senate 2023 um it's a little unusual for us to be coming back after break usually we go right into committees but we have to make sure we are ready for that uh so please bear with us part of the reason i say that is normally you break and we officers all receive some training into how to do our jobs so i just remind you we haven't had any training on how to do our jobs so bear with us and but again paul has been doing this for years so he doesn't need a lot of training the other officers will pick it up as they go along that the president is most essential the vice president second and include some of the technical training of speaker lists and and the rest so bear with us and then i'd like to remind us of this a note that i received about a dozen people prayed for us in this space on thursday and the prayer was that god will equip you with his wisdom his humility his surrender and unity as you do your work here and as we continue to do ours at home so that's on behalf of our prayer shepherd john hookah ma we're grateful we're grateful for that so know that we are being prayed over i have a series of announcements that we need to go through to go over at this time to make sure we're ready to move forward with our work and first if you've been following along with the prayers of the christian reform church of north america you might know that our theme comes from philippians 2 verse 5 we've already been reminded of that it says in your relationship with one another have the same mindset as christ jesus so as we begin senate 2023 our deliberations and discussions have been bathed in prayer but we have difficult issues ahead of us issues on which people disagree passionately at the beginning of senate 2023 we need to reflect how we will give honor and glory to christ in our relationships this week we've already been called to joy so let's be joyful celebrative in disagreements we speak the truth full of the grace full of grace how does it go up and to the right up and to the right over and over again up and to the right as sean was reminding us as officers of senate were deeply committed to promoting christ-like deliberation none of us here are here to win or lose a controversy we are here to follow christ obediently into the challenges and opportunities that face the church so we trust that you will encourage and exhort each other to this end as officers we are available to address difficult issues as they arise so as we gather here to do the work of senate your work is being supported by many on your denominational staff many in the churches and i do want to give a shout out and a thanks to the staff that give me announcements to read when i don't know what else to do that will help train us next to those who have been descended before and those of us who have been descended many times the staff comes here year after year after year after year and we're very grateful for the wisdom that they bring as we come together today so having said all of that the first item of business and there are a number of them here is the i need to read the public declaration of agreement with beliefs of the christian reform church in north america this is published at the end of the rules for synodical procedures and what i'd like to do is ask all of you to rise and then i will read this and again this is usually very pro forma and the question is is everybody going to rise is someone going to challenge the chair what's going to happen here please remain standing it indicates your agreement with those rules that can you you have them in front of you zack it says they're attached to my announcements thank you we are assembled as delegates to the senate of the christian reform church in north america to deliberate and decide on the issues here presented as senate's agenda we promise to do the work in obedience to the revealed will of our lord jesus christ and in full agreement with what the we believe that the old and the new testament are the word the inspired word of god the only infallible rule for faith and life we affirm three creeds the apostles creed the nicaian creed and the athanasian creed as ecumenical expressions of the christian faith we also affirm three confessions the belgian confessions the christian confessions the belgian confessions the belgian confessions the belgian confessions the heidelberg catechism and the canons of doric as historic reformed expressions of the christian faith whose doctrines fully agree with the word of god along with these historic creeds and confessions we recognize the witness of our world belongs to god a contemporary testimony adopted by senate as current reformed expression of the christian faith as we deliberate and make decision decisions consistent with these beliefs to the best of our ability and with the help of the holy spirit we promise to seek the unity and the well-being of the church of jesus christ who prayed that all his own may be one in them i ask all of you now who are standing in our delegates to express your assent by together saying amen amen we ask you thank you you may be seated i breathe a sigh of relief when that was over but we had a little bit more to do so the program committee which is done by the officers from the previous year has to be approved and uh someone from classism encoda stood up at one point and said he wanted to talk about it but it has to be done after it's approved okay okay okay there's always a little bit of okay what do we do now what do we do now what do we do now i'm going to jump ahead to it the chair see what i mean if they don't speak into the mic we're not going to hear out here on youtube land you i'm i'm sorry first identify yourself with the name the classes you're from and then i i was having trouble hearing you so repeat what your suggestion was sure my name is chattarola i am a delegate from classes men coda my motion that i have is contingent upon the program committee report making the advisory committees actually exist so it would be beneficial to accept that report first before i bring this motion okay so i'm going to zip ahead a little bit our motion is this that senate immediately be recessed and instructions given to advisory committee eight to review overtures 62 63 66 and 67 and that senate reconvene in plenary session no later than four o'clock this afternoon to hear and take action on the advisory committee's recommendations we have two grounds number one our unity as a denomination greatly depends upon maintaining the integrity of this body as we began senate 2023 it is of utmost importance that we solidify the trust that our polity depends upon regrettably credible reports have surfaced regarding the classes that may have violated church order and synodical procedures and selecting pointing out my friend ren just to his left ran when i got here living stones was a member here moved back to grand rapids to teach at calvin lost a great member he's an elder from another church in their delegates and concern that another class is disregarded settled and binding disciplinary instructions from senate 2022 these actions compromise our unity and our mutual trust ground number two in order for the reasonable and important remedies that these overagers request to be meaningful senate must consider them before conducting any other business immediately recessing senate to allow the advisory committee to make recommendations on these particular overtures and report back in a timely fashion is well within senate's established rules and procedures to be good stewards of the time that we have other advisory committees could meet during this recess to begin reviewing their materials with the understanding that no action be taken until after senate reconvenes that's the motion that we have entered thank you so basically what this would do is so what happens at senate is everything goes to these advisory committees these advisory committees bring things to the floor as recommendations and the floor acts on the recommendations the advisory committee sort of pre-chew everything and they're basically made up of it of a of a sample from the senate and most of the time senate adopts what the advisory committee recommends sometimes they tinker with it a little bit but they adopt it there were some overtures this year that basically challenged the seating of certain classes at senate and the idea would be if the advisory committee could rule on that those classes could be unseated at this point potentially and but obviously this is sort of a break in established procedure so they made this motion and now the question is okay what happens next all right so just for so the body understands and to make sure i understand as your president the motion is for us to recess from this plenary session immediately to have committee eight consider these overtures to come back no later than four to consider the objections to those who are seated as you can have previously read in the overtures that's sort of the heart of the matter i'm going to rule that motion out of order on the grounds that senate has senate goes to all of its committees first the committees do their work and if the committees come back and respond in a certain way to those overtures this whole body needs to discuss that and to discern that before it would change the way senate is constituted there's no current procedure for objecting to a committee that the program committee has assigned especially especially once we've already approved the committee report so it seems to me the best order would be to let committee eight do their work along with all the rest of the committees and if a new rule is established for subsequent senates so be it that's up to us as a body but i think it would be poor order for us to break now i know that's a rather lengthy explanation but i'm going to rule that that motion is out of order and a chair can do that a chair can do that now the chair is going to be challenged and so while this idea isn't technically illegal senate has the liberty to do as this motion requests senate doesn't have to and so basically what we're going to see in the challenge of the chair is probably a sense of whether or not the vote will be sustained now he's pleading his case but he's not talking into the mic or a slight adjustment in the timing of how we do things or the mic is off and that timing is critical to making the remedies that are in those overtures meaningful thank you thank you please always use the mic when you speak especially for the folks that will be listening but the chair as opposed to those who won't be listening has been challenged so i'm immediately going to step aside chad's going to take the chair he'll explain how this works i thought it was going to get a little more time to rest than that no as a chair when a chair is challenged the vice president takes over as the chair of the body now we will vote yes if we think the chair was right in his ruling we will vote no if you think that he is not correct in his ruling his ruling now this is a debatable matter so we are we so we there can we can have discussion on this are there any speakers in the queue okay so the skew the queue is just getting set up we'll receive a second from the challenge what's the point of order the rules notical procedures say it is debatable i will grab the paper here all right this way we're all on the same page concerning a ruling of the chair challenge the chair if any member is not satisfied with the ruling of the president the matter is referred to synod for decision an objection to a ruling of the chair must be seconded in order to be considered and debated so we do need to do that the president presiding at the time of the chair shall relinquish the chair until the body votes whether to sustain the ruling in question so it does say considered and debated so is there a second to that challenge of the chair okay if you could make your way if you are in the speaker queue and so the next up will be heather a strew boucher strobacher from classes grand rapids north so if you so heather if you could make your way to the other mic one of the other mics thank you my name is philip fritually from classes arizona i am on committee eight and i understand the reason of for the recommendation i personally do not agree i think we need to do what the chair said we need to do and let all the committees do their work thank you thank you heather okay then we have daniel meyers from classes ontario southwest next up heather strobacher from classes grand rapids north this is new to many of us and i would like to hear from our parliamentarian on exactly what our synodical procedures are on this matter and you can fill it out for us please kathy now you're going to see this fairly often because people are going to ask advice to the parliamentarian sometimes they're going to look to the parliamentarian to rescue them from something happening that they don't want kathy i think is going to be very um cautious to stick to the rules and and let synod decide now this as you see already with this the christian form church is a very young denomination you might say almost 175 years old is that young well for a church it is and its rules although it have they have their roots back in the the the dutch reform church going back centuries the crc continues to tinker with its rules and so you're going to find procedures that come up that doesn't really fit in the rules and generally speaking synod can do what it wants synod has a tremendous amount of power within itself to do what it wants and so it can change the rules and one of the interesting things about the senate is going to be well how what are the rules i mean the gravamen that's a long conversation about that there's a lot of conversations about a lot of these things because rules aren't necessarily that old or set in stone and there's not that many rules kathy please well frankly this motion has that was made that has now been challenged the ruling of the president has been challenged this motion was new to me as well so i'm not quite sure what your question is but it is true that our president has ruled the motion out of order for the reasons that he gave and therefore what the body has to decide is whether or not to sustain the chair's ruling so i'll make a clarification here what we are voting on and discussing right now is the challenge to the chair we're not discussing the motion so if you're discussing the motion i invite you to take your name out of the queue because if we would sustain the chair then that motion will go away if we would vote no if that would be the majority then we will have the opportunity to debate that motion but right now we're not debating the motion in question so to the most but yet everybody knows this is going to tell us something about whether or not the motion is going to pass and so there's within the hearts of the delegates they sort of want to well up and they want to argue about the motion even though this is just to challenge the chair and but effectively if you say yes the chair is correct then the motion goes away so it is and it isn't but the the vice chair is correct motion or to or to the uh challenge of the chair if i can i'll ask for your clarity whether my thing is to the motion or to the challenge um my question is uh from uh to ask our parliamentarian whether there's any historical precedent for this sort of activity or the request that has been made that's a fair request i think do we have any historical precedent to this that you know of not that i'm aware of okay see she's she's very brief it's just because in a senate like this there's a lot of temptation to have the parliamentarian either make a case you know basically get your thing done and so she's going to be very careful here to you know try and stick within it and yeah this is a totally new move but obviously was planned before senate because i don't think they really typed that little thing out during during you know the things that were happening before this was the move that they planned to come and that's not a bad thing there's procedure this is a body um there's a political element and layer to the body but it all has to be held in tension any other names in the queue we have Todd Ritzma from class of scranton rapids north speaking to the challenge of the chair i'd like to call the question we should on this i think we're there good thank you for that because we have no other speakers in the queue so just to know appreciate that though that is always an option um so as to be clear vote yes to sustain our president and his ruling that that motion is out of order you vote no if you disagree with his ruling all right all in favor say aye all opposed i judge that it passes and so that the chair is sustained thank you thank you chad just a word about challenges to the chair um challenges to the chair are simply when you think i've made a procedural mistake or i've gotten something wrong there's no offense to it please feel free to challenge the chair you don't need to feel badly about it my feelings won't be hurt we'll make lots of judgment calls together some of them will be close some of them won't be close so again feel free to challenge the chair whenever whenever is necessary i know the very first time i went to senate it seemed wrong it's not wrong it's just a parliamentary way of saying no no i think i i think not i think we could do it a better and different way so just keep that in mind uh committee and then they're going to they're going to adjourn for now and what they're going to do then is they go into their advisory committees and so there won't be any news for a little while so the rest of friday they're in advisory committees uh saturday they're in advisory committees um sunday is worship service and some other things and then monday morning then they start getting into plenary sessions on friday and friday and friday and friday and friday but the first day plenary sessions they don't do a lot of stuff the advisory committees at that point some of them will be done those that have the easier things the advisory committees with the heavier matters will continue to work into the week and their items will likely come out wednesday and thursday and synod ends at 3 pm on thursday so the job of the chair is to get it you get a sense of of paul he's comfortable in the position he's um he keeps a good keeps a good mood um in the body and uh we'll see how this goes so um i plan on doing more of these i hope they are helpful leave a comment that lets me know whether or not you think they're helpful those of you who are unfamiliar with youtube comments if you decide to read them be prepared to read uh people's opinions on a whole range of things and people will state their opinions strongly um and if that really bothers you best not to read the comments because that's what people do in comments it doesn't bother me i'm sort of like paul uh everybody has the opinions and um you're gonna do with them what you want but let me know if this has been helpful um it's it's i i do this in the spirit of yes you're getting my opinions in it my opinions can be wrong you might disagree with my opinions um and if you disagree with my opinions feel free to do a comment i'm going to do a live stream today uh we'll see how that goes we'll see if i do some more of those the reason i'm not at synod partly is because i have a um a son graduating and so wednesday and thursday are going to be the big days at synod there are also days that um i i'll have to see what internet access is like in the place that i'm going where my son is graduating so we will see what comes in any case um thank you for your time and attention and i hope this was helpful leave a comment