https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GM0fXvpkjCY

 Hi, this is Paul. As those of you who caught this very strange little Friday morning live stream this week, which was very impromptu and ended when Rick got here because Rick currently has the network all apart as he's reconfiguring everything and doing all this stuff. So I'm unplugged from the internet, but I have made myself ready to do some things that I don't need the internet for so that Rick can figure all this stuff out while I continue be able to do some things. I made a video that I don't know if I'm going to release it or I'll put on a front end. That's part of the reason for the slowdown. I know some people have been really anxiously awaiting more synod content. One of the things that I was thinking about, so the banner gets to California later than it gets to Western Michigan, and this was the banner out before synod. It always takes a little while for a print publication to have their banner edition. The banner edition will probably come while I'm on vacation, so you won't get it right away, but you can usually get banner content. Banner is the official monthly publication of the Christian Reformed Church. I often struggle in terms of questions about, okay, where exactly do we get perspective on this? Now Abide is one of the things that has arisen. It's really a group of pastors, like-minded pastors who, if you listen to some in the NCRC that really hate Abide, I like to remind them that All One Body did it first, as did Christian Renewal, as did ... There have always been these little interest groups that emerge in the Christian Reformed Church because it's a bigger body, and so you have a group that want to influence the body, and so these things emerge. Now the Abide pastors tend to be younger than I am. They're a generation younger. They're much more internet savvy. The All One Body group tends to be a generation older than I am, so there's a lot of generational issues going on in terms of these Christian Reformed interest groups. Now Abide has a really good website. They put out very interesting video content. Abide is even playing around with a print instantiation, and you have ... It's very similar to the banner in that they're doing similar things. Those of you who are around the Dominican Republic, around the Christian Reformed Church, Cedric Parcells has an article in here. It's super interesting to me that thinks about denominations, and this is just super interesting. This is super, super interesting because the kind of questions I think about are what is a denomination? What does it take to be a denomination? I should probably have Dan Ackerman and or Tim Vink on to talk about the formation of the Alliance of Reformed Churches, something that's been happening over in the RCA. We live in extremely interesting times in terms of the Christian Reformed Church and denominations. You all who are participating in this conversation are participating in it as well. These guys just did a video. As I mentioned on the livestream I did this morning, one of my limitations of being all the way out here in Sacramento is that stuff happens in Western Michigan and I can't go to it because I just can't go to it. I don't even hear about it because so much of this is local and interpersonal. One of the really cool functions that ABIDE has fulfilled is news organization. Again, in some ways they're competing with the banner. Again, 50 years ago this would have been a much more difficult thing. Now with the internet, in many ways they are outperforming the denomination in certain aspects. Just a group of pastors, unlike Better Together, they didn't get money out of Classes Grand Rapids East to start it. I'm sure they've gotten donations. Anybody who's aware of how you can actually get stuff done via the internet understands completely how these guys have done it. As is the case often in the business world, large organizations can't seem to get out of their own way. This kind of disruptive entrepreneurial ship is manifesting itself and having its way in the denomination. Now these two are two local church pastors. Unlike all local church pastors, they're interested in denominational politics, they're interested in theology, they're interested in church history. The internet gives and now abide this new thing, gives them a way to pursue it. It'll be interesting to see what happens to Better Together after this synod. These guys talk about a bunch of these issues, so their channel's a lot smaller than mine, which again is another totally weird thing. I wanted to talk about what they did and talk about what I think about what they're finding. To update, I'm Reverend Tyler Waggonaker. And I am the Reverend Cedric Parcells. And it is Thursday evening, June 29, 2023. We are on Kelvin University's campus. Back in our old haunts. Yes, we were just here recently because Synod just met here. And in fact, that's kind of what brings us back into the Grand Rapids area here, Cedric, isn't it? We were just down the street, not that far. So again, they, I mean, I'm sort of a, I was going to say I'm sort of a one man show here, but no, we've got the randos. So it's, yeah. From here at Kelvin, Christian Reformed. We are strange, but we are mighty. Church where they had a town hall meeting for Classes Grand Rapids East. And all the churches of Classes Grand Rapids East were invited, all the members were invited to attend. Now, this is interesting too, because this, what they organized is not a regular meeting of classes. One church decided to hold a town hall meeting. And you go through church history. Again, it's the initiative shown by certain members in the church. And that's what Abide is, except Abide is using the internet. So that's another way that all of this is changing. Because they were going to talk about Synod. Yes. And what was decided at Synod, what was discussed at Synod, the implications of that, of the decisions of Synod for the churches of Classes Grand Rapids East. And what their response might be to what Synod did this last year. Okay, so Classes Grand Rapids East is not waiting for a next classes meeting. Again, one of the things that I've talked about with respect to confessional conversations is how, what are the, what are the bodies through which these confide, that host these conversations. And so town hall, it's not that town hall has no official standing in the Christian Reformed Church. It's just getting a group of people together. All one body has, all one body, Abide Project, HESED, none of these things have any official standing in the Christian Reformed Church. Many of the people involved in them are people with standing in the Christian Reformed Churches, office bearers, or they work for the denomination, et cetera, et cetera. But these are parallel things. And so now Grand Rapids East, very soon after Synod, has a town hall meeting. Yes, it was actually good to be back at Calvin Christian Reformed Church because when I was a student at Calvin College here on Sunday nights for worship service, I would drive down to Calvin Christian Reformed Church and worship there often. Remember what I said about the particular unique place that Grand Rapids has in the Christian Reformed Church? I should show you this thing that Dave Snapper found and posted on Voices. So if you've made your way to CRC Voices, you've probably had a chance to read some of David Snapper's things. David Snapper is the world's biggest fan of the Christian Reformed Yearbook. And David Snapper, like many really nerdy Christian Reformed ministers, or like rightly actually there's probably not too many of them, his attempt to have, to collect Christian Reformed Yearbooks going way back. So this is kind of what yearbooks look like today, all nice shiny colors and stuff. But when I was in Iowa for Synod, there was a table of free books and it had old yearbooks on it. And so having been tutored by David Snapper, I had my way with the table. And here's a yearbook from 1910. And here's a... Let's focus. So that gives you, it gives you a sense of what's important. And I'll pull up the cover here. You'll notice it is in Dutch for the year 1910. Yearbook Christlike Reformed Church in America. And the book itself is mostly just names. So there's Oakdale Park, Grand Rapids, 10 Hoare is in Moline, Skriba. And so this is a 1910 yearbook. Here's a 1924 yearbook. And notice, see this is before the First World War. Come on, focus. This is before the First World War. This is after the First Year World War. Notice now we are in English. And so now, Clark isn't, you know, in Dutch, Clark is in English. And you have the names of, these are the people, congregational reports. You still though, in the back of the book have, and our good friend Job and some of our Dutch friends can probably work this, the Mengele work. I don't even know what that means. Someone in the comments will tell me. Now here's one from 1975. And ministers and statistics from churches. Obviously the church has grown since 1910. The print is still small. And today they, this one's mostly just directory. Some of the other yearbooks have more information and they're fatter. So this picture that I have on here is from the yearbook in 1940. And of course it's a map and it's showing basically all of the places that there are Christian reform churches and all the lines connect to Western Michigan. This was obviously somebody's idea. I should press upon Snapper to figure out how to get a better rendering of this for me because it, maybe if someone's in Western Michigan and they go to the, again, I'm not in Western Michigan so I can't go to the Calvin Library which would have all these things and you could pull them off and you could scan it or take a good picture of it with your iPhone. David's not necessarily a technological wizard, although he follows all of these numbers more closely than anybody else I know. And so here, but this just shows you, gives you the mind of the Christian reform church, especially in 1940 in terms of this special status of Grand Rapids in the minds of the church. It's, often in the Christian reform church we call Grand Rapids Jerusalem. We should probably call it Rome except the Christian reform church up till about 50 years ago was so anti-Catholic to call it Rome would have been a tremendous insult. And so instead Grand Rapids was Jerusalem. And so what's true is that almost anybody up until recently, the vast majority of Christian reform ministers were trained at Calvin Seminary. A good number of them were trained at Calvin College. If you go to the synod, if you go to the synod recordings and you find the report from the president of Calvin College, he has people stand up who basically have been to campus and it's almost everyone in the room. Now this plays out on in biological ways. Many, many Christian reformed people found their spouses in the Christian reform church and at Calvin College or Dork College or Trinity or Redeemer or Kings. So this again is a deeply tight knit organization. And so even though now there's all this drama about classes Grand Rapids East and for people who watching with a very low resolution would think Grand Rapids East bad, Zealand good. It's not that way because almost anyone who had spent four or eight years in Grand Rapids going to Calvin College and or Calvin Seminary, Calvin University, sorry, would have been a member of any of these Christian reform churches. And so again, this is family business. And so that was good to be in that sanctuary. Yeah, and I'd never been there before. I drive by a number of times. I've always wondered what it was like and it was very nice, very nice sanctuary, very nice facility. It started out actually, they wanted everyone to meet in their fellowship hall. They had a lot of chairs set up, a couple hundred chairs. That wasn't going to happen. That was not they quickly discovered that was not nothing. That's super interesting. That's super interesting. That Grand Rapids East didn't anticipate the level of interest. Really surprises me. They underestimate and they said that we didn't think there would be this this level of interest. They were very thankful for that. And so they moved it to the sanctuary, filled up the sanctuary center pretty much. I would say there were over 500 or so in attendance. It's not a small church sanctuary. I too have never been in it. I think I was in it once or twice, actually, years ago. But many of these churches, especially in Grand Rapids, had very large sanctuaries when these congregations were very large. And part of the unique dynamic of churches, Christian from churches in Grand Rapids is that they sort of rise and fall. But there's so much Christian reformed population in the area that people sort of move between the churches. And some churches rise and some churches fall. And so the churches are in some ways in competition with non-CRCs, but they are also in competition with other CRCs in the city. And so it was very well attended. So they began. How did they begin that evening? After singing, we sang two songs, two hymns. And it's always nice to have a large group of people singing. It is. It is. This is my father's world. Yes. Beautiful. And even the selection of this hymns is interesting. They didn't sing a praise and worship song. Probably because they didn't have the praise and worship band there that night. Probably because it was like the clergy who put these things together. So now all we need is an organist or a pianist and we can sing something out of the salt or hymnal. And so the meeting basically had three parts to it. And the first part was they had given out a handout that sort of summarized what the synod had done with regard to. And again, this is so helpful because. This tells you a lot about the Christian Reformed Church. Chances are, and I might be proven wrong, I'm happy to be proven wrong. And so if I am wrong, please leave a note in the comments section. They didn't think to record this. They're not putting stuff on a website. I'll have to go to Calvin CRC. I can't because Rick has the Internet down. So again, but now these young entrepreneurial abide pastors are sharing this. And I wouldn't know this. I would get it through CRC Voices probably. And I will go to CRC Voices and get a sense of this. But it. You know, one event, a hundred perspectives. You know, the HSR report and confessional status and about Neeland and classes Grand Rapids East. And then the other thing is, you know, the other thing is, you know, the other thing is. And so the first part was just sort of going through that piece of paper. And I have to have all Al Walters once again lecture me on the pronunciation of the Latin, which I don't know. Explaining what had gone down. And the second part was the delegates that Classes East had sent to Synod got up and they shared their experience of what committees they served on and what they felt. And the third part was the question and answer section. It's kind of an open mic. Yes. For anyone. They had a couple of microphones set up and they would just walk up as a member of one of the churches of Classic Grand Rapids East. And they specifically said that they would like questions, not statements. That's right. But but like it's synod, that's true. That did not take place. There were one of them was making statements and someone shouted out, oh, my God, I'm going to be a Christian. And one of them was making statements and someone shouted out, try harder. To ask a question. To ask a question rather than to make a statement. But actually, I appreciated the statements that were made to me because it helped get a flavor of where many individuals in the churches of Classic Grand Rapids East are at and kind of responding to that. Because what bugs around there get in my mouth. I'm a good protein. But besides it impacting, of course, the Church of the Classic Grand Rapids East, it impacts the entire denomination also. And so that's one reason why we were there just to sit in again as as as ears for our own purposes, because it does. I appreciate that they go and I appreciate that they report because there was a there was a member of I'll name the church Ammon Valley. Mark, you're probably listening to this. He's the pastor of Ammon Valley. Mark and Zach have been on the channel. I went to I went to Synod 2022 with Zach. And he was a member of Ammon Valley and I was at that point on the Classical Home Missions Committee. And he would he would always complain about this secret society called Classis because stuff would happen at Classis. And if you are a member of the church, you had no idea of anything happening at Classis. And that's kind of part of the CRC culture, too. It impacts our congregations and it impacts the congregations of churches all across the United States and Canada and even worldwide, actually, as the CRC is growing. So with interest, we were there just listening, taking notes about everything that was said, reading the handouts and listening to that. Anything on the handouts specifically, again, too, that that caught your attention, Cedric, as they were kind of going through the again what Synod decided. Well, I mean, the only thing they did a good job summarizing, I thought in terms of when they were just summarizing, they did a really good job. The one thing that did catch my attention was on the backside of their page. They talked about the fact that that recommendation B had been voted down with regard to another in loco committee. And so their their their interpretation of that, I guess, what they say is the effect is, is that they're and this is underlined. Yes, there is no current pathway or mechanism for forcing either compliance or disaffiliation. And so I think that there was a lot of discussion. That's an interesting statement has to be parsed very carefully. Current pathway, because, again, I suspect Senate 2024. Paul DeVries's speech. Play it if we want to, I suppose. And you'll from Ontario Southwest. Paul DeVries from Classes Thornapple and just full disclosure, I was on the local committee. I speak against this motion. This is a mistake, my friends. It lacks wisdom. A is enough. I agree with my brother, Mike. A is enough. B is, in fact, punitive. You think the job of the first in local committee was difficult and and limited in its mandate. I don't know how you read this other than it's punitive. The only advantage of B, if you could call it that, is that it provides a step by step process, which the in local committee will have to follow if we pass this because they have to follow their mandate. It spells out exactly what they need to do. And it is clearly punitive. The goal is, it seems to me, to remove the church. I served on the first in local committee. That's what the result of this will be. We will remove them. Classes East, Neelan, is only learning today. They had the right to appeal. They're only learning today, hours ago, that that was not sustained. And now we're going to go ahead and outline the procedure for. And I think that point he makes there is critical. And I think that point swayed a lot of voters to say, you know what, let's be fair. They've only learned today. Let's give them time. And so part of what this other committee is doing now, this committee that Grand Rapids East is going to set up, it's it's OK. Well, now you're going to have time to think about it. And what comes, I'll let this speech play out to the end and then we'll go back to the other one. Removing them. It's a mistake. I speak against it and would encourage others to vote against this. He is enough. Thank you. A number of people noted, was he addressing the chair? So. Oh, hang on. They talked about the fact that that recommendation B had been voted down with regard to another in local committee. Correct. And so their their their interpretation of that, I guess, that what they say is the effect is, is that they're and this is underlined. Yes, there is no current pathway or mechanism for forcing either compliance or disaffiliation. And I don't really think that's true. It might technically be true, but the way the Christian Church works, Senate has a tremendous amount of power. And that's different from the general Senate in the RCA. And part of the reason the RCA has fragmented the way it has. So so I think that there was a lot of discussion about about how to how to interpret that. Yes. At the town hall meeting. Yes. And there was a lot of thanks actually mentioned for for Paul DeVries. Several times. Several times. In fact, one of the delegates, actually one of the delegates who was from Nealon Avenue, who was a delegate to Senate, said Nealon Avenue was saved by a churchman, Paul DeVries, with his speech that he gave on the floor. And so again, that just as a reminder that things that are set on the floor of Senate that does have an impact on delegates. It is a deliberative body and people do make up their minds and sometimes can change minds too as they listen to things. So so yes, that was one of the points of discussion for sure. And that came up at different times later on as what does it mean that Senate has given instruction and what is it? What is the obligation for the churches of Classic Grand Pazeece to to kind of follow that instruction? And and now this is very interesting because again, I deeply appreciate the fact that they went to the meeting and the reporting on it because I would I would think. But this is me. I would think that. And I think this is I would think that it would be valuable having a meeting like that to be public. Now again, depending on really the particulars and the nuances of what you want this meeting to be, that would be a good thing. And now it can be done, obviously. Well, maybe that church can't do it because church is very widely in their capacity to to do things. But one of the big discussions that we're going to continue to have and we had this a little bit between me and Nate Vandenen and maybe to come up when Nate Vandenen and I talk next week is. To what degree should the Christian Informed Church live? You know, be putting these things out on the Internet. Since there isn't a police officer necessarily there looking on them and seeing if they do it or not. But there is still the general structure of the denomination of the church order where classes is supposed to ensure compliance of the church order and of the confessions and Senate, you know, passes that down. And so they were given that instruction. And but will they live into it? And that's that that was unclear. I think it's a fair way to say it was unclear. I think they're still trying to figure out what they're going to do. You know, one of the I think it was it. I think Mike Mike Abma. Oh, yes, who was one of the delegates from now again, classes Grand Rapids East is a body. They are an extended body. They are a spiritual body. They have agency. They have a mind. Now they are a collective body. They're doing collective cognition and the meeting is an element of this body. And they are still deciding what they're going to do in response to the synodical body from classes Grand Rapids East to Senate this last year. Said, you know, a lot of churches are having to choose, but especially when it comes to selecting office bearers. Are we going to because many of them in classic grand Rapids East and perhaps around the denomination are aren't willing to serve because they can't confess what the church teaches. And and this point alone shows that this is one of the real beauties of the Christian Reformed Church. People do take this stuff seriously. They care. And even if they're on different sides of the aisle here, they care. They want to come to church in good faith, in good conscience with a whole heart. And so even if they disagree with synod, they what synod said still matters. And so they're having to say leave people off the list for elders and deacons. So are we going to be a functioning church and disregard with now? Now, remember the video I made when sort of depending on your answer, we'll decide whether we move this now or take our break and so forth to the officers. Your motion looks a whole lot like the original overture. And you're just sort of asking us to go ahead and approve the main request of the overture, which is to have our general secretary do all this work. What's different about what you're asking them what the overture asked in the first place? I'm not sure I have a response to this. But if you'll indulge me, then I'll at least give it a go. Give it a go. Test yourselves. Here he is. As the officers in the body of synod. So just a few thoughts, if that's OK. First of all, very thankful for the work of the committee. I stopped and actually spoke to the advisory committee. I was grateful that they received me. And with regard to the first four things that just passed, I wholeheartedly celebrate and hope, which is what we just said that we did together. I actually am among those who are celebrating with most joy, particularly with regard to the work of resonate and its new director with regard to thrive and the work that it's done this last year. A lot of joy in the efforts that were made there. And I'm excited about some of what we're hearing with regard to the concejo and other groups that are emerging in our denomination. I think that would be unwise for us to simply pass by this before dinner. It's at least my opinion that this is the most important matter before Senate this year. How did that feel then? How does it feel now? Where is our attention? What are we thinking about? Did you hear that? Don't miss that. He's right. It's the most important matter before Senate this year. He's absolutely right. And if you and I think he's still right. Listen to my videos about all this drama about the same sex marriage stuff. Well, this is a this is a and the CRC is has C OPD. It has heart disease. It has diabetes. And in some ways, the same sex marriage thing is like covid. And while people like a same sex marriage is going to kill the denomination. No, actually, it's the underlying comorbidities words we all learned during the pandemic. Depending on what you do, I'd like to just point out the numbers in less than 20 years. In fact, in 17 years, our membership has gone from 272,000 to 195. A third of our church is gone in 17 years. Our baptisms, if you look just in 2006, 20 years ago, we regularly celebrated about 3800 baptisms. Today, it's half each year. Transfer growth 2006. Just 20 years ago, not quite 20 years ago, we welcome 4600 people by transfer. Today, 1900, much less than half. Evangelism 2006. We welcome 3400 people by evangelism. It's almost four for every church. Last year, we welcomed 800 less than one for every church. And having been part of the grocery reform church for a long time, I know what we're good at. Talking about things. And I know what we're not good at. Taking action. Hey, I'm happy to say this in the chapel of Calvin University that I am a Calvinist. But let me tell you something. I think actually Jesus anticipated us Calvinists when he gave the parable of the talents. You know, the parable of the talents. Landowner went away. There were five talents given to one, two talents to another, one to another. The five put theirs to work out one, five more. The two put theirs to work two more. But the one, I think, is the warning to Calvinists. They had a high view of God. They combined it with a low view of ourselves. And they used that as an excuse for spiritual laziness. Calvinists have a high view of God. We tend to have a low view of ourselves. I believe we're a five talent denomination. Our theology. Our articulation of the gospel. The way we disciple people. We're five talent people. We should not just pause here with talk. We have to do something. We have to have a concrete plan. And I want to make sure I say this correctly. Now, back to the other. And seeing if they do it or not. But there is still the general structure of the denomination of the church order. Where classes are supposed to ensure compliance of the church order and of the confessions. And synod passes that down. And so they were given that instruction. But will they live into it? And that was unclear. I think it's a fair way to say it. It was unclear. I think they're still trying to figure out what they're going to do. You know, one of the, I think, Mike Abma. Oh, yes. Who was one of the delegates from Classes Grand Rapids East to Synod this last year. Said, you know, a lot of churches are having to choose. But especially when it comes to selecting office bearers. Are we going to, because many of them in Classes Grand Rapids East and perhaps around the denomination aren't willing to serve because they can't confess what the church teaches. Okay. So that's where numbers matter. Now, I know a lot of people sort of freaked out when, okay, recommendation B, which was a new and local committee. And, you know, this thing didn't pass. So where's the accountability? There's a local option. Are they going to do it? Are they not going to do it? These decisions still have weight. And if, in fact, churches start selecting office bearers that are more comfortable with the current position in the Christian Reformed Church, that's going to impact decisions that happen in the local church. So these things tend to go in directions. And it's a really important point. And if churches then suddenly get squeezed for officers, well, then you just how much do you downsize your council and have other staff members and volunteers do the things that council was doing? How do those dynamics work again? It's incredibly complex as it trickles down all the way to the local level. And so they're having to say, leave people off the list for elders and deacons. So are we going to be a functioning church and disregard what Synod told us to do, he said, or are we going to be a non-functioning church and do what Synod told us to do? And he seemed to suggest that... Well, he did suggest, just outright. Okay, he did suggest that people, that some churches were simply just going to disregard what Synod told them to do. And this is where we begin to see this. So the confessional conversation often happens in a time of breakdown. Because, okay, well, what does this mean? We have to redefine, we have to reorient, we have to reestablish. And basically what follows in this video is all that sort of process. And so... And just very matter of factly, as part of that. Now, they are getting together a committee. That's something they mentioned tonight, that the Wednesday following Synod, the pastors, all the pastors of Classic Rampantseas, the churches were invited. And over 30 of them got together and were just kind of talking about what... So there was another meeting that we're hearing about now that, again, Classes wasn't officially constituted, but they are going to form a committee. And then probably the next Classes meeting will bless it. Classes like Synod meets two or three times a year at Grand Rapids. I think they have three meetings a year because geographically they're closest. My Classes meets twice a year because we're spread out from between Bakersfield all the way up to north of Sacramento. But there's a Classical Interim Committee, as it used to be called. A lot of Classes have sort of renamed it. They can act on Classes' behalf between Classes meetings, and then their actions are then ratified at the next Classes meeting. Next step for our churches. And so they are going to be creating a committee that is meeting already next week, Wednesday, and is going to be talking about where do we go from here? Everything's on the table, it sounds like. And that really was, that was like Stead that said that everything's on the table and how they're going to respond. And, you know, there was that's that's where I think, you know, they're they're they're searching for they're searching for their response at this point, because there were some people who were there. And when they got up, they said, you know, we're CRC to the core. This is our identity. That's why we're staying in the Christian Reformed Church. And then other people got up and said, we can't keep doing this. We should look into disaffiliation. And so there's the whole gamut there in in Classes Grand Rapids East, I think. Yes, yes. And pain. One of the or one of the those in attendance mentioned from Church of the Servant that they just had a meeting this past Sunday and they were talking about Senate as a congregation. And and and it was mentioned about how there's going to be pain from regardless wherever you're going to be on this. And and so there was, you know, a pain. I'm trying to look at this quote here that the pain of leaving now pain is an interesting word, because again, these are bodies, bodies hurt. It's this exaptation again back to the cognitive science stuff. Bodies hurt. The body has agency. The body has consciousness. The body has pain. Now, it might not be exactly the same kinds of agency and consciousness and pain that you and I have. But the analogy analogies are good enough to hold. And it's just simply the way we talk about these things in the Christian Reformed Church. Right. And their church is exploring that the pain of leaving the CRC will be will be borne by those who have the power. Right. And it was said at their meeting. However, but the pain of staying in the Christian Reformed Church will be borne by the queer members. That's a fascinating line. Those who because again, once something like, OK, we're going to see everything through the lens of power. All right. So now things are going to look differently. So now we're going to analyze this. So so those with power. So then it's it's almost like, OK, so if we want to prioritize keeping the queer people from not feeling pain, then we should leave the denomination. And that's the way this works, because if you adopt a particular lens, such as we're going to see everything through the lens of power, then things are going to look a particular way. And this, again, if you go back into the videos that have been made over the last couple of years, why I think some kind of separation is inevitable. Because people are talking this way and seeing things through these filters and those filters have consequences. And what's going to be interesting is that depending on if there is disaffiliation, how that works for individual pastors, how that works for their pensions, some of that pain might be financial for these people in power, such as clergy who have pensions. And, yeah, the CRC, it was said by that individual. And so they have a lot to weigh as to the direction where they want to go in terms of ministry. And that really was one of the people. Now I'm going to say that I'm going to give an invitation that, you know, so the pastor of Calvin CRC was in the group that Sean Baker brought together. So if she'd like to come on the channel, she can. If Mike Abma, again, I went to seminary with some of these people like Mike Abma. If Mike would like to come on the channel and talk, I'd be welcome to have Mike. I'd love to hear people honestly share where they're at right now. Now, again, and this goes to everything that I make, things may change, but it's helpful to get clear signals of where people are at now. People who got up, who's the leader of All One Body, Art Youngsma. You know, he was one of the members who said, you know, we can't just keep doing this indefinitely. All One Body has been doing this for 12 years, and this is where we've gotten after. Now, again, All One Body is the affirming advocacy group in the Christian Reformed Church 12 years. And he said people are, you know, in his opinion, people are are being hurt by the theology of the Christian Reformed Church. And people shouldn't have to have to deal with this confessional status issue. And so he really one of the interesting things this factored into the video that may or may not get released. One of the interesting things is, is this issue in question of pain. There were two speeches in particular that brought out this point. This be the last thing I say, because anything more that I say, which I'll probably just be filibustering. I was amazed. I don't. I'm amazed that he used that word, given all of the chatter after Senate. I want to speak to the chair and say that I've heard a number of words concerning words like mine, that we have assumed things that we think that you do not love the LGBT community. That we think that you are harming them. I would like to speak to both of those points. I do not think that you hate LGBT people, whoever that may be. I do not think that you are harming them on purpose. I genuinely do not believe that. I believe that you are drawing them to Christ in the ways that you best know how. You want them to have a deeper relationship with God. You want them to live in the grace of God. And you just want so much good for them. But as to the harm, whether you want to harm them or not, the effects of your actions are not under your control. Only your actions. While your love is true, the harm that is caused by your actions is also true. Beyond this. And so there was a pain. I'm trying to look at this quote here that the pain of leaving the Christian Reformed Church and their churches exploring that, the pain of leaving the CRC will be born by those who have been hurt. By those who have the power. And it was said at their meeting. I think it's helpful with both of these speeches, the speech I just played from Daniel from Southwest Ontario and these two. It is not the case that the groups aren't seeing each other necessarily correctly. I think there is a fair amount of understanding each other back and forth. What there is is disagreement. And this again is confessional. These are two very different perspectives that they are bringing to the conversation. But the pain of staying in the Christian Reformed Church will be borne by the queer members of the CRC, it was said, by that individual. And so they have a lot to weigh as to the direction where they want to go in terms of ministry. And that really was one of the people who got up, who is the leader of All One Body, Art Youngsma. He was one of the members who said, we can't just keep doing this indefinitely. All One Body has been doing this for 12 years. And this is where we have gotten after 12 years. And he said, people are, in his opinion, people are being hurt by the theology of the Christian Reformed Church. And people shouldn't have. And this is why I think there is going to be a division when you have disagreements this deep. This with this much perspective, it makes it really hard to continue to be in the same body. To have to deal with this confessional status issue. And so he really encouraged people to really consider maybe going to the RCA or working on some kind of relationship with the RCA. And so there's a lot that they're weighing right now. They're having a hard time finding office bears. They're concerned about whether or not being in this denomination is harming people in their congregations. And also, I mean, some of the people got up and said, people are leaving. Yes, yes. They are leaving our churches because of synod's. And that is unsurprising. I've known, I know situations here in Northern California in some churches where some people have left because of synod's decision. Synod's decision on this. And so they're feeling more of the stress. Although they did mention, Classic Grand Rapids East is a safe class, as they said. We do ministry well together. I realize that there are some classicism, some churches where they don't have that kind of safety and where it's much more difficult. And they were kind of grieving for the. So there are levels. There is even, I mean, this is a confessionality fight within the body of the Christian Reformed Churches. And then you have subgroups that have different positions. And again, that's not necessarily an unhealthy thing because we have it in our minds. I often talk about our consciousness, our consciousness, Congress, and there are factions, there are individual voices. All of us inside of us have multiple voices that we deal with. And so as the larger body, those classicist and those. And there was some conversation about this committee, I guess, that they're one committee they're putting together of maybe reaching out to those other churches in some of those classes. Even across the border in Canada and collaborating with each other in some way to to figure out what they want to do moving forward. That's part of their doing a Zoom meeting. And I presume a lot of that is because those who are scattered across. So organization is happening behind the scenes. The United States and Canada to kind of have that collaboration and talk. And the situation in Canada is different. Culturally, it is different. I think there are more per capita, definitely more affirming churches in Canada. The relationship between individuals and institutions in Canada is different than it is in the United States. I see that the more I talk to and again, the majority of pastors that I've actually on my chat on my channel on YouTube have been Canadian pastors. And given that Canada is. Is two fifths of the denomination. Again, collectively, maybe do we go into the RCA or collectively it's been floated? Do we create our own denomination if we determine that the CRC with its confessional position is something that we just can't do ministry in anymore? And this is where, again, there's sort of I say again, because I mentioned in the other video that you haven't watched yet that may or may not get posted. Whether or not the rule says two successors, Senates, weighty things will come to multiple Senates, because actually what what steers the Christian informed church is the community of Senates in good conscience. And again, that Art Youngsma, he did mention he kind of singled out very specifically that better together that which class of grandpazis funded to the tune of one of their more religious. And even at this meeting encouraged people to be get involved in. Yes, but he said that doesn't work because you're harmed. This better together in many ways is harming our LG. There's there's that word again. The table fails. Thank you, Bill. So no other speakers. So we are ready to vote on recommendation C. And we will do. Are we ready to vote, Richard? This talk. Um, Tim Turner, class classes, Niagara. This is Steve, classes, Niagara. This is good. I just want to acknowledge that the trauma that is being inflicted on real people in this room, one on that committee and people at home watching real trauma, real trauma. I work in trauma, working with people experiencing homelessness on the streets. I just want to say that a lot of people that come into our mission are people that have struggled with their sexuality because their communities have rejected them and they didn't have the support they needed. We're participating in that. So I just want to acknowledge it for my own conscience. Thank you. Sometimes I get my buttons mixed up and so I, I, I make videos of me rearranging the video instead of videos about talking what I mean to talk about the difference between what's going on is getting so stark. This is the reason you have a confessional conversation. You have a confessional conversation to clarify which Jesus are we talking about? Who is Jesus? How do we read the Bible? What are our perspectives? And since 2012, I've been watching the Christian Reformed Church in some ways go like this. And it's been going like that in a rather mindless way. I talked before about these different bodies, these different bodies that are within the Christian Reformed Church and these churches, these been going like this. And I've been saying we need a confessional conversation. You need to be talking to clarify who Jesus is. You need to be clarifying who Jesus is because you put him next to each other and you're not recognizing the same Jesus. You're going to have to go back and do this work. And ideally, a church is a place where we can do this together and we can use the resources and the accountabilities that are inherent within a tradition to try to achieve the clarity, unity, hopefully, but the clarity and the truth. This is what we're looking for. We need to be able to talk to people who are not part of the Christian Reformed Church. We need to be able to talk to people who are not part of the Christian Reformed Church. We need to be able to talk to people who are not part of the Christian Reformed Church. We need to be able to talk to people who are not part of the Christian Reformed Church. We need to be able to talk to people who are not part of the Christian Reformed Church. We need to be able to talk to people who are not part of the Christian Reformed Church. We need to be able to talk to people who are not part of the Christian Reformed Church. We need to be able to talk to people who are not part of the Christian Reformed Church. It's kind of like a local option. I know we've had our own thoughts about that. I appreciate the brother's comment. The challenge is that who is this Jesus that we're pointing people to? Because the Jesus that you are listening to and who's speaking doesn't sound like the Jesus that I'm listening to and I'm hearing when I read the scriptures. If our unity is supposed to be found in pointing people to Jesus, we may be pointing people to two different Jesuses. There was one member who got up in the Classical Grand Rapids East and said, I don't recognize this church anymore. I don't recognize my faith in this church. I wonder whether or not that's simply the case that we do have two divergent understandings of the faith. That's exactly why you have a confessional conversation. You start to work on this. You work on your own. The other side works on their own. They begin to understand each other. You can compare notes. You can decide, what do these two Jesus and these two perspectives entail? And what must we do about it? An incompatible understanding of the faith and continuing to try to be better together is simply going to harm people. And not just LGBTQ people who are on the more affirming side, but also LGBTQ people who are on the conservative side, who are saying, I can't be part of a church that isn't going to uphold me and strengthen me and tell me that I'm walking in the way of the Lord. Diana and then Richard from Toronto and then Brian from Grand Rapids North. Josh Dykstra from Classical Diana. You can rule me out of order if you like, but I've heard a lot of language going on tonight and yesterday and from many people when I've talked to them about this entire situation. And to be honest, my heart is broken because I have family on both sides of this argument. And in fact, I have family that has basically declared themselves atheist because they look at our church broken as it is. And they say, because you can't love me for who I declare myself to be, you don't love me. And I have told them time and time and time again, I love you so much. I love you so much. I'm going to preach the gospel to you day in and day out. And I'm going to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ to you day in and day out in season, out of season, every time I get the opportunity. And they've shut me out of their lives. People of God, the offense is the gospel. And there are many times where I would love to reach across the aisle. I would love to reach across into this world and preach the gospel. But if I don't know what I stand on, if I don't know the theology I have, if I don't know what the gospel of Jesus Christ is, how can I be an adequate servant of Christ to say, here, here is Christ. Here's what it means to be born again in the name of Christ. I wear the name of Christian, not in vain, not in false advertising, but in saying I represent Christ in this world. We just said it at the Convocation of the Synod with the breastplate of St. Patrick. May Christ see us. And that's where pastoral guidance, pastoral ministry, pastoral care starts. It starts with our theology. It starts with who we know we are to be in Christ. And if I can't say that to even my brothers and sisters in this room, what right do I have to say that to my family members, my friends who shut me out of their life because of this issue? I speak in favor of this motion because, yes, it's hard, yes, it's difficult, yes, there are pains behind it. But I feel that this is necessary for us as a church. I feel this is necessary for the sake of the gospel. Thank you. And that's exactly what the speech given by the one person that said, I love my family members. They don't understand. There are multiple speeches like this. I played them for this video. Dan from Southern Ontario says, you understand this as love. They understand it as hurt. You see this sometimes in very unhappy families. One person is trying to love the other person and the other person receives it as something totally different. You see it sometimes in a couple when, let's say, a child dies because the two ways that they try to grieve are exactly opposite. One person needs to grieve by talking about the lost child. The other person is trying to grieve by avoiding the lost child. And this is why often when a couple loses a child, the marriage is lost because their grieving styles are completely incompatible. And what you would do if you were trying to save the marriage is to try to bring those things to light. That's what a confessional conversation does. I need your support. And one of the members got up and said, yes, yes. So you're trying to please everyone is not a winning strategy here. And one of those in attendance also said, as they thought about, what does it look like to live into this? If we're going to be part of the Christian Reformed Church, we shouldn't take an approach where sin needs to create a hammer almost to force us to do it. It gave instruction and there's. And this is a very important point, too, because. The medic rivalry. The medic rivalry creates. Rival pairs. And so. Again, part of the big issue going on in the Christian Reformed Church is these questions of, well, we're now in a low trust area. We're in a low trust relationship. What does that mean? And we're seeing exactly what that means right now in the Christian Reformed Church. On one hand, we see, oh, we need a lot of rules. And from the right, we see that we need a lot of confessional rules in order to enforce our confessions on others. From the left, we need a lot of safety rules in order to make this a safe place. And so then people stand up and they say, in one video, they stand in one speech on one topic. They stand up and say, we this you guys are acting like this is law, but we need grace. And then on the other one, they say, no harm. Harm is the big word. Harm, harm, harm. We need law. And it's like, wait a minute. On Tuesday or on Monday, you're standing up and saying, we need rules. And on Thursday, you're standing up and say, we need grace. And it all depends on which context. And the two sides switch sides in the conversation about this. How do you establish a better trusting congregate, better trusting community? Hopefully, one of the ways is you turn up the resolution on how well each side sees each other. And again, one of the things that we're seeing is that there is some understanding between the sides. There's disagreement between the sides. At least if you can agree to disagree, then maybe you can begin to map out some boundaries and figure out how the two groups can work together. For example, if you had a grieving couple, the one who needs to talk about the lost child, maybe is not going to talk about that lost child with their spouse. Maybe they're going to talk about that lost child with their other friends who are trying to help them grieve. And the one who is avoiding it maybe is going to have to be with friends that can very gently sort of hold space for them for doing that. And I think that's why Murray Sheet mentioned that. And that individual got up and he said, we should really be adults on this. And that's the language he used in terms of saying that we shouldn't be forced to do something. We should receive the instruction and say, yes, we will do it because we've been instructed. We're not going to wait till we're forced to do something. And that's part of just being an adult, he said. And then as opposed to, I guess, maybe someone who is still younger and looking to escape perhaps. There was some talk about people's concern about synod and being involved in church discipline. And I think we have a difference of understanding of what the courts of the church are for. But nevertheless, talking about not wanting to see synod become an imperial synod or an authoritarian center and start doing church discipline. And the irony again is that with certain subjects like the code of conduct, the right is concerned about a tyrannical synod. And now with respect to human sexuality, the left is concerned about synod becoming a tyrannical synod. But the nature of the conflict will inevitably create these structures. And so you're going to want to find different ways to manage the conflict. It just seems to me that continually rejecting what synod says is just going to be something that spurs synod on to move more in that direction. So by trying to resist, you might actually create more of what you're trying to avoid. And that's the irony of it all, too. They were lamenting synod becoming that kind of authoritarian and in many ways, again, but they're forcing it by them admitting, which they did, too. And you can run the same tape with respect to the code of conduct from the other side. Well, you're resisting accountability. You're putting lives in danger. The safety of our children is in jeopardy. We have this long line of stories about people who have been abused. And then this often gets tacked on complementarianism. I hear that regularly. So, well, it's it's because you don't believe in women in office that children are abused. It's like, whoa, really? You don't want us to run those conversations through the other way, do you? So the way to talk about this is to figure out how to talk about this and to see each other and understand each other and have these things clarified with each other and figure out, OK, what do we do? I think I heard a couple of people earlier saying we're going to disregard synod in order to be our functional kind of churches. So some churches are going to choose that direction. But, you know, there was one thing that came up on at the at Mike Abma brought up with regard to Rita from Classes Quinty. She had got at Senate. Yeah. Mike got up Rita, then Herb and then Matt from Lake Erie. Rita Klein-Gelton, Classes Quinty. I have a question for the majority committee and I think I know the answer. Actually, four questions, but I know the answer. But because otherwise I wouldn't have signed the Minority Report. If this passes, can someone who is unsure of what God expects of LGBTQ peoples, can that unsure person become a member of the CRC? Question two, can someone who is unsure become an office bearer in the Christian Reformed Church, in our churches? Number three, can someone who is unsure sign a Gravamon? Is that OK? I've been a member of the Christian Reformed Church all my life as my husband and our parents and my four sons, my four boys who are, Kara knows they're men, and their wives are all following Jesus and are members of the Christian Reformed Church. My twelve grandchildren are members of the Christian Reformed Church. If my four sons and their wives fall into this category of unsure, can the CRC still be their home? You may answer the question. And again, I played this before. It's the defining moment of the synod for me. No, I know. No, Rita, that's fine. We were in committee together. I bless you. We worked together. I'll try and answer as best I can. Maybe not so much in the technical manner of things. Give some space here. Give some space. At 530 this evening, we adjourned. I think it was 535. And I jumped in my vehicle and... And I drove to the sports bar down the street, had ice water with women. And here I am, a 55-year-old guy sitting in the corner in a sweater crying. I love this church. I've been a member all my life. I love preaching for this church. I love teaching in this church. I love its confessions. I wouldn't be standing here tonight if I didn't love these confessions. But what grieves me so bad is that we make decisions here and that we leave here and some decide to be ogres about it, jerks about it, and we can't even hold to a confession. We've got to be jerks about it. So Rita, I hear your heart. Yes, well, it is a yes and no question. No. Let me try and put it this way. And if I'm out of order, say so. If you're going to vote for this majority report, please don't leave here and be a jerk about it. And to those who are opposed to this report, not all of us hate LGBT people. Okay? Sorry. I'm sorry. I wanted to add that context to this because that is the context. And I've addressed this in a previous video. And it was Cedric on Twitter talking to my friend and colleague and a formerly daughter church now all grown up in organized church in Davis about to answer this question. And he talked about Rita from Classes Quinty on Synod and she asked Steve Zwort, can my boys who are not sure about this and my grandchildren who aren't sure about this, can they remain members of the Christian Reformed Church? Can they make profession of faith? And at the town hall meeting, that was sort of just left hanging there as if there's not an answer to that. Oh, tonight. Tonight there was. And at Synod, to be fair, it was left. And one of the things I would encourage people to do is to go and listen to my podcast, which is the Confessing Calvinist. Oh, you even gave us a podcast. Okay. I was wondering if that was going to come. And the reason for this is because Synod 1964 dealt with this. And there was a Reformed Baptist couple that wanted to join the Christian Reformed Church and one of the ministers in Classes Muskegon protested and said, how can we allow Reformed Baptists, Baptists into the Christian Reformed Church? And Synod said, calm down, brother. Now, that's a hugely important thing because 1960s were very different era in the Christian Reformed Church and you can hear the tensions of that era were different, but yet there were tensions about things. Churches have the right, consistories have the right to allow people who are not in full agreement with our confessions to join the Christian Reformed Church. And it's explained that there were three basic reasons why they thought this was acceptable. One was because the Reformed Baptist couple was otherwise Reformed in agreement with our confessions. Second was that they were willing to be taught. And third was that they had made a promise that they would not advocate against the teaching of the church. And so, and these are for members, not office members. Exactly. Okay, but now when I think about Gravaman going forward, people who are struggling with alignment with the confessions of the of the denomination that they're in and there again there are levels of, there are lots of levels and layers to this. What people need is guidance and community and conversation and exploration. And it has to feel authentic to them. It has to be real for them. It's basically pastoral care and pastoral guidance. And I would say not just members, but if you're already beginning to sense the shape of a potential overture that I will write to the next Senate, it is of this shape because we need, we need similar levels all the way up. Because if an elder or deacon is struggling with something, a confessional difficulty Gravaman would be appropriate. How is that shaped? And I don't think we need a A-B gate on it to say in out six months or a year or two years. No, no, it takes time. But it's, it's within a context and it's within accountability. And so my idea is that if you have an elder or deacon who files a confessional difficulty Gravaman, the council then assigns, it could be the pastor of the church, could be someone from another church. There might have to be financial remuneration if this, if there's too many of these so that, you know, people aren't impoverished for the amount of time that they take. You could even have YouTube channels on issues or podcasts on issues. But let's have a conversation about this. Let's work on this question, because the goal is not just sort of keeping the sheep in the pen. The goal is growing the church on all levels of the church. And so the local council could assign a counselor to that person with a confessional difficulty Gravaman. At the next level, if you have a minister, the minister is filing a confessional difficulty Gravaman with the local council. Maybe at that point the council needs to be in conversation with the classes and say, what resources do we have for the pastor? And so then you have the pastor has a mentor or a counselor or a colleague was assigned and they will meet during the year and you could have accountability. And let's say every year the the counselor gives a report to the council. Now, again, some of you, and this is where some of the tensions are going to arise. Some of you say, well, I can't trust the local council. Well, then you're going to have to ask deeper polity questions about the Christian Reformed Church, because what the Christian Reformed Church does is try to keep intention. The authority of the local council, the regional classes and the bi-national synod and the authorities are of different kinds and they're held intention. So it and this is where supervisions of councils from classes are going to come in and supervision of classes from synods are going to come in. And the goal is not setting up all of these little Kafka traps or little binary gotchas. The goal is to have a system where, in fact, not only that where the confessional growth and development of the church can take place. And currently with our system of of assemblies, we don't really have that. We have other things within them that are designed to do some of this, but they have none of it's really been employed with an eye towards confessionality. It's generally employed with an eye towards pastoral care. So this is sort of the outline. These are the things that I am thinking about with respect to. OK, we've got another year to work on this gravamen issue. Let's let's look at developing structures that actually lead to better confessional conversations, better confessional development and growth within the church. And it's going to happen around these areas of confessional difficulties. Now, whether a split can be avoided, I don't know. Maybe such a thing could help with the disunity we have. That would mean that basically both sides would have to give a little something. One side would have to say, you know, look what they said. We're going to be teachable. We're going to continue to publicly maintain the confessional integrity of the church. But in appropriate spaces and places, we are going to have confessional conversations in order to achieve the truth of the truth of Christ and the presence of Christ in our midst. That's our goal. So I don't believe such a thing is. Is impossible for the Christian Reformed Church by no means. Might it be difficult? Yes. Would there be compromise on all sides? Yes. Would it have to be a brave space and not a safe space? Yes. But to me, that's the way forward. Which is which is the difference? Right. Yes. And it did not say that office bearers are allowed to take exception to the confessions. The understanding is that the office bearers in this church are going to lead these members into the truth of what we confess about scripture. And I think that's true. But that's a process. It's not a because again, we are not our these convictions are not subject to our will. And so therefore, that's why you have the tears. That's why you have the struggle. OK, maybe I want to believe this, but I can't. I run into this regularly in this space. People will come up to me and they'll say, you know, I've been watching this stuff and I want to be a Christian, but I just have real problems with the resurrection. I have real problems with the divinity of Christ. I have real problems with God's witness over the ages in the church. I have real problems with the divisions of the church with respect to its credibility. I have real problems with the way the church has treated such and such group or or me in the past or so and so. OK, you don't address this with bow the knee now or get out. You have a process in between and you say, where can we meet? What can we do? How can we talk? Now, again, it isn't a limitless thing. Hopefully, the process will yield for people, maybe for some people. Maybe for some people it will yield that they need to be in a different confessional space. I actually think confessionality itself, given the end of modernity, and I know a lot of CRC people hearing me say that are going to have no understanding what I mean. Confessionality itself is going to have to continue to evolve and change with respect to our knowledge about human anthropology and how people work. So I should play the rest of this because I don't want to unfairly use the video. Why these members need to have a teachable spirit. Exactly. I'm willing to be corrected. I'm willing to learn. And because office bearers are supposed to not only just not contradict the confessions, but they're supposed to promote it and defend it. And so they take a. So the answer to read his question is, yes, your sons can be in the Christian Reformed Church if they're unsure. Yes, your grandchildren can be in the Christian Reformed Church if they're unsure. The one thing they cannot be is office bearers. And so that is that has been the understanding. It's been the way the Christian Reformed Church has been working for at least since 1964. And they seem to think that this was common knowledge. So and this is where the Gravamen conversation gets interesting because I think Cedric's argument about the Gravamen controversy is right. But it's not the last word because the Gravamen confessional difficulty Gravamen's have been potentially used for office bearers and clergy. And I think the CRC right rightly says this isn't just get out of confessions free card. They're right. It isn't. But the left is right and saying you can't just tie people into a straight jacket. It's probably not going to work. You're probably just going to have a lot of unregistered silent Gravamen floating around the denomination. And that just yields suspicion and low trust. You can't have that either. And so what you're going to want to do is have a structure that is not just sort of yes, no binary in out. You're going to want to have a structure of process where there can be these kinds of conversations where that can grow. And actually we're going to need an ongoing process of discovery with respect to how confessionality works. That's what we're going to need to do. We can. I think that it's important to get that out there because it keeps this. The more we put this question out there and it's not being answered. I just think to myself there are good. You're good answers. There are good questions. Our denomination has struggled with us in the past and come up with we have answers. Yeah. Well, we're starting to lose our daylight here. Okay. So that's the end of it. And we have some good answers. I think we need better answers. And I think what we need are better processes or processes for the Canadians around and we need better systems. And because part of what has happened is that the form the ongoing formation of clergy now happens far beyond the Christian Reformed Church. And so when you arrive at an assembly all of these people are formed in very different ways. What are you going to do about that? You're just going to say, okay, all this for. I mean, we have the same thing happening in the local church. Back when these came out, that was still happening then. But 1910, no radio, no television. You had newspapers. You had print. You had publication. But the Christian Reformed Church could be a group unto its own in a new world speaking the language of the old world and getting all their ministers from the old world. 1924, well, now after the First World War, we're using English. Now we're having conversations with Presbyterians. We're still getting ministers from the old world. 1975, very different context. Television is forming our youth. Radio is in the cars. Music is changing us. The Jesus people stuff is going on, has gone on. The churches that we are in dialogue with and communion with both officially and unofficially are changing dramatically. Today, we need systems that deal with this and the concerns of the right have to be engaged. This is not a get out of confessions free card. It's not what this is. Of the left, they also have to be engaged. These are all that we've learned about cognitive science, psychology, formation. Now there's plenty of sifting that has to be done in there too. Don't get me wrong. People are formed. We have to be in the business of formation. Right now, there are all kinds of... I got an email from denominational offices saying that I could do... I could do... What am I thinking about? I can't think of a word right now. Dog on it. Basically, I could subject myself to faith development from outside people. These people aren't in the denomination. Is this particular... I can't think the word and someone will put it in the comment section. It's amazing how you can mind read me from the comment section. Spiritual direction. There it is. I knew it would bubble up. It comes out of the Roman Catholic tradition if I'm not mistaken. And I've known many people who have gone to monasteries and had spiritual direction by Roman Catholic orders. Something that would have been unthinkable 50 years ago in the Christian Form Church. Our formation is happening all over the place. How will we continue to form each other? And those clergy are forming the church and office bearing and meeting and assemblies and, and, and, and, and, and. We need a much better system of discipleship, conversation. And, and again, these, these spirits that are impacting the church from the outside, they have to be tested. And part of this is what we've not done well either. And what this has led to is this division. So maybe this was the video I wanted to make, the other video I wanted to make too. We'll see if I, but I'm going to put out this video first because I think it contextualizes the other video. So, okay, this was a lot longer than I thought it was going to be. Leave a comment. Let me know what you think.