https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=U0c2rhQfRQo

 All right. Well, I got your email and I read the article. So, well, let's begin with you. Yeah. I was looking yesterday through the YouTube channel and late 2017 is when you first started posting about Jordan Teerson. I'm like, wow, almost five years. Yeah. I've been following it. So I went to a college and one of my professors, he was retiring and he gave the the complication speech for our graduation. And he said, I've had many of you as students, but some of you have managed to escape this misfortune. But in the immortal words of Darth Vader, I have you now. I feel like, you know, I've been checking your calendar link, you know, for a long time. And I feel the same way. I have you now. Well, you got me now. So no, this is good. This is good. So you went to Kuiper College. You definitely have a Dutch first name. Were your parents Dutch immigrants? I'm a Dutch immigrant. Oh, you're a Dutch immigrant. Wow. How old were you? I was six when I moved to Canada. So, OK. Yeah, no, I guess, I guess we can start there and maybe I can just share a bit of my story first and then ask any questions of any part that interests you. Why did your parents emigrate to Canada? Yeah. So born in the Netherlands, my parents were our dairy farmers. And just with with the hardships, not really hardships, but the challenges going on there in terms of agriculture, they're just more opportunity to come to Ontario. So it was definitely in economic immigration. So I was six, moved in 99. But yeah, so I mean, you know, raised, speaking Dutch in the home. I have four siblings and we all just spoke Dutch up until fairly recently, you know, my siblings and I all got married to English speakers. So naturally, English just is the dominant language when I see my family. But yeah, and you've had the opportunity to recently go to the Netherlands, right? Yeah, I had John Van Donk as my tour guide. So we drove through a lot of Dutch ag country and heard him drooling over Dutch dairies. Yeah. Yes. If you listen to his first conversation with me where he goes through his story, I mean, that's he, you know, went to Canada on a, it was supposed to be a student visa, but they gave him a permanent visa. And then he looked around and, you know, was was hanging around with dairies and then discovered that a lot of the more successful dairymen went to the Christian Reformed Church. So he started going to the Christian Reformed Church smart schemer that he was and, you know, eventually became a Christian and a pastor and all those things. So now you've published in the Calvin Theological Journal. So did you go to a Christian Reformed Church in Canada? Yeah. So it's interesting because like the switch in some sense isn't that smooth, but it didn't affect my family. So in the Netherlands was raised and baptized in the Airborne de Kerk, the HKN, whereas the CRC has roots in the Kerk, the GKN, right? So in some sense, it was a switch in that way. But yeah, right when we moved to Canada, we started attending a Christian Reformed Church in the small town of Listlewell, Montreal. Okay. So yeah, that was my formative Christian upbringing. Did you go to Christian school? Yep. Christian elementary school, Christian high school. And then Kuiper College. Did you do anything between high school and Kuiper College? Nope. No, I left home pretty quick. I graduated high school, worked at a summer camp that was three hours north of where my family is and then right to Kuiper. So okay. Why Kuiper and not Redeemer or Calvin? I was actually really considering Calvin, but yeah, not Redeemer. I wanted to get away. I just wanted to, you know, enough distance to not go home for a weekend, but not too much to still be able to come home for a long weekend, something like that. And yeah, one of my brothers went to Redeemer. A lot of my high school classmates went to Redeemer. I felt like I just wanted a place to, I guess, find myself on my own apart from those, I don't know, identity connections or whatever. Yeah, just to find my own self in a space that I could be free from. I don't know some of that, but yet it was still, you know, Kuiper is a very performed Bible school, so it's still rooted in that sense for me. Yeah, and you know, I did a program called Facing Your Future at Calvin. Oh, okay, at the seminary. Yeah, between grade 11 and grade 12. And that was largely, that really solidified for me, like yes, I want to get into ministry as vocation, whatever that might mean. And yeah, so I mean, I loved Kuiper. And it's good to be in the States as well, and just kind of get that experience, see and experience. What did you notice between the States and Canada? I mean, you said you like being in the States. Why? Well, I love the school. And Kuiper really is its own, for better or for worse, its own little bubble within the country, within Michigan. Within Grand Rapids. Within Grand Rapids. Within Grand Rapids even, I mean, I, yeah, lived on campus my whole time there. To meet your wife there too? No. Yeah, so after Kuiper, I moved to Toronto. First I did an internship in Toronto at a small non-profit. I was still part of my Kuiper, my last semester at Kuiper, did an internship in Toronto, a small organization called Lighthouse. I don't know if you know Rob Gattema. Yeah. Yeah, he's the executive director there. So he, I have a good relationship with him. And yes, he was my supervisor there. For those watching, people don't appreciate how the Christian Reformed Church is its own little distributed network across the US and Canada. So, you know, I don't remember where I met Rob. He might have been at seminary with me, but, you know, name rings a bell. His face, probably from 30 years ago, is in my head. And there we have it. Don't know where he went or what he's doing, but now I know. Yeah. So he's nearby me. Yeah, so I did my internship there. And then I was living with a group of guys in kind of an intentional Christian community called Move In. And I just love that. We were living in a rough part of downtown Toronto, just high concentration of homelessness. It's not odd to see people shooting up on the streets, which is obviously very different from rural Netherlands and rural Ontario. Yeah, farm boy going to the big city. But yeah, I guess I was there with those guys feeling like we had a purpose. We met for prayer every week together with and eventually a number of girls joined our team too in a different apartment. And yeah, just trying to love the people in our neighbourhood as best we could. And that's difficult with those who are on the streets. But yeah, so I lived with them right when I moved to Toronto. And then I just decided I wanted to stay in that living situation. So I needed a good reason to stay, I felt like. I needed to justify that in my mind. And I did the intercultural studies and Bible and theology program at Kuiper. And I thought seminary is down the road for me eventually, I think. So why not look into it now? So I did, looked into it locally. And having been in New York, I felt like I wanted to experience something else. I ended up going to Wycliffe College, which is a theological school at the University of Toronto, an Anglican school. And so there's certainly foreign elements, but yeah, it was a rich community. Still obviously very Western, so not completely unfamiliar. I mean, the biggest foreign element was how liturgical Wycliffe is and the Anglican tradition is compared to the Christian informed tradition. But yeah, so did my MDiv there. Just graduated spring of 21. And also did the EPMC, the Ecclesial Program for Ministerial Candidates. So as you probably know, the road to become a minister in the CRC for non-Calvin students has changed. Yeah, so with this new program, it's possible. And I didn't ever do a residency at Calvin or anything, but did some online courses just to get me up to CRC snuff. But yeah, so did those courses and read that Richard Mount book. And yeah, approached the editor of the Calvin Theological Journal to write a review. And that was a really, really good learning experience. So name of the book for those who are watching? Yeah, so I have it here. Adventure, even gel full civility. So when I first saw this book, I'm like, why would I want to read? I mean, I know Richard Mount well, and he's kind of been the biggest mentor in my life who I've never met. But like, why would I want to read the book with the guy's own face on the cover? You know, but then I find out, oh, it's a memoir. So that kind of makes sense. It's permissible then. But why don't you do a little bit of bio for the listeners about Mao? Because Mao is, so at the end of the 20th century, Mao was one of the big names in the Christian Reformed Church. And as with Waltersdorf and Plantinga, Marsden to a degree, Marsden really also, but Mao, you know, there was there was that Calvin, they had the four of them on stage for something. And Mao is, they're all unique in their own way. Mao, Plantinga, and Waltersdorf all taught in the Calvin philosophy department in sort of its heyday. I actually was able to get a course with Mao and with Waltersdorf. I was never able to get one with Plantinga. So yeah, so why don't you give a little introduction into who Richard Mao is and why is he important? Because he's not a name I bring up a lot in my channel, which probably, especially given what you wrote about in the Calvin Theological Journals, maybe someone that we should bring in more. Yeah, I think so. I mean, he's like I said, he's been one of the biggest thinkers to occupy my imagination. So I was, I guess I'll give a personal bio or introduction. I was first introduced to him through the book Calvin in the Las Vegas Airport. Yeah. So I read that in grade 12. And did you watch hardcore as background material for it? Or? No, I've never, I can't remember if I've seen the intro that he talks about. I saw his, what's that other movie? The more recent one. Paul Schrader, First Reformed. Yes, First Reformed. I can't remember. Paul Schrader, another storied name in Calvin College lore from the... Yeah, First Reformed was really my first introduction to Schrader. And I, my poor wife, was when we were dating or engaged, we went to see First Reformed. It was weird and shocking. Set aside taxi driver and hardcore. So yeah, Schrader's done a lot of weird and shocking things for a Calvin College dropout. Yeah, yeah. But I don't know, Calvin is in Las Vegas Airport, to sets the scene so well. What is it? This guy going to some Calvinist conference meets a, what is it, a prostitute or something going like... So the premise of the movie Hardcore is that the daughter of a Christian Reformed elder runs away when she goes to, now this is all sort of couched because it's for a public audience, but basically the Young Calvinist Convention. And the father goes to the big city in order to find his daughter who has slipped into prostitution. And in order to find her, he befriends another prostitute who's going to help him find his daughter. And he has to explain Calvinism to this prostitute in the Las Vegas Airport. And that's where Mao sets up the book. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so like, and sometimes I was a cradle Calvinist, you know, enamored by Tulip and I mean, the biggest thing that I always, I feel like I was catechized well, even though I was a little, you know, looking back at my catechism class, I don't know where a lot of them are in terms of going to church. You mean the other people in your catechism class? Yeah. We were brasses in those teachers, but looking back, I was catechized well, you know, and the biggest takeaway about Tulip and that side of Calvinism was that in terms of the whole predestination debate, we don't know. And that should be our posture. That should leave us with a lot of humility in terms of when we encounter non-Christians. We don't know what God's plan is for them. And so there shouldn't be judgment passed on their lives. And, you know, in a big sense, we're just as totally depraved as they are. So yeah, so that scene in the Las Vegas airport explaining Calvinism, you know, it's Calvinism that should actually fit well, you know, to meeting the most unlikely person in that kind of setting. So, yeah, so Mao, he kept up with him. I mean, I read his, He Shines and All That's Fair, the book on common grace. That was a really good just thinking through that doctrine, you know, what does it mean to share things in common with people of other religions or whatever. Have you read this one? I've read most of it. Yeah, it's not very long. It's just a little thing. I have the newer version. Yeah, I bought mine for a buck 20 at the Erdmans Bookstore in Grand Rapids. Yeah, back in the day. I'm sitting beside myself too. Yeah, I've got the, you're mentioning the books. I haven't read this one. I'd be very, I'm very interested in it because the memoir. Yeah, because Mao's, does he talk about alcoholism and sobriety in it? No, I know he shares a video of that on some Fuller Youth Institute thing. No, he doesn't talk about his personal life that much. Oh, that's too bad. Does he have another memoir where he does his personal life? No, not yet. He should. I know. He says on the outside, outside, that he's like, this is a memoir, not an autobiography. And, you know, we can split hairs on how you want to define those two. But this is, he's more so working through his own intellectual life. Yeah, throughout the book. Rather than, like he doesn't talk about his wife, he doesn't talk about his son, or the alcoholism that he talks about elsewhere. So yeah, all that is still, I don't know, just unknown to me. And I imagine people within the CRC who are in some sense, much closer to him would know some of that more than I would. But, well, he taught, you know, eventually he got a degree in philosophy. He taught philosophy. He also got a theological degree. So he taught philosophy at Calvin College. And then he went and became the president of Fuller Theological Seminary out in Pasadena. He also was known for having civil conversations with the Latter-day Saints Church. And he took a lot of grief for that. And to me, you know, when I read your little review of the book and the journal that you sent me, is that online? Can we be able to link to it or not? I don't think so unless you have access to the at-lat database. Oh, okay. That's too bad. You should maybe write a review in blog form and put it out on the internet. So I'm sure there might be other reviews of the book out there too. Maybe. I should ask Caring Mag, the editor, what the permissions are for that, for just sharing those things publicly. Yeah. So let's talk about Mao's posture with respect to civility. Because this is, you know, lately, in fact, one of the possible videos I might record today on one of the channels with Jacob. Jacob and Mark were sort of rolling Nathan over the coals from Digital Gnosis and Midwits and a whole bunch of things. And so this question about civility and productive conversation is obviously a big thing in some of what's developed around my channel and some of the other channels that we're close to. Yeah. So describe for us Mao's approach to this as you understand it from his book. I mean, it all has to do with his, I guess, his theological standpoint. And you've described it well before too, that Calvinism actually enables a person to better approach someone. And I think it has to do with what I was saying before, that the fact that we don't know God's plan for someone, God's destiny for someone, that enables us to approach someone with an inquisitive mind. Even like John Calvin himself would read Plato, would read Cicero, would read these pagan philosophers in order to kind of formulate his own theology. And so as that develops, especially within Dutch Calvinism, it's like, why was Calvin able to do that? What does a Christian have in common with a pagan? And this was developed really well by Kuyper. Any goodness, any good spirit that's in a so-called pagan philosopher is ultimately from God. And so yeah, any gifts that any thinker displays is from God. So if you take that as your starting point, yeah, you can just dive into a really fruitful conversation. I'll share a little bit of what you wrote here. There we go. All right. The angle Mao takes for his memoir has to do with the idea of human commonness, a theme that he says has been informing his main intellectual endeavors since the start of his academic career. Mao does not want to settle any scores with those who have disagreed with him at the risk of sounding bitter and thus detracting from the overall value of the memoir. However, he does want to settle a score with himself. In writing the memoir, he aims to work through any undesirable consequences of approaches and viewpoints that he has argued for over his career. For what others find troublesome in Mao in particular, his emphasis on human commonness, he admits, is a worry he shares. Is sufficient justice done to human difference since differences exist across humanity? So the questions he asks himself are, did my teaching lead people astray? Have I been right? What has been the effect of the whole quest? These are existential questions that I imagine other academics and preachers too worry about. These questions are poignant for Mao, especially as he's looking back over his long career. In response to his nagging worry, Mao recounts his academic endeavors and resolves his inner conflict by seeing his work as a quest for common ground. He aims to listen and learn from those who are seeing their seemingly come from a different place in order to arrive at a third place that, to the surprise of both parties, they hold in common. He describes his experience, I kept sensing in various encounters with people beyond the boundaries of evangelical Calvinism that my theological feet were actually finding real patches of common ground. Mao uses the metaphor of common ground to explain what he believes were experiences of reality. The book seems to explain his experience not only metaphorically but also theologically and philosophically. Now part of what's interesting to me there is this concept of human commonness, but it's also interesting to me because in many ways common ground was sort of the goal, I'd say, sort of the goal of the baby boomer generation to try to establish a foundation for civility that sort of become passe. I think even with John Verveckis' dialogue, there's an aspect of that that's common ground, but I think part of what has developed is an anxiety that the search for common ground tends to boil things down to something like least common denominators, which are then insufficient for any party. And then it also tends to reduce the, let's say, a larger shared goal of discovering truth together even beyond staid theological, cultural, political, social positions. So more moving beyond rather than just a mapping of common ground and particularities. Yeah, and that's, you know, it's not just civility that he's pursuing, it's conviction as well. And he says, I mean, I guess that's the big caveat is that civility is itself the conviction that we have to present our condition civilly, but we have to get there, we have to actually present our convictions, you know, and really stand firm on them. And yeah, that's probably why you've been enjoyable to watch as well because you're pushing for people to have good faith conversations. Yeah, civil conversations, and to really bring out your convictions, what do you actually believe? And, and, you know, let me hear it. It doesn't do us any good if you just pull your punches and don't, and that's why I love, you know, characters like Jacob and Mark and, you know, I know people might go, you know, I might go to one of Jacob's just chatting streams and be horrified at, you know, what Jacob really thinks and how starkly he'll make the point, as will Mark and others in this little corner, but unless people are actually sort of making their point, why, you know, why are we wasting time with each other? Let's hear each other out and let's talk about it and let's do it in a way that isn't sort of fearful. Yeah, I mean, but again, this does get personal and, I mean, I lived through this history as a kid and you, yeah, more as an adult, like I, you know, so my family moved to Canada in the late 90s. Yeah, I was just six years old and one of my earliest church memories is talk over how the CRC, our CRC, a group split from this church to start a a united reform church, you know, and which, you know, thinking about that later is like united, they split from us. What does that mean? Like, well, but they're saying that they're united on the confessions. Yeah, it is a bit of an ironic name for those groups. Yeah. And then they've struggled to stay united in some ways. I believe it. I saw with the Protestant Reform Church in another offshoot of the CRC is having some deep divisions among themselves, you know, and I haven't listened to your sermons recently closely, but yeah, I've noticed that you've been preaching on first Corinthians, which I was an interim pastor at a church nearby this summer, and I decided to preach on the same or I already had a mindset to preach on first Corinthians one through four over the weeks that I was there. And one of the first things Paul says, I urge you to be united. But it doesn't end there. I urge you to be united in one mind. Sorry, how's it go? I urge you to be of one mind, to be united in mind. And so in some sense, the, you know, the the URC people have a point, like, we can't be, you can't be this forced cohesive entity, we actually need to be united on what we confess what we think. And so that really should be the goal for churches to, yeah, not just stay together because unity is good, but to be united in thought. Yeah, that's obviously incredibly difficult to do. And then some, but that's a must. Yeah. Yeah, it's a powerful passage. I preached on it not long ago, and it's far more, ago. And it's far more, it's far more demanding than just the sort of formal unity that people want to pursue in order to have unity for its own sake. Right. It's a I mean, it's a very deep demand that Paul puts. And, you know, then of course, a few chapters later, he'll demand that the man sleeping with his stepmother be put out of the church. Right. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'll be immortal brother among you. Yeah, that's right. And, you know, and then he'll, he'll have a lot to say about sexuality in the church in chapters five, six and seven. And I'm preaching on chapter seven this week. So, you know, there's, there's a lot going on here in, in these, you know, in these passages. So, yeah. And so now, I mean, now has, again, now took a lot of flack. Does he, does he talk much about his engagement with the Mormons, the LDS church? A bit, a bit in that book. And I have read Talking with Mormons as well. Okay. I haven't read that. Yeah. Yeah. He really doesn't there. And he states his case well. Yeah. And he had some, you know, some very clear, now has, so the CRC in 2017 tried for the first time, sort of a convention, they call it, as it was Inspire. Yeah. Inspire. And that was, it was in Detroit, you know, near Canada. So, you know, both West Michigan and Ontario could all come together and meet there. And they had Mao as their keynote speaker. And he gave a great speech. Mao is a, he's a great speaker. He does a, does a tremendous job. And he, he does a tremendous job, particularly in the CRC, because he knows the stories and he knows, you know, he knows it from the inside and he's been in it for a very long time, but he's also been outside of it. You know, the precedent of if there's a quintessential evangelical seminary, it's Fuller, of course, founded by the neo evangelicals, you know, the Billy Graham. And then, and then of course, Mao going there puts, you know, brings his own particular stamp upon it. So, Mao, at one time, you know, would have had a position which was in some ways quite high and central to that particular brand of evangelicalism. And yet for Mao, he, he didn't see this as threatening his reformed particularities, but usually tried to, you know, speak in a way. So again, when I, when I read, when I read the, the review of his book, I could immediately see the, you know, some similarity in terms of what I've done, even though Mao has not really been on my mind in this aspect with this project, which when you sent it to me, that really interested me, because then when I read it, I was like, oh, wow, I don't know why, I don't know why I haven't thought of Mao more in this, I guess, partly because I, you know, I've seen Mao more as trying to bring a degree of peace and unity within evangelicalism and even reaching out to the Mormon church. Now, Mormons, sort of the, the overlap of Mormons and evangelicals, neo evangelicals, is really sort of the stamp of American culture on Protestant Christianity. Because if you ever visit, I don't know if you've ever visited the, the Mormon major buildings in Salt Lake, if you go there, you really get the impression that this is, this is a deeply American religion. The, you know, Mormonism and the American frontier story are so deeply intertwined. And so evangelicalism also is also deeply American, neo evangelicalism to be more precise. So, and then how Mao, I mean, Mao always, he was a professor at Calvin College, he, you know, he has credentials, he's a member of the Christian Reformed Church, but he also always seemed to be a citizen of the evangelical movement in a way that, you know, in many ways, more so perhaps than Marsden, Waltersdorf, or Plantinga. Yeah, I mean, isn't, isn't that his, his own father was a Baptist evangelical preacher, and his mother was a Dutch Reformed woman? Yeah, I think, and I, that's why I'm a little, I'm always very interested in people's personal stories, so I really do hope he writes a more personal memoir, perhaps along the lines of, of what Lou Smedes did, or Eugene Peterson did. I think that would be, that would be helpful because, well, if Mao doesn't get around to writing it, maybe someone else should, because a lot of the contributions that he's made are built into his story. Yeah. Yeah. And it's kind of made me, like, the more details I learned about his personal story, it's, it's, it makes me realize, okay, my own personal details needs to interweave in my, in my life, in my work. That's how it will be most effective. And yeah, I mean, maybe there's a, there's a solution for, for the meaning crisis for us, you know, like, just, and I think that that's, that's so biblical, too, just realize who you are, so that you can be who you're called to be. Yeah, and yeah, obviously, that's a Christian understanding that that's a Christological way of understanding that, but, you know, be who you are in Christ, so that you can be who Christ is calling you to be. But yeah, I mean, I definitely would have trouble with that kind of language in, in non-Christian circles, because I feel like they wouldn't understand what I'm saying, but. Because they're all chasing the secret, sacred self. And once you say in Christ that then, no, what do you, no, no, not, not, not one of those religious things that's inauthentic, authenticity comes from expression of the secret, sacred self, you know, Sheilaism from Robert Bell a generation ago. You probably, probably didn't have you read Habits of the Heart in seminary. That was a, not an uncommon popular book when I was in seminary. Well, I read that one, but. So, so I mean, in some ways, we got your story derailed by Richard Mao, not derailed, because I did want to talk about it, but so. So, I spent a lot of time with his writing, so. Okay. So you did the EPMC program. Yeah. And you're done with that? Yeah. Are you candidates now or is that coming up this next Synod? We were at, we were in the same room in June. Yeah. I, yeah, I was with my wife and I have a, we have a six month old daughter now, so she was two, maybe three months in June. Oh, congratulations. So yeah, thanks. So we, I didn't stick around after the presentation of candidates, but yeah, I was hoping I'd bump into you and we could. Yeah. I could meet this guy who I've been watching for so many hours. Shoot. Oh, God, it's too bad that didn't happen. I'm glad it's happening now. Yeah. So you're, you're candidates. Where are you living? Are you in Canada? Yeah. Yeah. So I was downtown Toronto for about five years and then we were in a one bedroom apartment. Housing is terrible in Toronto as it is with the cities, but yeah, so then my wife and I were expecting. So one, we needed a bigger space. Two, my wife just wanted more support in that, so it makes sense. So we moved just next door to her parents. We're in a big apartment building in Scarborough, which is a, in some sense it's a, it's a suburb of Toronto, but it doesn't feel suburban. It still feels very urban, Toronto's still big, but yet it's not city centre either. So I guess it's, it's its own category between city centre and suburban, but yeah, that's where we are now. Yeah, I've candidated this summer. The, the Canopy committee of the denomination still wanted me to work on some preaching and I still have to do Hebrew, which I'm taking a Hebrew class right now. So. You didn't get Hebrew at Wycliffe? I didn't. I mean, I am, I'm thinking there now. Class of three students with a doctoral student. So in some sense, their language program isn't as strong as Calvin's, because Calvin actually has professors dedicated to the language. But we'll see how that changes too, because the CRC just lower its requirements for Yeah, no, that wasn't, that's important to me to be as close to the word of God as I can. So yeah, that's kind of what we're doing now. My wife is on maternity leave. And so I have these two requirements yet, Hebrew and just as a plan to work on my preaching. The only way to work on your preaching is to preach really? Yeah, well preaching and I have a mentor to discuss it with. Okay. So. So are you finding much pulpit supply opportunities? There's a lot of vacant CRCs in classes Toronto. Okay. So and once a month at the church where I've been attending since since we moved here. So right now it's Hebrew and preaching that's keeping me busy. Okay. Which about twice a month right now. When do you anticipate being satisfying their requirements and then looking for a call? By April. Okay. Okay. I mean, then I'll be done Hebrew and Yeah, I don't want to talk too negatively about the Dominational Canopy Committee, but I mean, once a really hard process to they sometimes feels like they make it unnecessarily harder. Your friend, what's his name? Rob, who wrote the Rob, Rob Torntra? Rob Torntra from Oregon. Yeah. Yeah, he was a my preaching evaluator. Oh, okay. Yeah. Rob's a good guy. Yeah, no, and I, and I do think back about what he says and what he said in kind of those interviews and it stuck with me. But yeah, the difficult thing is that they said, we want you to have to work on your preaching with a mentor. And so we want you to do a six month preaching internship. And I'm like, I just moved to a new apartment recently, you know, have a wife and a kid, I can't just, you know, up and find an internship somewhere. Yeah. Yeah. And like I said, a lot of the church, the CRC churches in classes Toronto are without a pastor. So yeah, finding a mentor isn't so easy. But yeah, luckily, the CRC in Scarborough, which I had already done an internship at two years ago. They got a specialized transitional minister. Yeah. Because their minister just retired. So yeah, Mike Wynowski, I don't know if you know him. Yeah. Yeah. Another another classmate. So yeah, he's he's offering mentorship and that's going well so far. Good. So yeah, I, I don't know, I never. Yeah, I did intercultural studies and Bible theology at at Kuiper. And I did my MDiv at Wycliffe because I wasn't too thrilled about alternatives. But yeah, the title of pastor and preacher has been are ones I'm like, nervous to make my own, to say the least, but I'm slowly seeing that I know this is something I have to step into. And yeah, you know, if you're going to do a job, do it well. And so if preaching is a job. And again, the only the way to get good at preaching is to just keep doing it. And part of, you know, we, we, you know, for a while here in Sacramento, we were really working on church planting. And in, in some traditions, people start preaching, you know, when they're young, and they might have been preaching for 10 or 15 years, by the time they actually get to theological education, which would horrify the Christian Reformed Church, the Christian Reformed Church, it's usually backwards. They fill you up full of theology. And then they're like, okay, now go preach. And it's like, how do I preach it? Because it's a, it's a very different thing than just vomiting your theological thoughts onto a room of well-meaning people. It doesn't usually go so well. So, so no, it's, and yeah, I would hope that given, if you're in an area with a lot of vacancies, you know, hobble together. If you can, you know, it's really hard. It can be kind of hard on your wife and new family to go to a different place every week. But if you can, I mean, as much preaching as you can do over the next six months, you know, do all the pulpit supply you can, even if you, you know, even if, let's say, you're repeating a lot of sermons, if you can go to a lot of different places, because even in the process of repeating a sermon, so you preach it once and you're looking at all the people and you can tell, are their eyes glazing over? Are they falling asleep? Are they paying attention? Are they quiet? Are they restless? All of that stuff. So then after that, you do a little bit of, you know, post-mortem on it and you look at the sermon and say, how can I tweak this? And then let's say you add an illustration or you change it around a little bit, then you preach it again and see if the effect is different. And, you know, there's a lot of different ways you can work on those skills. Yeah. Yeah. Although I found I definitely have a hard time re-urgitating sermons, right? Like every context is different. Every church profile is a bit different. And so, hey, I, you know, I need to say something a little bit different depending on, you know, the crowd. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. And the other biggest difficulty I found, you know, I did a stint of eight Sundays in a row this summer, which was the longest for me. By about week five, it was like, huh. Like, you just go through this motion of like anxiety leading up to the Sunday morning because you're nervous about delivering this thing. And then afterwards, it's just like this depression of like, how did that go? Like, I just don't know. So yeah, finding the stamina or something as a preacher is key. Yeah. My first number of years here, it was a hundred sermons a year, basically. Yeah. I know. But again, if you do that, if you do a hundred sermons a year, you don't have 40 hours to spend on a sermon if you do a hundred sermons a year. There's a lot of other stuff you got to do. And so you start getting, you start getting good at it. You start finding those shortcuts, figuring out ways to streamline and to, no, it's just like so many other things in life. Doing is how you get good at it. So, and yeah, at first, because we did a lot of preparation for preachers at our Sierra Leadership Network. And it was always so funny because you'd get them all ready for their first sermon. And it was like all these ideas and hobby horses and things that they had pent up for years, you know, boom, and I tried to get it all out in the first sermon and then they're done and say, okay, let's start working on the next one. What? I only had one sermon in me. Well, if that's the case, you're never going to get into this profession. That's just all learning. It's just all learning. So, yeah. And anything, we're about out of time. Any last minute things you wanted to get in that could be fairly short? Yeah, I knew this time was going to go quick. I guess I should mention estuary quick. I mean, there was one friend I have in this area who I talk about this stuff with, only one. And we're definitely thinking, wouldn't it be cool to get a group together to just meet up and talk about whatever. But this kind of stuff, talking civilly but bringing out our convictions. Yeah. For the sake of a question, like... Join, join else. Yeah, I have. I signed up and haven't... Oh, you haven't done it yet? Okay. Any response or anything? What? Oh, well, we'll fix that. The dump will be all over you. Okay, good. Well, we've had after Europe, we've had a whole bunch of new interest in else net and John will have to probably adapt a little bit. But yeah, else net is a good thing because basically all they do is they practice the how to do it, how to run a meeting. And after you've practiced how to run a meeting a couple of times, then it's like you can have some confidence that, oh, this is how it's going to go. And off you go. And you can use meetup.com. There will be Toronto. I've got plenty of listeners in Toronto. I know it's a big area. But I got plenty of listeners up there. And so there'll be interested parties. And then the challenge is finding a space. But again, if you're hooked up and connected to churches, churches usually have empty rooms in the middle of the week. And they've got people with small group skills and chairs you can put in a circle. Bang, easy. Yeah. I listened to your conversations with Topher. Those are good. Oh, yeah. Yeah. So he's not too far. I've reached out to him recently to see if he's interested. But he must not be on Discord anymore. Yeah. Yeah, people are on and off. Yeah. And I don't find, I find Discord a difficult platform to navigate into. Yeah, I do too. Really utilize. And so it's, yeah, to find a, to network with a Toronto group of your listeners is, I'd love to do it, but. It's still too hard. Yeah. It's still too hard. Yeah, I'd say, I'd say, I'll ping Vendonk. And we'll make sure that you get on the list of the invitation list for the ElseNet groups. And I told John, if these groups grow too big, he'll have to, you know, have some more, some new leaders for the groups. Vendonk can only do so much. And then we'll, we'll see where that goes. But, but good for you. Good for you. So yeah, I've got to, I've got to sign off now because I got another, another guy coming on in a few minutes, but I'm glad you got a slot. Yeah, me too. And look forward to seeing where this goes. Yeah. Thanks for all you do and keep up the good work. All right. I will send you, I will send you the recording of this video and then you can let me know whether, whether this is something you want to let me share or not. Okay. Okay. All right. Take care. All right. Bye bye. Bye bye.