https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZfBKR7dvHSk

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a friend with me on the line today. His name is Reverend Lloyd Wickers. I suppose now he has a military title too. He's been a friend of mine for a number of years. He was a colleague of mine. He pastored the Ammon Valley Christian Reformed Church just about an hour south of me in Ripon, so we worked together on a variety of church things over the years. Over the last few years, he's been a U.S. Navy chaplain and he is currently stationed in Rome. When I bumped into him on Facebook talking about all of this coronavirus stuff, I thought it would be really cool to talk to him. So, Lloyd, it's so much fun to talk to you even if it's under these less than totally happy circumstances. It's good to see you. Hey, it's good to see you too. And just a little correction, I'm not actually in Rome. I'm in Sicily. Oh, okay. Yeah. Well, why don't you, just so people get a chance to know you a little bit, why don't you tell us a little bit about yourself and maybe especially the chaplaincy stuff, how that's been going and what are you doing? Oh, just in general, outside of a crisis. Outside of a crisis, yeah. Outside of a crisis. Because it's helpful for people to know you. Yeah, so indeed, I joined the Navy as a chaplain in 2014 and I've served in a couple of places. I've been at, Navy chaplains serve the Navy, the Marine Corps, and the Coast Guard. So I actually joined and they sent me straight to the Marine Corps. Spent some time at Camp Pendleton in Southern California, deployed with an infantry battalion there in 2016. And a couple years ago, almost three years ago, made our move here to Naval Air Station Signilla in Sicily, Italy. The Hub of the Med is our kind of little tag name, I guess, if you will. Been here for about two and a half years and a lot of, honestly, in terms of what we do, Paul, a lot of what we do as chaplains, on the religious side of the house, we provide for religious needs and the exercise, free exercise of religious practice for people out of our own faith traditions. So in that regard, I'm a Christian Reform minister that gets to wear a different uniform every day, I guess. The facilitate piece, religious freedom is extended to everybody in the armed services and everybody doesn't have their own chaplain though, so we facilitate for people of all faiths. We spend a lot of time counseling. We're not therapists, but we do a lot of pastoral counseling and that kind of thing, which in the military, I think is unique in that chaplains are the only people that have the privilege of absolute confidentiality. So we report nothing to anyone and there are no exceptions. To the extent that civilian pastors, I think, would even have a hard time with the things that we're not allowed to report. So it is different here. And we spend a lot of time advising leaders, advising leaders on things related to religious freedom and religious practice, advising leaders on matters of morale and ethics and ethical leadership. Yeah, we have the freedom to walk around just about anywhere we want. And for the most part, I would say our presence is welcome in just about every place we walk into. Wow. That sounds wonderful. Is your family there with you or are they back in the States? So this duty station, they're here. Yeah, this is considered sure duty for me. It's a three year tour that's supposed to end in July. We'll see. We'll see in light of the crisis if anything changes in that. But so far, we were slated to move to Japan in July. Okay. Okay. Have you enjoyed this? It sounds like you have. It's been a blast. Absolutely. I mean, it, pastoring in churches, I got a lot of great years of experience. I learned a lot there. Great memories. Some hard ones too, but for the most part, a great experience. This has been in many ways, a chance to really take theology and apply it in ways that go so far beyond the scope of anything I thought about as a parish pastor. We meet people from so many different backgrounds. Wow. It is practical theology every day. Wow. Wow. Well, it sounds tremendous. And I'm so glad that you... I mean, it's a big leap to take from a local parish pastor to a Navy chaplain. But I remember when you took that leap. And so I'm glad it's really worked out. Yeah. No, it's been fun. I'm the old guy just about everywhere I've worked. That was not true when I was pastoring. That's true. Yeah. I'm not even the old guy at my church. I'm the young guy. This is a new variety of youth ministry, Paul. It's pretty amazing. Okay. Well, let's talk a little bit about what we were going to talk about, which is this coronavirus. Now here in Sacramento County, just yesterday we got the shelter in place order. And so Sacramento and Yolo counties are shelter in place counties right now, along with some in the Bay Area. The governor of California has advised people, basically given sort of a, I don't know to the degree to which it's a legal order, but the whole California supposedly now is shelter in place. I was just chatting with some family in Rhode Island and Massachusetts, and they don't have the legal side of it, but stores are closing. And I get emails and comments from a number of people saying, this is a huge overreaction to something that is a small thing. And just being local, whereas a church right down the road has had a death, and now a number of people have tested positive, testing is way behind here in the United States. Nobody's been sick in my church. I don't, you know, I only personally know a few people who are sick, sort of. I talked to one guy in England yesterday who is, but I mean, so for a lot of people right now in the States, it's sort of hard to get orientation. You see the alarm of the government, you hear things in the news. We know that the media in many ways, you know, if it bleeds, it leads. And so they play this game of just hyping everything. What do things look like from your end of the world? Well, let me say first, shelter in place is an interesting name to give it. When that's called shelter in place here, we're diving for cover because it means bullets are flying or there's an active shooter somewhere. And here it's a mandatory quarantine. So what do I see, right? Well, to be perfectly honest, three weeks ago, Paul, I probably would have been among the chorus that said, this is a bad flu and there's a lot of hype and we need to relax a little bit. Within two weeks, we had three cases. We went from three cases in Italy to 17,000 cases in Italy. That was about two weeks' time that had passed. Any minute now, I'm expecting the update. We're kind of hovering around here for these latest updates in terms of new cases and new deaths. And just even as I glance now, it's not come through quite yet. But the rate at which this virus has spread is incredible. And I watched from a distance at some of the things that you guys are seeing in the states on the news. We do get some news networks that come out here. Mostly the cable news stuff, which seems to use the word sensationalized. I almost want to call it entertainment. It's hard to watch. And honestly, even some of what I see in terms of how Americans are responding to this is a bit hard to watch, in part because we're about three weeks ahead of you. We've been under this quarantine for quite some time already. And just last night, the Italian government put the screws in just a little bit tighter. And there's still room to go tighter. But here we are. So what do you do with 3,500 new cases a day and anywhere from 350 to 500 new deaths in a day? When I look at some of the numbers, and I'm no mathematician, but when you look at the United States and when things were first discovered and Italy, when things were first discovered and you just put about two weeks in between the two, the trajectory should cause you all to pause just a little bit and take this a bit more seriously. I'm not a medical person. I can't speak to, you know, how is this virus different than others? What I can tell you is that it has it has. We can't drive in this country without having authorization to be on the road right now. Really? And that's not just because you're US military or something like that. Oh, no, no, no, no. It's there's there's the documentation from the Italian government that if we're going through a checkpoint, we have to provide, which basically says we're on the road to get groceries or we're on the road to go to the hospital or to get medication or for some other life necessity to to not be out for the right. One of those reasons results, I want to say, in a 200 or 200 year old 250 euro fine. Wow. To lie on that document is a much larger fine in prison. So they're taking it very, very seriously. Now, this has been a problem that's probably been far more significant in northern Italy. And I imagine the news on your side of the pond is capturing that, too. However, it's not slowed yet and and it's moving south. And so I think there's there's greater fear here. We see not quite to the degree that you saw in the states, people flooding to stores and stocking up on things. Toilet paper, of all things. Can you help me out with that? Well, there's a thing I've read. Everything I've read says nothing about diarrhea. Well, there's a friend of mine named Jonathan Peugeot, who's an orthodox icon carver. He just made a video about that. And it's a it's a it was a good video in terms of why, you know, why symbolically. And I know others have commented psychologically, you know, people, it's a fear response. People are going to need this. So, yeah, go for here. And maybe it's not an issue here because in Europe they use bidets, right? I mean, what's the purpose of toilet paper? Only the Americans go after that stuff. So, you know, the trends we see, at least at this point, it does it does impact. I mean, the death rates are typically the older the older people. And I've heard lots of theories as to why that is. And even some of the, I would say, careless and irresponsible stuff I've seen on social media. You know, well, you know, Italian smoke. Well, yes, Americans, right? Or, you know, those who are sick. I think one of the things that were that's really been hard to watch here, Paul, is that. We have good doctors here. I would say a good number of doctors in Italy have even been trained in the States. If you want to say that that's the gold standard. I don't know that I go that far. But but if that's your metric, OK, there's even a good number of doctors that have been trained in the United States. It's not for lack of skill. We just don't have the equipment and we don't have the bed space. And so with with such an incredibly contagious virus that we don't know that much about yet, that seems to be targeting older people and hitting them largely with respiratory problems. You go to the hospital and in a city like Catania, which is the big city closest to here, you know, you've got some three hundred and ten, three hundred and fifteen thousand people. You've got 20 ventilators in this entire city. And this city does it. They're the big hospitals for a lot of feeder towns that are surrounding it, too. Right. So now you've got doctors that are having to make wartime battlefield medical decisions. Thirty patients in the room. You got three ventilators in that hospital. Who gets it? Wow. Right. So so they're having to decide, you know, who's young enough to survive this. But it's not just an age thing, because a young person with a with a deep medical history might get passed over for somebody that's got a fighting chance at getting over this. Yeah. And and and so, you know, a lot of I a lot of what I see and hear and I appreciate the way you asked the question, Paul, you look around and you say, well, it's we don't see it here. It's not affecting a lot of people around here. Here's the thing that I'm seeing in Italy is. These people go home and they're younger and they're going into very, let's say, multi-generational homes. Right. So you can you can be you can be contagious for 14 days and be asymptomatic. And so you walk around this place and you don't pay attention to quarantines and you go home and you bring it you bring it home. And the next thing you know, grandma or grandpa gets it or no, no, no, no. Here in Italy. Right. And and. So a lot of the answer to why do we do what we do, why is quarantine important? It's not just so that you stay healthy, it's so that the people around you stay healthy. Right. People don't worry about this so much when it doesn't affect them personally. But wait till it's your grandma or grandpa who gets turned away from the hospital and told to go home because they don't have room. Right. We see ICUs and hallways and hospitals. In northern Italy, there are lines of military vehicles outside of hospitals waiting to pick up bodies. Wow. I mean, it's it is something to pay attention to. Unfortunately, it seems like and I would say, you know, I'm not going to speak for the Italian government because I can't. But but it seems like if I'm any indication of what a lot of people, a lot of other people are like and how they approach this, it's it's not a big deal. It's not a big deal. It's not a big deal until it's a big deal. And then really the momentum has started. The trajectory is ugly. And how do you stop it? Yeah. Yeah. So it's heart wrenching. How are people doing emotionally with it? And maybe first, you know, to the degree that you have contact or experience with civilians around. And then we can talk about the soldiers that you're actually caring for. Yeah. So so I think around the community. Yeah, there's fear. And I think there's yeah, Italy is a very social country. And so when you talk about quarantine, it's very difficult for them to do. And you have you have those that are just kind of. Disregarding these instructions and continuing to go about their business, at least that's been the case for a couple of weeks. I think that's changing now with some with some tighter screws going in. But then you also have those that are just, you know, why? Why aren't these people listening? And why aren't you doing what you're supposed to be doing? Why are you endangering your neighbors? Why are you endangering my family? I don't see them fleeing to grocery stores. I largely see in this community because they are so so much of a social community, it seems it seems like there's a care for one another. So that that go into grocery stores and just taking every last thing and leaving nothing for those that come behind. Americans do that. But but some Americans do that. But I don't see as much of that around here. You know, they're only letting people in a few at a time in a grocery store because of the social distancing piece. Yeah, I haven't gone shopping in town because I I haven't needed to. And we've been told you shop you shop the closest place to your home. So that for me, that happens to be on base. And the and the rules are a little bit different here. But those that I know that live out in town. Yeah, it's tough. There were lines out the door, but people waited their turn. They got what they needed. It doesn't seem like for the most part, things are not on the shelves because because trucks are still driving and shipments are still coming in. They haven't they haven't stopped those things. OK. But yeah, that's that's to be out and about because it's work requires it. Right. Yeah, yeah, yeah. How about how about the how about the soldiers and other military people that you're with? How's it? How's it going with them? Yeah. So sailors on this base and families here again, the shipments are coming in. I think like like a lot of what you see in the states, you know, we're still Americans here. And I think some of our gut first reaction is to panic. And so, you know, that first day when it sounded like quarantine instructions were coming, there were long lines, people buying things, clearing stuff out. I guess I guess the nice thing about being in a military community is when people are being stupid while they're shopping out of a panic, the commanding officer can say, knock it off. And he could start putting putting restrictions on how much can you get? Right. I mean, you can't fill your shopping cart with with frozen meat. You can't fill your shopping cart with, you know, toilet paper, you know, or whatever. So so leave some for those that are behind. It was it was a first reaction and it was so unwarranted. There was another Navy base here in Italy that I think hit some of these restrictions before we did. And it was the same reaction. The initial rush to the store, grab as much as you can. Meanwhile, there's managers saying, we got trucks coming tomorrow. And the next day and the next day, why are you all waiting in line for two hours to buy your groceries? Right. So but but a lot of that's kind of tapered off. So we're getting used to all being homeschoolers now. Today, the new instruction is, is you can't even be outside unless, you know, unless you're going to the store or really the hospital. You can't go for a walk or something like that. No, no, you're not allowed to be outside. So is that the Italian instruction or the the base instruction? That's the that's the Italian instruction. So the base the basis, we really want to honor our host nation and we really want to do the things that they want us to do. And so so so yeah, I mean, it's not just for the sake of playing nice. It's it's the right thing to do. Yeah. We don't know what we don't know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think anybody does. We're still we're still learning. We're still learning what this is all about. Yeah. Yeah. Well, thank you. Thank you, Lloyd. And I really appreciate that. And again, I think it's. It's it's difficult for people when we look around and nobody around us is sick. None of our friends are sick. We keep in touch with our families. They're not sick. We see all the alarm and, you know, one impulse says, oh, let's panic and panic by. So we have enough for it here. And the other is, oh, this is a huge overreaction. They're tanking the economy. You know, why? Why are they doing this when, you know, it's there's there's nothing going on. But it's it's helpful to to see. You won't you won't know what's going on until it's too late. Right. Then it then it gets out of control. So I don't think it's a reason to panic, but I do think it's a reason to be smart. You got to watch watch what you're listening. Be careful what you're listening to. There's a lot of unreliable stuff out there, too. But I would like to believe that that leaders at any government level within the states would be listening and watching to what's happened in other parts of the world and say, you know, what what can we learn from this? And to be accused of overreacting as a leader, I said it on my Facebook thread to Paul. What a badge of honor for any leader. Call me call me an overreactor over this, you know, and until my last dying breath, because I'll take that over the accusation of you didn't act soon enough. Yeah, yeah. You know, and who wants to be responsible for the for the catastrophic consequences that come with that? I don't think it's an overreaction. I will say that. OK, I think it's cautious and I think you should be cautious. Because if the trajectory for us is what continues in the states, you're down for some dark days. Yeah, yeah. And we certainly hope that I, you know, I've said to some people, say, hey, you know, if two, three weeks, a month from now, someone looks at me and says, you know, hey, you you sounded the alarm and it didn't happen. I will be I will be more than happy to have been proven wrong. I will be overjoyed because my you know, as you well know, churches have large numbers of seniors in them. And we know that, you know, from China and Italy, that it's often the seniors that are most vulnerable to this. I I don't want to do a bunch of funerals when the travel restrictions are lifted. I don't want to do that. No, no. I mean, to be accused of that, actually, you know, they won't probably say it to you. But Paul, it means you did it right. Right. I mean, you got ahead of it. So on YouTube, they will say it to me. Well, between you and me, they're wrong. It's not between you and me. I know. Yeah, it's it's the right thing to do. And it's a great opportunity. And I don't know how much who your main audience is, Paul. But what an opportunity for the church to stand up and rise up to this. I'm I'm watching churches figure out how to do things online, you know, and the reach that that potentially goes out to, it's just a beautiful thing. I'm watching I'm watching around here people taking care of their neighbors. Right. When you're quarantined, when you're when you're quarantined because you're symptomatic or live with somebody who is, you may not go out. Not even for groceries. Right. People have to bring you groceries. I'm watching people do that. And this is not a time to hoard and be selfish. I think this is a time to come together and to look out for the needs of the people around us and care for them. And the church has to get creative about ministry because there's there's no package you can order to or campaign that you can do that's going to touch this. Right. I mean, you have to listen to your neighbors and you have to know your neighbors. You got it. You got to care about them and love them. And there's there's a lot of neat ways you can do that. Living the gospel. I've been getting emails from pastors about equipment because they know that I do my I've done my YouTube thing for a while and I managed to fit it into my schedule. And, you know, as a as a local pastor in the states, some people I said to my council last night, we're having weekly council meetings over Zoom. I said to my council last night, I said, you know, some people have more time than they usually have. Some of us are busier than we usually are. So we'll have to spread that around. But it's, you know, to me, I keep reminding I keep reminding Christians that, you know, being a Christian doesn't mean you won't get sick. Being a Christian doesn't mean you won't die. People point to the plagues in the Middle Ages and and in the Roman period and how Christians didn't leave. And that's right. But but being Christian means that you have confidence that that you will be with the Lord come come life or come death, that you are in his hand. And, you know, the first question and answer of the Heideberg Catechism, what is my only comfort in life and in death that I am not my own but belong, you know, body and soul to my faithful savior? Jesus Christ was fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood. So, you know, we this I think this is an opportunity for churches to be able to talk about why we have hope, even if we like everyone else will, you know, are subject to the illness and so on and so forth. So I I hope that the church does well in these circumstances and is able to be generous and non-anxious with each other as we're also very realistic with one another about what what we're potentially facing. And again, if if because the United States did some of these things earlier, our you know, our medical systems aren't overwhelmed. Hey, praise God for that. That's certainly the goal we're looking for. Absolutely. So. So thank you, Lloyd. I don't know if there's anything else you want to plug or because you always give a chance to plug things on YouTube, but anything else you want to plug? You should have given me a warning on that, Paul. I would have been glad to plug lots of things, but thanks for the opportunity. And and on behalf of of this country that's been my home for the last two and a half years as you're navigating your own crisis, keep praying for us, too. So we're not we have not turned a corner yet. We're still deep in the rise. And yeah, we'll keep on keeping on. And certainly we pray for you all, too. And and and hope, like you said, that that good learning comes through the experience and that your story is very different than ours. So, yeah. Well, thank you, Lloyd. And thank you for your service. And maybe I'll check back with you in a week or two and we'll see. Keep it. Keep in touch with me as things change and we can do this again. I'm quarantined. I'm not going anywhere. OK, Lloyd, you take care. Yeah, you too. Thanks, Paul. OK, bye bye. Bye.