https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xY6ykmy_NaI

 Hi, this is Paul. As you can see, I'm not in my usual place. I'm out of town for the graduation of my youngest son. Synod has just ended and it was a synod that I don't think will soon be forgotten. There's going to be a lot to talk about after this synod. I think I'm going to talk right about Wednesday. I finished watching all of the Wednesday video last night and my goal is to try to get a sense of the day. I've got some Wi-Fi connectivity here but I by no means have the bandwidth to upload a lot of content and maybe that's for the best. The Christian-Formed Church is in a slow moving painful, slow moving painful divorce. The Christian-Formed Church is in some ways the best sort of family that cannot escape her specific misery. She's careening for what may be an inevitable divorce but she is doing her level best to try to avoid it and that misery really came to a head on Wednesday night. As I laid through in my previous videos, the advisory committees meet and the advisory committees are small samples of what comes to the floor. Part of what was notable from advisory committee seven was many people mentioned on the floor that the experience that they had, the spiritual experience that they had was something that they would remember all their lives. It was an incredibly moving, powerful experience to be on that committee, to be with twenty some odd people in a room and to wrestle with these things together face to face. Part of what makes this so difficult is that all of that face to face processing is in service of a judicial decision, let's call it that, where there's choosing yes and no, where there's decisions about structures, where there's decisions about the future. One of the things that you'll notice if you watch the Senate videos is that there's a tremendous amount of worship and the music is beautiful, there's a tremendous amount of prayer, there's the Christian Informed Church is employing all that it can to try to keep the body together while at the same time doing their best to honestly represent the sincere beliefs and practices of the diversity of churches that they come from. As mentioned in earlier videos, the Christian Informed Church has tried to strive for racial diversity and ethnic diversity, but it's difficult to know how all the diversities overlap and what they all mean. In many ways, the advisor committees are sort of fractals of the far larger body and no, they are not necessarily selected as, let's say, I'm not saying anything against the delegates, the brightest and the best. I caught Jacob's livestream the other night with Phlebas where they were talking about synod and it's not the best way to do this and it's not the people at the top of all the hierarchies that do this. As I mentioned in my Mr. Smith Goes to Washington and Reverend Vander Ploeg Goes to Senate video, the Senate is full of randos and that's part of her glory. It's the regular, it's a very Protestant thing. It's the regular people of the church delegated representing the church of the great and to do the work of the church together and in a time of conflict and transition like our own, that's extremely difficult and I think people are really doing their best to bring their best selves to that place and at the same time represent what they truly believe and do the work of the Lord with all of the differences that apply for each of them given their different circumstances. Now the Christian Forum Church has its roots as an immigrant church and as I mentioned in my earlier video about burning the wooden shoes, over the last 50 years the church has increasingly become an American church. I got a phone call right in the middle and it was a 616 number which is of course Western Michigan so I picked it up and it was a synodical delegate driving home. Yeah, CRC has its roots as an immigrant church and for many the church is quite literally an extended family thing. It's nowhere near the extended family that it was in the 1970s and before but it's a big deal and people have given their all for this church multi-generationally and so all of this is enormously painful for people and it's enormously difficult. I will have to talk about Thursday at some point. I don't know if I'll have time to do it this weekend. Like I said I'm out of town, family is gathering to celebrate a graduation and I still have my sermon to finish so I've got stuff in the can for the YouTube stream but I will be preaching on Sunday. But yeah there's a lot of emotion going through a lot of Christian Reformed people right now and I think all up and down it's conflicted. I think up until up through Wednesday it seemed like basically sort of a pretty consistent conservative victory and then Thursday happened and of course we'll have to talk about that. Committee 7 which dealt with the human sexuality report from last year and all of the overtures that came as a response of it as I mentioned many in that committee said that the experience that they had of working together was one of the most incredible spiritual experiences of their lives. In the end they couldn't have a completely unified report. They did break into two groups and it was in some ways again sort of a fractal of the larger body and to have it be right there on the floor of Senate was a powerful day. Committee 7 used all of their relational resources to create a mountaintop spiritual environment only to find it was not enough to resolve their differences. And then there was this moment and I'm going to simply drop the video into here and just let it play because in many ways this moment typified Wednesday and this was sort of the salient moment that showed everybody the way it was. Thank you David. We have Rita, then Herb and then Matt from Lake Erie. Rita Klein-Gelton, Classes Quinty. I have a question for the majority committee and I think I know the answer, actually four questions, but I know the answer because otherwise I wouldn't have signed the Minority Report. If this passes, can someone who is unsure of what God expects of LGBTQ peoples, can that unsure person become a member of the CRC? Question two, can someone who is unsure become an office bearer in the Christian Reformed Church, in our churches? Number three, can someone who is unsure sign a Gravamon, is that okay? I've been a member of the Christian Reformed Church all my life as my husband and our parents and my four sons, my four boys who are, Kara knows they're men, and their wives are all following Jesus and are members of the Christian Reformed Church. My twelve grandchildren are members of the Christian Reformed Church. If my four sons and their wives fall into this category of unsure, can the CRC still be their home? You may answer the question. No, I know. No, Rita, that's fine. We were in committee together, I bless you. We worked together. I'll try and answer as best I can. I'm not sure if I can answer this question as best I can. Maybe not so much in the technical manner of things. Come to order, folks. Give some space here. Give some space. At 5.30 this evening, we adjourned. Thank you. I was 5.35 and I jumped in my vehicle and I drove to the sports center and I was told that I was going to be driving to the sports bar down the street, had ice water with women. And here I am, a 55 year old guy sitting in the corner in a sweater, crying. I love this church. I've been a member all my life. I love preaching for this church. I love teaching in this church. I love its confessions. I wouldn't be standing here tonight if I didn't love these confessions. But what grieves me so bad is that we make decisions that we don't make decisions here and that we leave here and some decide to be ogres about it, jerks about it, and we can't even hold to a confession. Have we got to be jerks about it? Please, I'm, so Rita, I hear your heart. Yes, well, it is a yes and no question. No. I'm sorry. If, let me try and put it this way, and if I'm out of order, say so. If you're going to vote for this majority report, please don't leave here and be a jerk about it. And to those who are opposed to this report, not all of us hate LGBT people. Okay? Sorry. I'm sorry. So, yes, I want to believe, Rita, those who have questions or are unsure have a place and we're not jerks about it and we can find a way to converse. But please understand, I love these confessions. If we could do this, we could hold to truth and bring people along in the truth and they can see Christ in us. I don't know, I realize that probably doesn't specifically answer your question. I'm just speaking to the heart of what we're trying to talk about here. So, I apologize. Stuck couples often cannot always find a way out of their misery and in some ways that's sort of where the Christian Reformed Church is right now. Powerful realities are aligned against their union and I can diagnose it, but I can't resolve it. And so what comes now are a few thoughts about the dynamics that I noted through the course of the whole day Wednesday. And again, depending on interest and how the conversation keeps going, I might do a deeper dive into Wednesday. It was an important day, but Thursday was important too and we will have to talk about Thursday. There are obviously two different, there's obviously a difference of belief beneath the two perspectives and for over a decade now I've been calling us to a confessional conversation and we're clearly having one. I'm not sure how well we're doing with it yet. There are signs of hope that perhaps we are doing it better. A confessional conversation is to help the church basically find not only the lines of the reasons over which they disagree, those are obvious, but the much deeper roots beneath those lines so they can better understand how to organize their wine skins and how to be churched together and how different parts of the church can relate to one another despite differences. This has been happening nearly right from the start in the church and sort of the pressure to hold them together is of course John 17 and you'll hear that brought up again and again during Synod. Again, the CRC is trying its best to not have this difference, not divide it, just to have this difference, but the question is whether that cost is too high and that's what many are weighing right now. What is the cost? Where are the priorities? What are the hierarchies? How are we supposed to make these decisions and come to the judgments about the people around us? The CRC has tried this with Women in Church Office and in the 1990s accepted basically a political compromise that led to the departure of around 60,000 church members and launched a few smaller denominations, some of which are still around. And as Sean Baker noted in the video where we talked about some of these things, the echo of that trauma, trauma is a word that likes to be used right now, I will call that trauma, to the church still remains and that trauma from the Women in Church Office continues to impact this conversation. But these issues are not identical and a lot of times we look for analogies in order to sort of navigate and this is how we're trying to navigate and there's some things you can learn, in some ways there are similarities, in some ways there are differences. World views matter in this framing. Whether or not same sex, the deep divide, and this is one way to put it but it's by no means the only way, same sex attraction is a violation of God's good order or same sex attraction is a natural variant in humanity and so much larger world view conflicts that have been around since the modernist fundamentalist fights are still sort of beneath the surface here and they don't necessarily cut one way or the other. Both sides both resist those forces and appeal to them in making their arguments. Is it something that can be tolerated, can be accommodated, can be lived with, or must be continually resisted and I could just go through speech after speech after speech and you can just hear these issues just reverberating on both sides. Culturally by virtue of the way arguments have been made for the last ten years people want to point to identity and representation to sort of get out of it and that breaks down quickly because once let's say you say well it's lived experience of being same sex attracted you can immediately point to someone who is same sex attracted and doesn't come to an affirming conclusion and vice versa and so a lot of these ways to try to get out of the dilemmas are not working the way people want them to and yet they continue to be appealed towards and they continue to not be have the impact with others that perhaps these arguments had five or ten years ago. To avoid the divorce the CRC is desperately looking for common ground and this is where a couple of issues and some of the ways that we're relating to each other we really have to sort of take a step back and look at. With all of the pain and the trauma of this ecclesiastical divorce that is feared and quite likely imminent people are looking for comfort people are looking for common ground people are looking for ways and reasons to avoid the divorce and again in a marriage especially a marriage with children this is the kind of thing that absolutely tries the soul of an unhappy couple. Now one of the things that you'll see on the floor of center is that the one of the things that you'll see on the floor of senate are collective and communal confession one individual this was actually in the Thursday meeting talked about well there's all sorts of analogies that fly and the reason we use analogies is because we hope with a question that we can't easily sort of find our way through we hope that analogies will sort of guide the way and we have to use analogies analogies are foundational to our thought process to our language process languages itself in some ways almost completely metaphorical and so analogies are powerful and there's a sense of confession and so one of the things that you hear and this was very clear in the very moving united committee seven the committee seven preamble which was a moving document it was something that both sides could agree to and so when both sides found their agreement in this which is basically confession then in the past we've not done well so maybe we're fighting over how to regard the issue now but in the past we have not done well and we can both agree to that and so in those moments the two sides can come together and look at each other and again it's almost like a couple saying okay we've got these we've got this horrendous fight and these horrendous issues that are pulling us apart but in this one area we can be together and doesn't it feel good just to be together and being together for this confession of past error let's say gives us comfort and solace and healing and the fact that it's a confession is not arbitrary either because if both sides can sort of offer this joint confession they can in some ways at least give the hope of absolution and that's so foundational here and so it also gives them a sense of joint mission so mission and vindication now being on the right side of history so we used to we've done these grievous things in the past now we see clearly even though we still have this conflict now we're together on this so let's focus that let's put a lot of energy in that let's really try to make that moment count and stay and then maybe we can get over the other together we can agree that wrongs have been done and we'll all say that maybe we can avoid the divorce but the safe harbor has a bitter pill and I think for me that's something that I saw most clearly at the end of Wednesday's deliberations especially Wednesday night now in the videos that I make that most seriously people haven't watched there's been a more moral alignment that's been going on between the church and Christendom beyond it that is significant for the story of the West over the last 500 years and particularly salient over the last 150 years especially since sort of the Darwinian part of what happened in the modernist fundamentalist fight is that going into the scientific revolution and go especially going into all of the discoveries of the 19th century about geology and Darwin all of this sort of broke the church apart before that the church sort of looked at the Bible and said we can trust the Bible for history and morality and part of what the modernist fundamentalist fight was over was the modernist basically said we're skeptical about the Bible for history but we can trust it for morality and ethics and in that way the beginning of modernism sort of had that bargain and of course fundamentalism sort of doubles down and says no it's really really historical and we can trust it for ethics and that tension continues and in many ways that tension continued in the West into the Cold War and through the Cold War but by the end of the Cold War you had the rise of the new atheist and again I've run through this argument in some of my previous videos. Now even during the Cold War when there was at least a sense of alignment between the church and its Bible and the morality of the culture beyond it there was sort of an intensification sort of a two speed a two speed moral situation between the church and society. People in the church were considered moral but maybe a little too prudish maybe a little too persnickety when it comes to sexuality or other moral aspects but still there was alignment but there was an intensification and you can see this still in the case of adultery. When No Fault Divorce came around basically the government said we're stepping out of the decisions about morality with respect to ending marriages and so that even in the church today adultery is not tolerated and especially clergy will be held accountable for moral lapses or moral failures. Divorce and remarriage can be a process by which there is maybe reconciliation but even over the last 20 years the Christian Reformed Church has doubled down on safety and so you get these strange ironies where and these were present in the Senate. I haven't talked about the code of conduct yet because on one hand we're at a time when the safetyism in our culture is really leading towards accountability, accountability, we need to hold people with power accountable. But at the same time you have this openness with regard to sexuality and sort of the combination of sexuality and identity which has a loosening and so we've been having this, Ben Van De Zand used to have this great phrase, you can't suck and blow at the same time and if code of conduct is about sucking in to fortify ourselves a lot of what's been happening on the sexual front is blowing to relieve ourselves and you can't suck and blow at the same time and we've been trying to do this as a synod. So the same, so you'd hear speech after speech after speech about centralization and then liberty and what you'd find is that the two sides just keep switching positions with respect to them. The, let's say the side that's more to the affirming, well they want the code of conduct, we want accountability. The other side and says no we have local jurisdiction and leadership and so the compromise is basically reached there. But then with the other position they flip around to the other way and again as Ben Van De Zand used to say you can't suck and blow at the same time, it just doesn't work and we're, and so basically what we're doing is hyperventilating as a denomination. Now what happened is that the broader western liberal culture embraced sort of the natural variant model and over the last ten years some of the most powerful influence machinery, this is again part of the irony of all of these power conversations, the most powerful influential influence machinery in the culture has been pushing the natural variant model now really since the 70s and well this has been forming people outside the church and you add that with the intensification dynamic that happens between church and culture, those who are let's say liberal within the church feel a lot of pressure because the church seems to be a lagging indicator of public morality instead of a vanguard which the church wants to be and you flip that around and at the same time that energizes, this is why again the Christian Reformed Church has been and will continue to get more conservative. Lyle Schaller pointed this out years ago in his early studies with respect to church growth. Countercultural churches always have stronger dynamics. Their groups are more passionate, they give more money. Countercultural groups strengthen and so the Christian Reformed Church in its aspect because it's sort of divided, it's assimilating between mainline and evangelical, the countercultural elements are intensifying and strengthening within the Christian Reformed Church. I've made videos about this before and again this is why the Christian Reformed Church is and is going to continue to get more conservative particularly on certain matters like this one. If you know anything about Aaron Wren's Negative World Thesis, that's what's happening here. Now there are always two strategies for moral improvement and both sides use both. They tend to use them at different times and they tend to use them from different people but both sides use both. The hard and the soft. Now hard strategies for moral improvement tend to use a lot of different words. Marginalize. Now marginalize sort of has a negative connotation in the culture but one of the hard methods to bring about moral improvement is to marginalize, to deplatform, to cancel, to take a group that you believe is pushing the culture in a bad direction and marginalize them. Now again and again when you hear people sort of, the left tends to use this word, marginalized people, marginalized people and there's sort of a sacred list of categories of people that are in these marginalized people. But of course if you have a culture war like we're having now, people who in the past perhaps had power in the culture as the culture war goes on and as they lose in their culture war they are increasingly marginalized. Their candidates are no longer elected. Their perspectives are no longer granted the airwaves. Their positions lead to people getting canceled and deplatformed on social media and the momentum happens with that. That's part of sort of the hard method of moral improvement. There's censure where people are called out. There's shame. You ought to be ashamed of yourself. And again I'm not saying these are bad or good. A lot of these hard methods were employed to great degree and great success and in my opinion in a helpful way let's say the fight against racism that really happened in America after the second world war in the 50s and 60s and 70s. And churches continue to use these. Governments use these. Cultures use these. These are used in culture war. So you have sort of hard strategies of moral improvement to marginalize, to censor, to shame, to hold accountable, to punish, to discipline, etc. Now when you hear this keep this dynamic in mind when you listen to especially Thursday because even these two means have a degree of moral valence between them. So there's the hard strategy of moral improvement. Then there's the soft strategy of moral improvement to admonish, to influence, to persuade, to win with love. And of course within Christianity Jesus in fact doesn't take up armed revolt against the Roman occupying forces of God's holy land and God's holy people. Jesus really moves the world with soft methods. And so I think generally speaking part of how Christianity has conquered has often been putting soft methods over hard but that doesn't mean that hard methods are always off the table with respect to Christianity. And in some ways you see the soft methods in the Gospels and you see the hard methods in the book of Revelation. All right. So both of them are in the Bible and our view during church history very much is a debate on that. This is an ongoing conversation within Christianity. Now again almost everybody uses both. The ratios with which they use both often differ with respect to temperament. Some people are just by temperament more people who tend to major in soft moral improvement. Other people more hard moral improvement if you can look at the big five personality profile. People who are high in conscientious tend to major in hard. People who are high in openness tend to major in soft etc. etc. Now the hard approach lives in a moral economy with justification. Usually the hard will be the hard approaches will be justified by certain arguments about well these people have done this. This is what we need to do. This is the moral environment we're living in. OK. So you have to keep the hardness off in play if you're going to understand how in some ways the CRC is in a really difficult relational trap with itself that is making it difficult to process. You heard this a few times during to manage this conflict. Now we should we should know we should observe that the moral evolution story is a rider and you will hear this again and again on the floor of Senate. You'll hear this on the Internet. You'll hear this in social media. The argument basically says this that there's a shared history of the hard. And remember when I said the the introduction the preface to Committee 7's report was what was that's the combined report. We can all look at the past and say we've made mistakes. We've made mistakes with respect to racism. We've made mistakes with respect to sexism. We've made mistakes with respect to the way we've treated LGBTQ same sex attracted individuals. And that's clear in the 1973 report. Many people reference the 1973 report. Now we changed our mind on racial social Darwinism. Now part of in my recent conference with John Reveke and Jonathan Peugeot we made a made an observation. Jonathan Peugeot made an observation with respect to the past and the future. And I'm going to rephrase it this way because we're talking about the relationship let's say between the Book of Revelation and our reading of the Book of Genesis. Now careful with this modernist fundamentalist fight here because I'm going to make a broader argument that generally speaking this eschatological framework that we tend to project into the future. We also tend to project into the past. And you see this often because often it's imagined that well racism is just something that has always been bad bad bad bad bad. And that's just slowly getting better through time. So you have this sort of bias of progressiveness that well things are always sort of getting better through time. This is sort of the eschatological framework. You have the post mills that believe everything's going to improve slowly up until the coming of the kingdom. You have the pre mills that often believe everything's going to get worse and worse and worse until Jesus interrupts it. Then you have the odd mills that are kind of floundering in the middle and saying well some things are getting better some things are getting worse. So it's really tough to make those kind of judgments and arrangements. It's helpful to remember that racism builds on a bias within human beings for in groups and it's very easy for racial. And of course racism is often a impacted by globalism. You have people in fairly homogenous groups where you don't have a lot of racial characteristics distinguishing them. Those groups will find other characteristics to differentiate themselves between in groups and out groups. Let's imagine aboriginals on or let's just say Native Americans in North America before the before the Colombian exchange. They found all sorts of ways to fight against each other and to kill each other and to a slave each other. They had things that they had in common and they had things that they had had a part. But tribalism in group out group dynamics is very clear with us. Part of what happens in the 19th century with the rise of Darwinism is very quickly social Darwinism comes on its heels. And this becomes a very powerful factor in racism. It's a big long it's a big long thing. But but we tend to look at the past with this sort of eschatological mode. And often people like it's just it was just all racism until the civil rights movement doesn't really hold. Certainly racism was around the Christian Forum Church position of racism as that is in fact endemic. And will continue to be so. But that doesn't mean that there aren't certain different ways that people go about it. Now you hear a lot of arguments on the floor that well bias against same sex attracted individuals is basically the same as racism. And all of those lines should sort of follow. So we should embrace the new naturalistic model with same sex attraction. The results are obvious. It gets better if you adopt our model. You might make an argument. I would I would argue it's a complex thing and I don't want to necessarily get too deep into it. I could in another forum. But it's helpful to remember that the naturalism that intensified racism has also been employed in this argument especially in the born that way argument. And the born that way argument is actually losing ground and has been losing ground over the last decade. But the argument is openness. Greater openness is better. And for myself I think I think there's a lot of truth to that. I wouldn't really want I think I think having greater openness. I mean it's it's remarkable that you have same sex attracted individuals on the floor of Senate basically telling their stories in a public way and receiving support. I think that is a positive that the the gay liberation movement has given us. And that's my opinion. But there are some deep complexities within this narrative. But most run with it in a popular low resolution mode sort of in an eschatological low resolution mode. And that's important again with respect to this bitter pill. And this arose at the end of the day when Stanley Jim and Wayne Coleman stood up because suddenly because of the rider on that narrative all of these things sort of come together. And again as human beings we're always trying to simplify. I don't need these. We're always trying to simplify our narratives and and have them make sense for us. We're always trying to compress and simplify the world. So if we can just sort of clump all these people together then it all makes sense. Listen to Wayne Coleman's words at the end. Listen to Stanley Jim's words there. They're basically making the argument. These things aren't really all the same. They're not really all the same. Historically they're not the same and they don't play out in the same way. And again as I've said sort of the immutability argument of born that way has has basically been nuanced quite a bit. And it doesn't mean that it's never true. But a lot of the adjustment strategies have been built on the assumption that it must be true in the same way. So let's say that Stanley Jim will be Navajo period or Wayne Coleman will be African-American period. The cultural conversation has moved on. Not in the CRC. And this is part of what's going to be a problem for the affirming side. And part of the reason that I don't really think they've done enough confessional work. The traditionalists have an advantage in that they can much more easily sort of inherit a lot of confessional work and maybe adjust it with some confession. But the affirming side has a lot more work to do. And what's happening now in the culture is that things are moving so quickly with liberationism, with transhumanism and with Gnosticism. That basically says that there is no the relationship between the material substrate and the person on top is increasingly tenuous. And that I can be whatever it is I choose to be. And so what's part of what's interesting and you could see this in the Human Sexuality Report that said pretty much nothing about transgender. And it came up. There are only little hints of it that came up in the debates during Senate. This is looming. So again, in some ways, the Christian Form Church is fighting the battle of the beginning of the 2010s. But people of the Christian Form Church are looking over their shoulder and they're in their workplace and in the rest of their life, seeing the battles of the 2020s. And so the stories in this safe harbor are blurred. Now, this gentleman, I don't remember his name, gave quite a speech on the Gravaman issue on Thursday, which I'm not going to get into yet. That's something that's going to require a lot more thought and a lot more work. But the comfort and unity and doubling down on the safe harbor, again, is really present. There's an interesting way in which it's because hard requires justification. The psychology of that is really comforting because it comes with a degree of self-righteousness. In other words, on one hand, you confess and that sort of humiliating confession makes you small. Righteous indignation makes you feel powerful. And so you can go from that mood of confession right into righteous indignation and say, OK, we're going to level up. We're going to get really hard. We're going to. And now both sides do this. I was once in a committee where, you know, some of the clergy abuse stuff was coming up. And someone made an argument that what we really have to do is double down and make sure that this doesn't happen. And, you know, zero tolerance, bright lines, all of that. And I made the comment. OK, but it could be that a lot of the people who are doing this are, in fact, doing it because of past zero tolerance, bright lines. And maybe what you're going to need is a better combination of hard and soft. When you look at, for example, people struggling to gain sobriety or chastity, it's usually a combination of hard and soft. And in fact, authority is sort of developed through combinations of hard and soft. Some of the best teachers are both strict and loving and figuring out that dance of strict and loving is really powerful. And that's often what people need to to to to engage in a transformation beyond a really difficult foe. Part of the dynamic of the safe harbor, sort of the communal public safe harbor, is we can at a moment feel small and confess and have a hope of absolution and then well up and feel powerful and strong and full of righteous anger. And it's this little dance that we do. Now, I don't know how many of you have heard of Rene Girard, but he would be very much worth looking into if you've never heard of him because he developed this. He developed the idea that we actually develop our desires together. And one of the strong dynamics of this is the scapegoat dynamic. And groups are in fact united by this escape goat dynamic. And you see this in politics all the time, every time and we're getting near a new presidential election. Well, Joe Biden, you know, Joe Biden is uniting the Republicans and Donald Trump united the Democrats and the independents and, you know, got him, you know, got him out of office and scapegoating is a really important thing. And it can really bind a group together strongly and can really bring a coalition together. And it's in this safe harbor that we see the scapegoat dynamic. And this intensifies the entire thing. And I think makes this this conflict management even more difficult. We keep going back to it. We keep wanting to denounce the evildoers and we can all be together on this. We can go through this process of confession and then moral indignation. And you watch this on Wednesday. That's the note at which Wednesday left. But in the end, we over promise setting up tomorrow where we will repeat it again. To what degree can America make up for its sins of slavery? To what degree can generations today, those who have inherited, at least in some ways, and again, you've got to watch these identity inheritances because they're far more tricky. If, for example, let's say I had been abused as a child, physically abused by a man with a big black beard. And for that reason, I had a bias against men with big black beards. Would I be justified to go out and harm men with big black beards? I think we could understand why. But do all men with big black beards, are they responsible? But now suppose there's a community of big black beards. Suppose I'm a McCoy and the Hatfields have always tried to keep us down. And so any Hatfield that I find I'm going to, these are tremendously complex things that I'm talking about. And I don't want to just sort of put them in a low resolution and sort of reduce them that way. But this dynamic that you saw at the end of Thursday, okay, confession, we've all done wrong. Now we can all scapegoat and join in righteous indignation against and we'll promise to work harder. We promise to do better. We'll make every class hold every church accountable. We'll, we're setting up the dynamic for the next generation because it's not going to happen. And it doesn't mean that there isn't will there. Part of it is the nature of grievance. Part of it is the nature of bias. I wrote a thing on Voices that I didn't send about this. This, what we see happening at Synod, this, this liturgy of first confession, contrition, hope of absolution, and then turning up into scapegoat righteous indignation. We're doing it for other reasons than actually healing the wounds of the past. Partly because not all wounds of the past can be healed. And so in many ways what we're doing is setting up the next generation to major in grievance and we will keep cycling this. Meanwhile, the division beneath remains and I don't think it's going anywhere. A lot of people in the denomination have thought that time is on their side and the thesis that I've made and a number of videos is that time probably isn't. Even in the broader culture we're beginning to see movement on this. Ryan Burge is an outstanding researcher and he does a lot of research in the church and just recently he wrote this article. Approval for same-sex marriage has stopped increasing. One of the most interesting trends in public opinion research over the last 20 years is the issue of same-sex marriage. The General Social Survey first asked about it in 1988. 18% of respondents said that homosexual couples should have the right to marry one another. Look at that number, 18%. Think about how fast this developed. Speed isn't necessarily a good thing with something like this. They didn't ask about it until 2004 when the share in favor had more than doubled to 37%. Don't forget in 2008 California voted to keep same-sex marriage illegal. That number just kept racing upwards every subsequent year by 2014. A majority favored same-sex marriage, 57%. Now bear in mind that means 43% do not. And bear in mind again what I've made, the point that I've made in a lot of previous videos about the Christian-informed church getting more conservative. In 2018 it was 68%. Wow, that's a huge jump. In 12 years the share of the public who favored same-sex marriage rose 33%. That's an insanely fast public opinion. But check this out. The share in favor in 2021 was 64%. The share in favor of 2022, 67%. Yeah, that progress has stalled out. Maybe even reversed itself a bit. This post is about trying to sort out all this stuff. Who are the holdouts? And is it likely that there's just a ceiling in support for same-sex marriage? And again, I'll put the comment or I'll put the link to this in the notes. Another big issue you heard a lot about on Wednesday was pastoral care. And all of these motions we want, we need to have the denomination do pastoral care. The difference beneath the two sides means that pastoral care will look completely opposite. And you could hear that again and again. Pastoral care has become in our culture nearly synonymous with being nice. Now, part of this is because of the therapeutic industry. Counselors are supposed to be nice. But if you actually talk to counselors, you'll notice that, well, remember the hard and the soft? There's not a lot of softness for certain categories of people that we can all agree with. This scapegoat dynamic need to be marginalized. Pastoral care for the two groups of the Christian from church that are really in this unhappy marriage of opposites will not look the same way. At all. And if you listen carefully, you could hear that because one group says pastoral care looks like this. It looks like sort of a combination of hard and soft accountability towards the traditional stance that marriage is for heterosexual couples and chastity are for those who can't be in those relationships or don't want to be. The affirming camp will say that chastity means sex within marriage, regardless of gender. Go back to my video about the church and its sex license, because they dealt with that earlier in the synod with especially thinking about seniors and think about how the relationship between sex and marriage has changed as a society. Now it might be swinging back, but these things take time. So this hope that, well, we can just sort of have this dynamic of mutual confession swinging around to righteous indignation going from soft towards us. So God has soft moral improvement towards hard, normal improvement and then re marginalizing certain groups in order to achieve moral moral improvement. Pastoral care will look completely opposite. I think that's the last slide that I made. Yep. So, I'm obviously gonna have a lot more thoughts about Synod 2023, Thursday. I don't know that I've ever seen such a day at Synod in my adult memory. One of the good things about synods in the Christian Reformed Church is that there's usually another one. The conversation will go on another year. It may be that this year there'll be some churches leaving to the left and some leaving to the right. I don't know. My goal in this is that we have a better conversation. My goal in this is that we understand each other a little bit better. We understand the dynamics of this current moment and maybe we can have a better confessional conversation. We can manage this conflict better. And regardless of how and where people and churches go, all of these transitions can be more productive than they've often been in the past. At least to the degree that it's possible. I'll have to see if I can upload this video from here, otherwise it'll come out late. As always, leave a comment. Let me know if you found this helpful.