https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QjzqdQmOgdk

 Hi, this is Paul. I know at this point a lot of my regular viewers are no longer with us because why on earth would you sit and watch this stuff? A lot of people just looking at 15 or 20 minutes of Senate are like, why watch these things? Well, have you ever watched this movie, Mr. Smith Goes to Washington? If you've never seen it, you should watch it. Is this guy brought into the Senate and he's a true believer and he's there and he's going to shake up the system and he's going to bend the rules and he's not going to take no for an answer and he gives a speech and the whole world changes. If you've never seen Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, definitely see it. It's a great movie. And on the Senate floor this year, we very much had a Mr. Smith Goes to Washington moment and that's why I named this Reverend Vander Ploeg Goes to Synod because you don't see this often but it's a truly great moment in CRC Synod history. So I've shown this chart before to those who watch my channel to talk about CRC membership decline and there's an E missing in membership. Yes, I know. And this is something that we discuss on CRC Voices fairly often. David Snapper has really followed close look at the numbers. We talked about the departure of some conservative churches in the 1990s. And but the real issue as there's actually a presentation done by the guy who keeps careful statistics of the CRC. There are a lot of factors in terms of this and but this is a reality. And so there was an overture that came to Synod from Classus Southeast U.S. championed quite likely by Scott Vander Ploeg. Scott has been to Synod quite a few times the last few years. I should pull up his picture. Scott in fact does have a YouTube channel that he played around with a few years ago. He had nine subscribers and four videos. And I met Scott during a I met Scott during a an Inspire conference that was the first one that they had and I was a speaker there and Scott was a speaker there. And I had heard about the growth in his local church and I wanted to learn more about it. I wanted to learn what he was doing. I knew the pastor the pastor before him at that local church was a colleague here in the Central Valley and he was the church planter there and it was a you know it was a reasonably successful church plant. And then Scott went there and the church absolutely blew up. And Scott's method was a fairly standard simple personal discipleship program where you just start discipling people. And so he had this little video that he made. Every week I have the privilege of bringing God's word to his people the people whom God brings to the place where I serve as the pastor. And there is one thing that I am absolutely intentional about every week as I prepare those messages and that is that those messages are gospel sent. About three years ago I was introduced to the idea of gospel preaching using the outline of the basic gospel message. And let me tell you that has transformed me not only personally but also as a preacher. Couple of years ago I began to do a few things differently in the way that I preach. And one of those things was to orient my preaching much more towards gospel presentation. And that's been refreshing. I have greater clarity on what's at stake in my preaching now than I did in years past. I'm not just filling heads with knowledge. I'm moving hearts closer to Jesus Christ. After people became Christians in my church I found that I was rather like a dog chasing cars. I had no idea what to do when I caught one. When somebody came to Jesus I had no idea what to do next. Week in and week out you'd have this new Christian looking up at... You'll recognize this guy because he's at Synod. He gives a speech on the Synod floor too. So yeah, this basic solid discipleship program. But of course it's not just his discipleship program that was working. He's obviously also, and you'll see this with his speech at Synod, he's always also a great speaker. He's a very compelling pastor, very compelling evangelist. And so his classes wrote this overture that basically put out a bunch of the numbers that the Christian-informed church is facing. In this addendum, so here you have baptized children, evangelistic growth. You just have these numbers just falling since the 90s. And then you have classical statistics. And these classes which in the mid 90s were at this point 6,000, 7,000, a lot of them down 50%. Central California not as bad. I could look at the details of that. Hackensack had already tumbled. If you go back into the 1970s, I did this when I was a missionary on deputation in the 1990s in North Jersey. I was preaching and I wanted to talk about what had been happening with these numbers. And so actually if you compare Hackensack and Hudson, these are the classes that are in the New York, New Jersey area. They're a lot smaller than they were in the 1970s. A lot of this decline has happened even in some of the... Anyway, so numerical decline. And so they wrote an overture and the overture basically said, we need to get really serious about this and there needs to be accountability and we want to see things change. So as I mentioned, what happens at Synod is these overtures come into Synod, they go into the advisory committee and the advisory committee pretty much pre-choose them. And often what happens is things sort of get blunted. It's also true that generally speaking, what comes out of the advisory committee is what passes on the floor of Synod. Well every now and then something different happens and that's this story. I'm trying to think of which of these may be the shortest and I can't make up my mind so I'll just take it from the top. I said earlier that, we said earlier that the future is bright. Now he just said, I don't know which one will be shorter so I'll take it from the top. Be careful what you say. And yet we also face the reality of Overture 12 that both our ministry leaders and classes Southeast US brings up. And so you're going to hear in a moment our committee's response to that. But there's a lot of work to do. So these are our recommendations. One, that Synod in humility acknowledge as of grave importance the troubling trend of membership decline in the CRCNA, numerated in Overture 12, and our deep need to prioritize discipleship and evangelism by addressing individuals and communities holistically. Second, that Synod celebrate the work that Resonate and Thrive are already doing with churches and encourage Resonate and Thrive to collaborate with the churches so that the churches can grow better in discipleship and evangelism in their context. That Synod celebrate the work of church renewal and planting already underway and that Synod celebrate significant growth in ethnic minority congregations. Third, that Synod with hope urge the churches to make use of Resonate and Thrive resources, coaching opportunities and personnel and that Synod encourage the churches to give careful thought to the responses from Resonate and Thrive to Overture 12 listed there. Especially significant are six calls from Resonate to the churches with a reference. And finally, that Synod thank Classes Southeast for their passion in highlighting the trend of membership decline in the CRCNA and our deep need for church renewal and church planting. I wanted to add a note as well, a final note, that Resonate and Thrive together with Calvin Seminary are already working with the churches to address the concerns brought up in Overture 12. As a result we expect, and that was our last part, we expect that additional resources will be needed for church renewal and planting in North America and internationally. Just add a brief comment there that we wanted to add that note so that it wasn't lost in the grounds and we also wanted to make sure that, to clarify that resources are a lot more than just financial resources. We already talked about that with regard to changing church order and we're not suggesting any changes here, but we're not just talking money. And finally, five, that Synod consider this to be our response to Overture 12. And then one ground is listed in addition to the above rationale, that we sense a high value for contextual ministry within the CRCNA rather than a top-down approach. Okay, now let's be fair to the advisory committee that it's really easy to become alarmist to see, oh, the sky is falling and we've got to do something. And so we put a lot of dramatic words on pages. We move a whole bunch of things. A lot of what's under this as well, this isn't news to anyone. We have President Eight and we have Calvin Sam and, you know, this is, in fact, this has been a conversation that has been so slowly gaining momentum over the last few years. And it's one thing to get all hot and bothered at a meeting like Synod and then to leave it and to have nothing happen. And these kinds of challenges don't lack for proposed solutions. Okay, so, and you're going to hear some of those in this, from the Synod floor. What we really need to start doing is praying more. What we really need to start doing is preaching a certain way. What we really need to start doing is implementing this problem, this program. What we really need to start doing is doing more social welfare things and then the people come. What we really need to start doing is have better theological education. What we really need to start doing is put the sacraments foreign, you know, forefront. What we really need to start doing is strict accountability. So in other words, there's a whole realm. When you say, here's the problem, people rush forward and say, I have the solution. Okay, and so Synod usually says, well, there are a lot of people working on this and a lot of people trying a lot of different things. And so let's not sort of reinvent everything. There's already a lot of things going on. This obviously puts people saying this kind of message in an awkward position. What are you, are you against survival and evangelism and discipleship? No, but we have yada, yada, yada. And you'll hear that in this debate. But again, what happened at Synod doesn't happen very often, but this is why you have Synod. All right, thank you for that. Do you want to take those one at a time or do you want to take them as a whole? I want to take them as a whole, but we certainly, someone always can move to split. Okay, and that's just a little point where when you have a whole group of recommendations, you can take them as a whole, but if someone asks to split them up so you can deal with them in more depth, you can do that. That sort of keeps Synod working efficiently. So we'll take it as a whole unless someone wants to split the question. All you need, split the question. We're going to take them individually, like I just said. Our recommendation, starting with number one, recommendation number one is in front of us. Any questions or comments? This is the recommendation you can see right on the screen in front of you. Just number one at this point. Any conversation or questions? Seeing none, all in favor of recommendation one, say aye. Aye. Any opposed? All right, that carries. Brings us to recommendation two, already read for us. You can see it in front of you. Any questions? All in favor, say aye. Aye. Any opposed? All right, that carries. Number three. Again, you see it in front of you. All in favor, say aye. Aye. Any opposed? So as you can see, this is just sort of Synod's sleepy way of, we know, we know, we trust, things are okay, we'll move into the future. I didn't play the speech from the director, the new director of Resonate. That's the t-shirts that everyone is wearing. You can go back and watch that yourself. It was a great speech, I thought. It was a great speech. But here again, we trust the system. You know, we're not going to set our hair on fire. Just continue moving forward. All right. And number four. Recommendation number four. Any questions, comments? For those who are listening, that Synod thank Class of Southeast for their passion in highlighting the trend and membership decline in the CRCNA and our deep need for church renewal and church planting and talks again about Resonate Thrive Calvin Seminary. All in favor, say aye. Aye. Any opposed? And finally, recommendation five. And at this point, everybody's thinking, yeah, you know, this was an overture. We have a lot of overtures. We have a lot of things to do. We all know this is a problem. You know, stay the course. Four out of five. And then the last recommendation, five, is consider this our response to Overture 12. And basically by that point, you can lay the thing to rest. And this is where Reverend Vanderplug makes his appearance. Excuse us a minute. Okay, they have to caucus a little bit. There's a question about procedure. It doesn't really have much to do with this. The officers talk for a moment. They're just trying to get some other things in sequence down. Everybody takes a pause. Now it's Monday afternoon. They're just about to the break for dinnertime. They have to take the Synod photo. There's a bunch of things that are going on. The officers are continuing to meet here. No big deal. Wait, wait, wait. Wait, wait, wait. Okay. We just approved item four. And the reason we caucus for just a minute is we had an amendment or not an amendment, a motion that Scott wants to move before we get to item five. Oh, so Scott, while he's watching all this thing go on, he sits down at his computer and types out something which essentially is what the overture was because he probably wrote the overture too. And so he just maybe even just cut and paste it, just plop that in there. And then the executive is like, this, this, what you're trying to insert here is basically the overture and we just dealt with the overture. You can't do that. And Scott, the officers have a question for you and sort of depending on your answer, now or take our break and so forth to the officers, your motion looks a whole lot like the original overture. And you're just sort of asking us to go ahead and approve the main request of the overture, which is to have our general secretary do all this work. What's different about what you're asking them what the overture asked in the first place? But if you'll indulge me, then I'll at least give it a go. Give it a go. Test yourselves. There he is. As the officers in the body of Zenit. So just a few thoughts, if that's okay. First of all, very thankful for the work of the committee. I stopped and actually spoke to the advisory committee. I was grateful that they received me. And with regard to the first four things that were just passed, I wholeheartedly celebrate and hope, which is what we just said that we did together. I actually am among those who are celebrating with most joy, particularly with regard to work of resonate and its new director with regard to thrive and the work that it's done this last year. A lot of joy in the efforts that were made there. And I'm excited about some of what we're hearing with regard to the Kinseiho and other groups that are emerging in our denomination. I think that would be unwise for us to simply pass by this before dinner. It's at least my opinion that this is the most important matter before Senate this year. Did you hear that? Don't miss that. He's right. It's the most important matter before Senate this year. He's absolutely right. And if you've listened to my videos about all this drama about the same sex marriage stuff, well, this is a, this is a, an O the CRC is has COPD. It has heart disease. It has diabetes. And in some ways the same sex marriage thing is like COVID. Well, people like a same sex marriage is going to kill the denomination. No, actually it's the underlying comorbidities words we all learned during the pandemic. Depending on what you do, I'd like to just point out the numbers in less than 20 years. In fact, in 17 years, our membership's gone from 272,000 to 195. A third of our church is gone in 17 years. Our baptisms, if you look just in 2006, 20 years ago, we regularly celebrated about 3,800 baptisms. Today, it's half each year. Transfer growth, 2006, just 20 years ago, not quite 20 years ago, we welcomed 4,600 people by transfer. Today, 1,900, much less than half. Evangelism, 2006, we welcomed 3,400 people by evangelism. It's almost four for every church. Last year, we welcomed 800, less than one for every church. And having been part of the Christian Reformed Church for a long time, I know what we're good at, talking about things. And I know what we're not good at, taking action. Hey, I'm happy to say this in the chapel of Calvin University, that I am a Calvinist. But let me tell you something, I think actually Jesus anticipated us Calvinists when he gave the parable of the talents, you know, the parable of the talents. Landowner went away, there were five talents given to one, two talents to another, one to another. The five put theirs to work out one, five more. The two put theirs to work two more. But the one, I think, is the warning to Calvinists. They had a high view of God, they combined it with a low view of ourselves, and they used that as an excuse for spiritual laziness. Calvinists have a high view of God, we tend to have a low view of ourselves. I believe we're a five talent denomination. Our theology, our articulation of the gospel, the way we disciple people, we're five talent people. We should not just pause here with talk. We have to do something. We have to have a concrete plan. And I want to make sure I say this correctly, because I'm not proposing that the weight of that land on our denominational staff. The weight has to land on us, the churches. We need the help of our denominational staff to help coordinate us. This has to be a top priority. And that's why I'm urging us to take up my motion. Okay, thank you, Scott. I appreciate that. Here's what we're going to do. Scott has submitted a motion. We have it up here in writing. When we come back from our supper break, we have to make a decision, and I'll have to talk with my officers. One way to do that would be to vote down number five and introduce a substitute motion, which would be Scott's. The other way to do that would be to consider this up front. So we have to think that through a little bit, but we'll be coming back to that after supper. So think about what Scott said and just note that there will be a motion in some way or another perhaps coming to the floor if you agree with that motion. So what we're going to do now is... Okay, then they're going to go to supper. Now, those of you who want to change the world, those of you who want to move the Christianity reform church, Scott has given a master class in influence. He's been working on this for years. He is credible. He has an on the ground program. He has been sending overtures to Synod. This has been slow, steady pressure at Synod. Another overture this year. He met with the committee. He's not burning the house down. He's reaffirming all the good things he sees around him. I'm a loyal person. I'm faithful to the nomination, but this is what we need to do. And you might think, well, he just gave that lovely speech. That'll carry the day. Oh no, we are not done yet. So now they've had dinner, they've had worship, they've tied up a bunch of loose ends, and now it's back to this thing and it's Monday evening. Now one of the things that's important to know about Synod is it is a marathon. These people, since they have gotten in last Thursday, have been working. They have been putting in probably anywhere from 12 to 16 hour days, working, working, working, and they're only halfway through. And all of the big stuff is still ahead of them. And so they've kind of got that behind them. So there's this constant pressure to keep things moving. And that constant pressure to keep things moving says, you know, well, the real drama here is going to be about the fight over same sex marriage. To Global Missions Advisory Committee 5 and their report 5B, we had passed motions 1, 2, 3, and 4. And then Scott had sent us a motion that he wanted us to put in between 4 and 5. In Scott's judgment, this motion had something new and perhaps different than what the committee had already considered. I'm not sure I don't think he thought that. I think he's just saying, no, I'm not having it. I'm going to keep moving forward. You're not going to dodge this. We thought we could add it and then we could go to number five, which is to declare that this is our answer to Overture 12. So the officers talked about it. The committee reporter and chair talked about it. And we really think it's substantially the same as what the committee considered. And they're right. Scott spoke to the committee and so had his case to make there on behalf of his classes and the overture that was in front of the committee. And he did. The committee had all the other material to consider, including from some of our agencies and others in response to the overture. And they did. ...decided not to go that direction. So essentially this motion would be to do something different than our advisory committee decided to do. So I'm going to rule that you can't just insert this motion in the middle of... And Paul is absolutely right. ...a committee report. The only way to get to this motion, Scott, would be for us to vote down number five, which is if we can bring this report up, it's report five B, response to Overture 12. We already approved the first four and now we're on number five, that Senate consider this to be our response to Overture 12. If you wanted to consider Scott's motion, or you're at least interested in looking at Scott's motion, which again, the officers as well as the reporter and the committee chair themselves, judge is essentially... Now you wonder why Paul takes so much time repeating stuff. You really have to, because even though the delegates are all sitting there, there's just sort of a layer of resistance you have to get through. So it's, you got to be clear, you got to be clear, you got to repeat, you got to repeat, because you want to keep everybody on the same page. Asking for something that's different than what the committee is recommending. I guess the parliamentary way to put it would be, it's a substitute motion. It doesn't, you can't just drop it in with all the others. It really cancels out what the committee was intending. Hopefully parliamentary, that's all clear. If we act on number five and approve it, the matter is closed because that's our response to the Overture. If you want to hear Scott's amendment, not amendment, Scott's motion, you would have to vote this down and then I would give the floor to Scott and he could make his motion, which again, in the judgment of the officers, is essentially what the Overture was asking for in the first place. We clear what I'm saying. If you have a question for clarification, please ask it. We have two speakers. We have Scott Vanderplooge and Chad. If you have a question for clarification, please ask your questions for clarity. Don't argue the point. All right? I'm just asking a point of clarification. If we vote down five and then we vote, what happens to the response to the Overture? So if we vote that down. So he's saying if we vote down five, what happens to the response? The only reason for voting that down would be because you wanted to hear Scott's motion. And Scott's motion is basically the Overture that they've all read already. Is there any response to the Overture at that point? Just procedurally? Then we would have to adopt a response to the Overture. We'd have to have a new motion. We'd have to come back to that. Okay, thank you. So again, as I said, the reason he repeats so often, because he just said all this twice and then it just takes a while to get through because everybody's got papers and computers. We can't table five and go to Scott's thing? You could make a motion to table number five to go to Scott's. That would be another way to do it. You know, I'm just curious. I'm going to motion to table number five. Okay, this guy right here. Remember I said we'd see him? He's that guy right there five years ago. Okay. So that's where again, this master class on influence, know your disciples, set up this table, get the whole thing. And even when you get a no, maybe don't always take no for an answer. Point of order, just a moment, Dave. I'm fine with that. You know what? I wasn't in the queue. You are correct. But we haven't even put number five on the floor yet. I'm just trying to explain what we're trying to do so everyone's clear here. All right? If you vote number five, let's put number five on the floor. Would you do that please, Adrian? Yeah. So our committee moved that Senate consider this what we've already done before supper to be our response to Overture 12. All right. The motion is now officially on the floor before us. I have Chad and then Eric. Chad, Rukov and classes, Minn Kota. And in light of what David just suggested, I'm going to move that we table number five at this point because I think we do need to address more of what we talked about earlier before the break before we move on from this topic and look at this new motion. Okay. The motion on the floor is to table number five for the express purpose of considering the Overture at large. A reminder again that if you vote to table, then we would go to Scott's motion, which the committee itself has already ruled is something completely different than the committee decided. Keep that in mind. Motion to table is not debatable. If you vote yes, we go to another motion. If you vote no, we go back to motion five. So we're not voting on motion five. We're voting on the motion to table. Everyone clear? All in favor of tabling say aye. Opposed? Aye. Well, I'm not even going to tell you what I believe. I believe that we are going to need to vote electronically. You're going to vote yes or no. Please wait just a minute until I know we're ready for that vote. Someone give me a high sign when that's up. We're going to vote yes or no. Are we ready to do that, Lee? All right. You can vote yes or no, and the vote is to table. Vote yes to table number five to consider something else. Vote no if you want to consider number five. Yes or no? And then we wait. And then we wait. They've been having internet trouble. We wait. We wait. We wait. Please make sure all of you vote and do so as quickly as possible. Raise your hand if you're having internet issues. Oh my goodness. Friends, I warned you earlier. Committee five had all the excitement. Someone can't help you. Keep your hand up so people can see and get to you. I know there's a lot of you, but. And we wait. Technical problems. More waiting. Thank you, everyone. Lee is just telling me that they're frankly not exactly sure why the internet is so slow. It will eventually come up for you. Hopefully we can approve it through the night. But I'm looking at the numbers and we just hit a majority. I know some of you didn't get to record your votes, but we're already at a majority and the motion to table did not pass. Oh, Mr. Smith. He failed. The motion is defeated. The motion to table is defeated. Which means we're all done. Scott had his mission, failed another year. Means we are back to number five on our screens. That Senate considered this to be our response to Overture 12. That motion is on the floor and now the speaker queue is for those who wish to speak to number five. Eric. So now again, if you defeat number five, in other words, Scott's motion isn't dead. Five can be defeated, but it was already determined not to table it. And so all of the signs would say, all of the signs would say the advisory committee recommendation is going to pass. Classes Hamilton. I would request electronic voting on number five. We haven't even gotten there yet. You want an electric, you saw the way the last one went. I did. Yep. I'm sorry. I'm just giving you a hard time. Yes. I will always honor a request for an electronic vote. So we'll have an electronic vote when we get to this. I have Scott Vanderploeg and then Blake Campbell. No, we are not done yet. All right. Scott Vanderploeg, class of Southeast US. So I'm standing to speak against the motion to that Senate consider this to be our response to Overture 12. Yeah. A couple of thoughts. First, with regard to our times of worship, I think even in our last singing and reflection 46, we're speaking about what we really believe about God, that even in the darkest times, most difficult times, God's refuge and his strength. Therefore we will not fear. Undoubtedly, perhaps in this room, even I think this, I'm the person who's compiled all the statistics. And maybe there's an era where we say to ourselves, ah, this isn't something we're good at. You know, when it comes to evangelism, this might not be something that we think is one of our strengths. But even though it might not have been, I believe it can be. The CRC is a denomination that believes in the gospel. And we believe in the sovereignty of God, a God who can turn things around, a God who's on a mission. And by the way, if we're Christians, then we're on a mission. Because Jesus said, go and make disciples. I, at least, have a dream that the Christian Reformed Church will start being known for something. We've been in search of an identity for a long time. And I think we ought to be known for the gospel of Jesus Christ, the powerful gospel that can change lives. And we ought to be known as the church that carries out the Great Commission. We can do that better than anyone else, or as well as anyone else. So I think about God's command to Joshua. Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous. Do not be terrified. Don't be discouraged, for the Lord your God is with you wherever you go. We shouldn't look at what's happened to our denomination and say, well, let's have a good discussion about it. Let's lament that we've been in decline. But we can celebrate that some good things are happening and we can hope for a better future. It's time that we said to ourselves, no, we've got to come together. And the purpose of this overture was to say to all of us, it's time to make this a top priority. There's a lot of things that people came here to talk about. I came for this. It's time that we as a church embraced that we have a unique role to play in the Great Commission. And there are people in the world who need us to step up. And we've got to come together. We have to have a plan to make this a top priority. We have to embrace this together. And for that reason, I urge us to vote no on number five. Thank you, Scott. I have Blake from Ileana and then Timothy. This is a long shot at this point because you couldn't table number five. So now you're going to have to rally the troops to vote it down. But don't count that speech out. From Hudson and then Chad and we're come from Minn Kota. We have left Timothy Chad and John. The question has been called. Yes, sir. Your point of order or. I'm sorry, I couldn't hear you. OK, yeah, we'll trust you on that. So we have a fourth person. I've also been trying to get in the queue for like two minutes. My if you're trying to get into the queue, don't lie, but didn't have the opportunity. Raise your hand and we'll honor that. So I'm hearing it from Dave and raise your hand so I can we'll just manually get you on the list. So we have five people on the queue. The question has been called again. Remember, calling the question means discussion ends just those who are on the list get to speak and then we'll vote all in favor of calling the question. Say aye. Any opposed? Aye. That motion carries. Listen, how many people still want to talk about this? We have Timothy Chad, John, and then we'll catch the two who didn't get in the queue. Hudson, so I'm speaking against this motion. So I started church in New Jersey, and if it's my ability, it was my church to grow is based on my ability to bring in Dutch immigrants. Well, then my church is not going to grow. We can't grow our churches just by adding to people we already have here because that's not an option. And if we look to the canons of Dort, one of our great confessions, it does not let us off the hook about our evangelistic purposes. We cannot take this seriously enough or you will find that this denomination will no longer exist. Please take this seriously. Do you want this church 10 years, 20 years? Do you want to reach the lost with the gospel? Do you want to save people from condemnation? I believe we do. So I say take this seriously. Thank you. Chad, then John. Chad, you've heard this phrase before likely if we keep doing what we've been doing, we're going to keep getting what we've got. We have to take a serious look at our operations when we look at the numbers that have been presented to us here tonight. This must be our top priority, as was said before. It is neat and fascinating to hear about all of the different things that we've been doing as a denomination, and they are good things. But one thing as I look at what's been presented to us and all of these different reports, one glaring thing that I see missing is a strong emphasis on the proclamation of God's word. We are not encouraging our people to expository preaching anymore the way that we need to. And that is something if we want to read. Now remember what I said about here's the dilemma, everybody has a solution? Well, that can fragment, but that can also unite. Juvenate this denomination that we have got to do. So I don't even know what's in this motion that's coming, but I know it's better than what we've got. And we at least need to consider it. So I strongly encourage this body to vote down number five. That's not a slight on the committee that put this work together. It's just a realization that we have got a serious problem and have got to do something about it now. Thank you. Harold and then it's going to be Nate from Lake Erie. Nathan? Yes. We already spent hours and hours talking about this thing in our committee. We were talking about numbers. We were talking about everything that is changing now. The thing is that we are only thinking about the growing for Anglo people. It's not going to work. All of the traditional churches are declining. It's not only CFC. All of the churches are declining. But the thing is that something is changing in our denomination anyway. Some people is growing. Kevin said, for example, last week the million of the planters, half of them Latinos. 25% of the cities. Only 25% Anglos. Something is happening. But the thing is that if we have only the vision that we have to grow in only one way, we are going to lose the time. This is not the way. We need to see what is happening. There is something that is happening here. When I came for the first meeting to the COD six years ago, when I was reading the list of the names over there, I found beside to my name one mark, one asteroid beside to my name. And I said, oh my goodness, I'm special over here. Who is special in this list? Stanley Young. Oh, the Native American. Oh, he's special. Oh, the black people. Oh, no, we are not special. We are different. We have one mark beside to our names because we are different in this termination. Six years ago. Now we are changing. Something is happening. Now we have more inclusion. We are growing in diversity. We are growing understanding the different cultures. So we are not declining everything. We are declining in numbers. But probably we are growing in different ways. So we need to understand this. The Lord is doing something. And probably we are going against the things that the Lord is doing. So we need to see. You know, we already talk about this kind of thing. We already spent hours talking about this thing. But the thing is that can we have the opportunity to open the eyes and to see the world be different, for example? Are we ready to change? Are we ready to give more opportunity to other people, for example? Are we willing to work in our classes in different ways, for example? Yes. He said, if nothing changes, nothing changes. That's right. But something is changing. The thing is, are we ready for this? So that's the kind of thing. We are doing everything that we can do. Thank you, Harold. But at the same time, we need to know what the Lord is doing. And I think he's doing something very important for us. Thank you, Harold. Nathan and then David, and then we're going to vote. Nathan Grunewald, classes Lake Erie, also on Committee 5. And just wanted to say that this overture does portray the reality of the problem. And we all agree. And it's dire. And we need to do something. The challenge of the committee that we face, one of the challenges, is that the grounds or the recommendations laid out on page 390, compared to the gravity of the problem, wouldn't make a great deal of a dent in what needs to be done. So as I listen to my brother here, we need a massive vision. We have a problem. But the recommendations that we were given just don't feel big enough to make a dent in what we need to do. And so I want us to hear that the pain and the weight, but also say that unless we want to spend two days crafting a motion that does include the growing edge of the CRC, thinking about minority congregations and how to bring them in, and paint a vision that's much, much bigger, we cannot work with what's in this overture to match the gravity of the problem with where we need to go. So we need much, much more time. And for that reason, for now, I'm in favor of the motion at hand. Thanks. Thank you, Nathan. David. David Bosh, from the class of Thornapple Valley. I'm kind of surprised I'm doing this, and even more surprised why. I'm going to speak against the motion. And here's why. Oddly enough, I think that making a floor motion is roughly the worst way to get things done around here. Remember, this is the same guy who was in his video about his discipleship program. And it's weird that I would be interested in one, but bear with me for a second. I'm a millennial, and I've watched the majority of the friends that I grew up with in a Christian school turn away from Christ, some in such a hostile way that they will not speak to me anymore for the simple reason that I'm a minister of the word. There are others in this room who have had the same experience. When I hear a guy here, we're not allowed to lord it over people when we're pastors at bigger churches, so I'm going to speak up for somebody else. A lot of you know Scott over there. And years ago, he started training me personally in evangelism and discipleship. Ever since then, a lot of the people I couldn't find traction with, there is not a moment in my ministry anymore where I don't have somebody who's a new Christian or investigating it on my porch talking weekly. And I wouldn't have the tools to be able to do that. I mean, I have the will to do it. But the guy over there is the guy who had the insight and the skills and the gifts of God to actually deploy me. And I'm actually seeing these people come back to Christ, namely people I went to school with. Now, here's the deal. Our denomination on the whole is no good at evangelism. And so one of the only guys that I know who's actually knocking it out of the park into the impossible by helping a fool like me wants to stand up and make a motion thinking it'll help, I kind of want to listen. So it's probably not a very good ground. It might not be sufficient for you to listen to me, but there it is. Thank you, David. We have motion five in front of us. An electronic ballot was asked for, so we are going to vote yes or no on number five. Let Senate consider this to be our response to Overture 12. Yes means you're in favor of number five. Let Senate consider this to be our response to Overture 12. And the this refers to the four motions that we passed just before dinner. Yes or no? And we know there's going to be Internet issues. It's just slow. At least that was the word I got from Lee. Now there's no Internet, Lee. I'm asking you if you want us to continue to work on the problem or whether you'll accept a voice vote. I'm sorry, I didn't hear you. The electronic vote request, but in good faith that the electronic vote will start working in future motions. Yes, thank you for that. I hear you, Eric. It's just coming up, I'm hearing. So let's do the electronic vote because to Eric's point, we can't have another several days of this or at least we hope we won't. So it's up now. No, it's back down. So here's what we're going to do, folks. Bear with me here. Stay with me here. Clearly, we have a problem that we need to fix, but let's do a voice vote on that. Oh, the drama. Yes, and see if we get a. We are getting votes. Keep trying, folks. God, because it was so long, we're voting on number five. Yes or no on number five. Yes or no on number five. The motion was defeated. The motion was defeated. You don't want to table it. Apparently, you want to defeat it. Seems like very similar motion. So, Scott, deliver us. Deliver us, my friend. Come to the microphone. And if we have that motion from Scott, can we bring that up? Mr. Smith moment. Now, entertain that motion from Scott. And read it to us. We'll get it up on the screen as soon as we can. All right. Scott Manor, Blue Class of Southeast U.S. Thank you, Mr. President. So I move that Senate instruct the Office of General Secretary to work with the Council of Delegates, each agency, as well as churches and classes, to develop a comprehensive, unified strategy and plan to arrest and reverse the trend of decline and bring about a positive trend line of membership growth to our denomination. Second, that Senate instruct the Office of General Secretary to work with the Council of Delegates, each agency, as well as churches and classes, to continually update this plan and to report its progress regarding this plan to Senate annually until such time as Senate decides that this issue has been satisfactorily addressed. Thank you. Excellent. There we go. We have the motion that Scott just made. Is that supported? All right. Again, for those of us who get easily confused, which includes me, we've really been discussing this since just before dinner, right? We've had a considerable discussion on tabling and then to defeat. Now, we're finally to the motion that Scott wanted to make, which I assume was our intention. And it was substantially the overture that the advisory committee sort of said, tut, tut, tut, by voting down number five. So this motion is now on the floor. That Senate instruct the Office of General Secretary to work with the Council of Delegates, each agency, as well as the churches and the classes, to develop a comprehensive, unified strategy and plan to arrest and reverse the trend of decline and bring about a positive trend line of membership growth in the denomination. That Senate instruct the Office of General Secretary to work with the Council of Delegates, each agency, as well as churches and classes, to continually update this plan and to report its progress regarding this plan to Senate annually until such time as Senate decides that this issue has been satisfactorily addressed. That is the motion that is on the floor. I have a speaker's list that has been building here. We have Chad, Brandon, and Daniel. Chad from Minn Kota, Brandon from Granville, and then Daniel from Chicago. Please make your way to the mic when you think you're next up. We begin with Chad and then Brandon. Chad, Eric, from Minn Kota. I do appreciate the comments that were made earlier that this is a complex issue and hard to get our heads wrapped around, but on the other hand, this should not be that difficult because we do have churches in this denomination that are growing and that are healthy and are strong. And by and large, those are churches that have remained committed to the ordinary means of grace. Spend some time. Go to those churches. We just were at one this past Sunday in Sparta. It's booming there. Figure out what they're doing and bring it to the rest of us so we can replicate it. Thank you. Thank you, Chad. Remember to speak clearly for or against the motion. Thank you. Brandon, I'm going to speak in favor of the motion and hear you worry, David, thinking that your speech didn't convince anyone. I appreciate this emphasis on evangelism and mission. I do have reservations about membership being our metric for whether or not we're succeeding and that's simply because we live in a post-Christian and secular society that is going to become more post-Christian and more secular. That said, I would like to see us as a denomination focused on evangelism and mission. So I'm going to speak in favor of this and I think that this would be good work for us to pursue as a denomination going forward, just maybe with some different metrics other than membership. Thank you. I have Daniel from Chicago South and then Gabriel from Hackensack and then Harold from Classes, California. Dan Roeder from Chicago South, as I was already saying. I'm the son of missionaries. I'm the son of a zealous Southern Baptist mother who brought me up to evangelize everybody within sight and I'm going to speak against this motion. Over the course of my life and my ministry, everything really has been aimed at bringing people to Christ. The techniques have gone on and on and on. First you were to make friends with people. Then you were to have seeker services. Then you were to have to have crusades. Then it was going to be promise keepers on and on and on, technique after technique after technique. We heard here tonight that 12 years of Christian education just did not do it. Apparently not enough information. The name of Jesus wasn't spoken off enough. The gospel apparently wasn't presented that whole time. And so, you know, let's be careful about one more technique. What I oppose in this motion is the top-down approach we've been throwing every day at the office of the general secretary. Please figure out from the top what it's like. I like the idea, okay, if things are going well in Sparta, go over there. Take a group from your church there. This needs to be a congregational effort. This is the call of Jesus. It's the fundamental one. We don't need a huge study committee or to add something else to our brother over there. Thank you. Thank you. I have Gabriel from Hackensack, then Harold, and then Elizabeth from Grand Rapids East. Yeah, my name is Gabriel from Class of Hackensack. I really intended to go through all the synag without talking, but here I am. I think it's really about relationships, right? And it's about coming back to the word. I think a brother said it, just really digging deep in the word and understanding how God is calling us to disciple. That's through relationships. I just don't, this is okay. It just doesn't do it for me because of what the other brother said with regard to membership. I'm not calling people to membership. I'm calling them to discipleship, to come to know Christ. And I know we all know that. But I also want to say that, yes, the numbers are decreasing and there's reasons for that, but Jesus had his numbers decreased too. John 6, 6 is one of the saddest verses, I think, in the Bible, and it says this, after this many of his disciples turned back and no longer walked with him. And why? Because he spoke truth to them and he loved them with truth, and he was not afraid to walk with them and show them the true way of the kingdom. So we can't be afraid to do that and walk in grace and truth. Thank you very much. I have Harold, then Elizabeth, and then Drew from Classes Muskegon. Yes. In our meeting, Chris said something that is true. We can define as a denomination, we can design any kind of strategy. We can design any kind of things, but at the end, the responsibility is in the local church. And we can force the local church to do whatever we design. So at the end is the responsibility for every church. So I don't see any kind of difference between this proposal and the work that Resonate and the other agencies are doing now. So I don't see any kind of difference. Probably needs something else to do. Thank you, Harold. Elizabeth, and then Drew, and then William from Classes Ileana. Elizabeth VanderHagan, Classes East. I speak against this motion. Resonate and Thrive have resourced as well, and I believe that this happens from the local congregation, not from the top down. Thank you, Elizabeth. We have Drew now, and then William, and then Gay from Lake Superior. Thank you, Mr. President. Drew Sweetman, Classes Muskegon. I speak in favor of this motion because I believe that it provides us with a plan that goes across our entire denomination. It goes beyond our agencies, to our educational institutions, to our churches, and to our classes. And so I think it's a very widespread effort across the entire denomination, and I believe it also creates some accountability that is badly needed. Thank you, Drew. I have William, and then Gay, and then David from Thornapple. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Bill Sietzma from Classes Ileana. I request we call the question. So the question has just been called. We have, I think, 12 speakers in the queue. If you vote yes, it freezes it right there, and then we vote. If you vote no, we continue to add names to the queue. We're all clear by now what we're voting on. All those in favor of calling the question, say aye. Aye. Those opposed? Aye. All right. It's perfectly acceptable to withdraw your name from the queue as well. Gay, David, and then Tara from Hamilton. Hello. My name is Gay. I'm a classist Lake Superior from Bridgewood Church in Savage, Minnesota. I wandered in as a very broken woman to Bridgewood Church, and I heard this wonderful preacher. His name is Arland Kopendrayer. And I met Christ. I grew up Lutheran. I didn't get it. And then when you're confirmed, how old are you? Like 13, 14, 15? And I was boy crazy like you would not believe. There were so many cute boys in confirmation that I didn't pay attention. And so I just didn't get it. And then that day, as a very broken woman, to meet Jesus Christ in a CRC church and to hear teaching and the catechism, this is gorgeous. And so I want, I think of all the other broken women and men who are in your communities and who need to meet Christ. You know, Romans 5, 8, when my kids were little and my daughter Jenny, who is now 29, I sat down with her for Awanas and we were going over Romans 5, 8. While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Come on, Jenny, you can do it. You can do it, Jenny, come on. While we were yet sinners. She was four. We don't talk like that in our house, right? While we were yet sinners. She got her, took a deep breath and looked at me with those big blue eyes and she said, OK, Mommy, when we were wild sinners, Christ died for us. Some of us more than others, Jenny, some of us more than others. And I think of those people who so desperately need Jesus. And so I am in support. Thank you. Thank you very much. David, Kara, and then Derek from Classes Ontario, southwest. Hey, everybody, me again. I'd like to, not to be a surprise, I want to speak in favor of the motion and I'd like to answer a couple of things. I've heard this kind of talk from a lot of us before that it's not within our power to reverse the decline if that's what's to happen in our time. And Jeremiah ministered faithfully his whole life he didn't see a single convert. And it's true that if the Holy Spirit doesn't bring somebody to himself it's not going to happen. And it may well be that the plan for our time is a time of thinning out and purifying of the church or however you want to. It is entirely possible that no matter what we do we will still see the decline of the church in the west. And it's true that what's happening to us is happening to almost everybody, virtually everybody in the west as far as churches are concerned. No one would contend with that. And if the numbers as they stand currently continue, when my generation entered ministry most of us did so with clear eyes knowing that by the time that we retire there might not be much of a church left. And that the idea that we're getting paid full time for ministry in the beginning that we'd better invest well now because that might not be the case when we retire. All that is true and maybe there's nothing we can do about it. But the question is if we're to go down, do we want to go down with our full focus on seeing if there's anything that we could have done to serve our Lord better, to make ourselves more useful and perhaps see God do something through us. I think that's the best way to glorify him. And if we are to shrink, if we are to fall, fine, so be it. But I would really like to know that it was our full focus and our first priority and our full attention on it all the way down to the glory of God. And who knows, maybe when the Spirit shows up we might just be ready and catch a wave. But if we're not ready to articulate the Gospel in every way as best as we possibly can with every ounce of strength, then I just don't know how that happens. Thank you, David. Kara and then Derek and then Catherine, one of our ethnic advisors. I'm Kara DeHaan from Classes Hamilton. I'd like to speak against the motion. As was pointed out already, we have Resonate and Thrive. And for the last five years I've been privileged to sit on the Oversight Committee of the Resonate Global Mission. And I've got to hear three times a year of the ways they are growing the Church. We heard Kevin speak about the future being bright before dinner, and that is true. Resonate is on the ground growing Church plants, equipping leaders to be in witness with the communities around them. And so I want to point out that before dinner we accepted a recommendation that we take a look at what Resonate is doing. And so especially recommendation three was to look at six calls from Resonate in their response to the original overture from Classes Southeast. And I'll just highlight that they are looking for our commitment. They need us to do this in prayer. This is not just an agency. This is not a task force job. This is every single person job. So read this. Join in prayer. Be a Church willing to become a parent Church for Church plants. Participate in committing to identify, developing, and releasing missional leaders. Commit to extend hospitality and welcome to the people of diversity, to our neighbors, to Church plants and leaders. Be a congregation. Be part of a congregation who's willing to share the use of your building, who's even willing to start over as a Church plant as your congregation comes to an end. And also finally, join with Resonate in the hard work of searching hearts and inviting the Holy Spirit to search our lives. Don't let this urgent thing just fall to pieces as we continue with the work of sin. This work is important, but Resonate, as well as Thrive, are doing this work and need us to work alongside them. Thank you. Thanks, Kara. I have Derek and then Catherine and then Andrew from Arizona. Hi, Derek. Delia from Classes Ontario Southwest. I speak in favor of the motion, actually for a lot of similar reasons that my friend Kara pointed out, because I feel like especially the second half of it, it's trying to enhance the work of Resonate and Thrive and the things that are already going. I think if you are here this week, you probably care a lot about evangelism already, but as a pastor in the Church, I encounter a lot of people that would never come here who they don't even think about evangelism. Evangelism is like, outreach is like the extracurricular activity that you can choose to do in school to them. And I feel like if we get reports regularly put to our churches reminding them that Resonate is doing really good work and we need to do those things, that might just show them that it's not an extra thing. It is the mission. That's why we follow Jesus, disciples making disciples. So that's why I speak in favor of the motion. Thank you. Catherine and then Andrew and then Gerard from Arizona. I don't have voting power, but I do want to encourage everybody to consider this motion in front of us. And I'm not speaking against Resonate or Thrive, because in the end we may agree that Thrive and Resonate would be the best parties to take a lead in delivering this plan that we're going to develop. The reason why I want to speak is because I sense a lot of ambivalence and pessimism in the room. And I would like us to look at this from a strength-based approach. If you look at this chart, there is a lot of decline in membership. But then if you look at Florida, they have 2% increase. If you look at COAM that just joined CLC in 2014, they have 75% increase. And for some, a couple of other classes, there was only 1% or 2% decrease. Let's don't be so hard on ourselves. And I belong to a Toronto CLC classes, and there are some churches, including my own churches, that has a major decline. But I've also gone to other churches in the suburbs, like Bowmanville and Richmond Hill, et cetera. They were doing very well, and we can always learn from them. And let's don't just keep the learning within the classes. Let's do it across classes, across the continent. We don't have to go to our relatives, relatives like other churches and denominations to learn, although it's good to learn from them. We have a lot of things that we can learn from each other here, and this is why I want to speak up. Thank you. Thank you, Catherine. Andrew, Gerard, and then Jason from Wisconsin, and that's the list. Andy Littleton, Classes Arizona. My friend's name is Jared. Ever since childhood, he's been, you know, Gerard and stuff. So I'm just... But I don't need, I don't mean to speak against... Andy's been on the channel. You can find him. ...the motion. Actually, I really do appreciate the sense of urgency around these numbers and the general considerations. The one thing that does strike me slightly as off is that our metric is membership growth only. I think that there are certain situations in which doing exactly what we ought to do to be faithful to the gospel and the scripture will indeed cause people to not choose to be in our churches. I believe that in our context, we have seen, we've seen even this year, conversions of people from atheism and other religions, but at the same time, many people pass us by due to teaching the scriptures and the basics of the gospel. I think we need to look at faithfulness. I think we need to look at our willingness to sacrifice. We saw how many hands went up for how many of us need to be paid full-time. Sometimes to reach people, you need to be willing to let go of something that gives you comfort and wealth. We have to let go of not only the, you know, it's not just strategizing, it's not just resources. Sometimes we have to go to hard places and do difficult things. Sometimes we have to find new paths, and we need to raise up leaders that cannot get degrees, and we need to send them off because they are evangelizing and bring them in. Many of the most powerful evangelists in my context don't know how in the world to operate in a room like this. And so I just want to encourage that everything in this I believe we should be doing as far as focusing on growth and evangelism, but it is foolish to believe that to do it will only come through measuring membership growth. Thank you very much, Andy. Jared and then Jason. Hello. Jared McDaniel from Classes Arizona. You can call me whatever you want. I don't mind. So I will be honest with you. I'm hesitant to be up here after everyone has said what they have, but I was in this group, and one of the things that I shared is I'm an outsider here. I didn't grow up in the CRC. I've been a part of a church that joined three years ago. I didn't even grow up in the faith. And the thing is, you guys can talk all you want about strategy, but unless you were actually in bars, in gay clubs, in places where sinners are, it doesn't matter. Like, this church will die, this church will die if we are not willing to love people where they are and invite them into our homes despite their worldview. Like, I'm not even necessarily in favor of that. Now, Rod Hugen has also been on the channel, and these guys come from Arizona, and Rod, I've told the story of Rod a little bit. Rod, we grew up CRC. He's related to two of my seminary profs. His family moved to, told this story on my channel, his family moved to Arizona because his father had health issues, and then his father died when Rod was young. Rod's an enormous man. He worked in business for a while, felt a call to ministries, had ups and downs, was going to try to be a church planter. He was terrible at it. He was a terrible church planter. And so he just didn't have too much long on him. At that point, there was denominational funding for too long. And he just, he wanted to give all the money back, say, I'm a failed church planter. And his local rep said, well, just, that'd be such a pain to turn all this around. Just do something positive for the next while. Just go bless some people. And so he bumps up into a Baptist pastor, and they become friends, and they share their vision of what a church would be like. And so they found the village in Tucson, Arizona. And it's different from churches. Eventually when they got a building, because someone offered them like $300,000 of matching grants or something like that, so they were able to buy a building. And they filled it with used furniture. It's all full of comfy chairs and sofas, and they always have a communal meal. And Rod started that church by just inviting people to his house to have dinner, all kinds of people, and loving on them. And the village started, and then Rod and I were both on the whole missions board, and we would meet together in Grand Rapids. We were both, you know, heavily jet-lagged. And so we'd just drag ourselves to the meetings at 8 a.m. because that's when the Calvinists start their meetings. And then by, you know, by 10 o'clock at night, we're, you know, we're just starting to wake up. And so he and I would go out, and we'd go to Denny's, and we would just sit and talk, and we became close friends there. And he saw how we were sort of attracting young church planters to Sacramento to plant churches, and he wanted to do the same things with Tucson. It just didn't work at all. And so he just had to give up on that whole vision, and then sure, wouldn't you know, God brings Andy Littleton to them, and bit by bit by bit, and they have this wonderful, glowing, growing cluster of struggling churches in Tucson that just major on loving each other, and feeding each other, and doing life together. And that's the group that this guy comes out of. Favor of this measure or against this measure. I think it's fine. However, coming up with strategy is not going to, just merely coming up with strategy, is not going to proclaim Christ. I was 21 years old and studying Buddhism when Christ entered into my life. Like, it is the Holy Spirit working through people who are willing to engage with people who disagree with them and invest in them and invite them over for dinner. That is how we grow the church. And I just want to close with this, Jesus' own words. In John 13, by this all people will know that you are my disciples if you have love for one another. That's the work. So either pass this motion or don't pass this motion. But go home and love people and invite them into Christ, not merely with doctrine. Invite them into Christ with how you love them. Thank you, Jared. Now part of the reason I've sort of let this run, and I haven't interrupted it with commentary, is because, as many of you know on my channel, I have these randos conversations. And if you go to the conversations playlist, some of the people are a little bit famous and they've written books and such. Some of those people are Christian Reformed people, but most of those people are randos. They're people that have found me on the internet and they've come to me and they've wanted to have a conversation. And right here at Synod, these are the randos at Synod. You know, some of them are pastors and they have churches, yada, yada, yada. Some of them are elders and deacons or young adult representatives. Phlebas noticed that I didn't include the great young adult representative speech about the marriage thing. I should have got that. It was getting late last night. I had to end the video. But I just wanted to let the woman who got up and told her story, told her story about being boy crazy, this guy from Tucson, these are the randos at Synod. And, you know, are they for this motion? Are they against this motion? You know, okay. But God bless these randos. Jason, and then our general secretary will speak and we'll vote. Jason Rice, Classes Wisconsin. I speak in favor of this motion for all of the reasons that I've heard for and against the motion. Because of the words comprehensive and unified, a plan doesn't negate that this is a movement that happens at a local grassroots level. I would hope that our plan would be a plan of a local grassroots level. A plan doesn't mean that we're not encouraging our churches to go into the bars and the clubs to preach the gospel. I'm doing that with my congregation every single week, telling them to love sinners and call them to repentance and speak the truth. We have this idea that we have to either love them or speak the truth, and I have seen the opposite of that. I was a youth pastor for 11 years. Sixty percent of our youth group was unchurched kids. And I remember speaking to a group of kids who I had to discipline every week because they were locking kids in trunks and driving their cars, and I was having to suspend them from youth group for a week because of swearing and cussing at my leaders. And I said, why are you here? You could do this at the park and you wouldn't be yelled at every week. And they said, because you're speaking about things that nobody else is speaking about. And we love you, and you love us. It's not one or the other. And my desire is that a unified strategy would not be dumping it on the office of the general secretary, but would be creating something that would bubble up from the bottom up and would encourage us to bring the gospel into our communities. That's why I speak for this motion. Thank you, Jason. Go ahead, Zach. Yes, I'm Zachary King. I'm the general secretary, and my job is to do what Senate tells me to do so I don't speak against or for the motion. I do want to make a pastoral comment, however. As you're voting for this motion, this is me speaking to you in my role as a pastor to the churches. I hope that as you think about this that we'll all want to dig back into the core of this issue, and that is God changing us. And us coming to repentance and to continued growth and the love and knowledge of God and the love for hurting people. Because if we don't do that, I fear that many of our efforts will be walking in the same direction that we've walked for many years. And I know that God wants to renew us. I know that God wants to restore us. I know all of those things God wants to do. And I know that we as a people need to make space for that. So that is my pastoral comment. Thank you. Thank you very much. One of the things I really like about Zach King is he is a sort of a regular guy. I got to know him last year a little bit because I had dinner with him because I had interviewed him. And just like I do with my randos, it's like, I need to know a little something about you before we get up on stage and talk to one another. And I love this Senate moment because in some ways this is you're seeing here the heart of the church. And yes, there's emotion on the floor. And yes, people are going to be voting one way or another. But you know what? And if you listen to all the speeches, they all sort of want the same thing. And yeah, you put this idea out there and there's a hundred different ways to go about it. This week I'm preaching on 1 Corinthians 12 and 13 and 14, mostly 12 I think. If you know the passages, you know why. But you know, God has this body and he's got all these different critters in it. And he works in different ways. And they got their own ideas and they got their own thinking. And they do this or they do that. But God is working and his will will be done. Thank you so much, Zach. All right, the motion is in front of us. The question has been called so there's no more list. You can see it. We've had lots of discussion on this. I'm going to ask for a voice vote. All of you in favor of the motion in front of you say aye. Aye. Those opposed. Aye. That motion carries. Mr. Smith won. I'd like to suggest to the body that we really need now before we pray and we're going to do that in just a moment. We want to pray for the churches, our evangelism effort, for those who come to the faith, through our ministries. But to just wrap this up, I really need someone from the floor to make a motion that we declare this. That'd be one, two, three, four, and five. That motion that was defeated had to be because tabling it, that wasn't good enough. It had to be defeated. Now we have to bring that same motion back to the floor to wrap this up. Which this now becomes as our answer to the overture. It's moved and supported. Everyone clear on what we're doing? We just voted on it. It's really fun to think about the fact that most of the members of my church don't watch most of my videos. But some of them might watch this one. And when they see that guy behind the microphone, that Paul DeVries, they're going to remember that little boy that ran around the churchyard and lived in the parsonage. And this is just part of what God does. We can't redo a vote. You got to ask before we vote. Or are you challenging the chair? You don't think I heard it right? The way to do that is to challenge the chair. Because you're essentially saying I got it wrong, which is fine. The chair has been challenged. No, Mr. Smith might lose. So the chair has been challenged on his ruling on that vote. So what we will do now is we will vote yes to sustain the chair, vote no to go against the chair. So this is a debatable matter. So you can join the speaker queue if you would like. Which is open now. I know this gets confusing, but we are voting on the chair's activity. So yes is a sustain, no is a defeat. So I don't see any speakers in the queue. So we're going to vote on sustaining the chair. Is it a point order? Do you like to do an electronic vote? We can do an electronic vote. All right, are we ready? I'm going to go with all the problem they've had with the electronic vote. Back to this. Electronic vote. Richard says yes. So yes is with the chair. No is a right. No is saying. Is sustained. So he will, when he's done talking, take back this podium. Mr. Smith wins. So the chair is sustained. So Paul, can I just make a comment? This is Adrian. Pardon? I think this is still my committee report. Can I make a comment? Please. I know you've all forgotten about me. That's okay. That already was a comment. You can make another one too. I told our committee at the beginning of our time together, was that two weeks ago I think, that my job was to listen well and to try to represent what our committee did and then to go to the floor and continue to listen well. So I just, I've heard and appreciated and just we already said thank you to classes Southeast. We're about, I think, to declare this our response. I hope. Please do, folks. I don't want to be up here all night. But I just want to say, yeah, I would encourage all of us to listen well because we've got a big task ahead of us. And I want to end just by saying thank you to Scott for continuing to call our denomination to Discipleship and Mission. That's clearly a deep, deep priority for all of us in this room. And clearly we all have very strong feelings about how we do that. And so, yeah, one of the theologians I love says that we do not always please God, but our desire to please God pleases him. And so, yeah, thank you. And please, please do make motion five. Thank you very much. So the motion is that we consider this to be our response to Overture 12. So four motions we passed before dinner plus Scott's motion. All in favor say aye. Aye. Any opposed? All right. That motion carries. Excellent. There it is. There it is. So, yeah, dreams do come true. We'll see where it all goes. But this was certainly a moment to remember in this Synod.