https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=UpmNVaMX6SE

 This is Paul. As I've been mentioning for a number of months, I am a delegate to the Senate of the Christian Reformed Church, which is starting next week, Friday. I'm hoping while I'm at Synod to be able to do some video interviews with people and some conversations with people. Synod is a very busy time, and so there's not a lot of extra time left in the day, but there is a lot of processing that people have to do. Now, if you're a member of the Christian Reformed Church, or even if you're not a member of the Christian Reformed Church, but you're curious about this whole thing, you can actually watch Synod on YouTube, and it's on a 20-minute delay. Over the last several years, there have been another number of policies that have been laid down with respect to social media. A lot of these issues have in fact been around even before Twitter and Facebook and some of those platforms arose. I remember one Synod I was at where someone seemed to be giving a speech on the Synod floor that they were reading off an email that someone else sent them. At the Synod, there are repeated admonishments to keep the deliberation from the people in the room, but yet increasingly it seems that the electronic world continues to make its way into the Christian Reformed Church. So the convening session of Synod actually happened May 25, and there are a number of, there's actually two videos that you can watch. We convened on Zoom, and so you can find people on Zoom like this. There were rows and rows and rows of people on Zoom, and then there was the service that convened the Synod. And I'm also grateful that this time together in these proceedings that this is all done before the face of God. So worship is the context of everything that we do. Now this is the Synod President Pro Tem. What that means is every year there is actually a specific congregation that hosts Synod, even though Synod takes place this year, usually on a college campus. This year, most often the college campus is Calvin University, which it is this year. Its college campuses work out well. You have dormitories, you have dining halls, and so a lot of the physical things tend to work out well. This is Dirk, Reverend Dirk Dirk Van Eck or Dick Van Eck. He's a pastor of a church planter in the Grand Rapids area, and his church is the church that is in a sense hosting it. Now some of you, especially on my channel, will pay attention to things like, well here you've got a pastor, he's not wearing vestments, he's not wearing a collar. He's got, you know, there's stage lighting behind him. The convening worship service was done with guitars and mics, and so very much in sort of an evangelical seeker atmosphere. Part of what's been happening with the Christian Reformed Church over the last number of decades is that it's been undergoing a process of assimilation, and the assimilation tends to be towards larger elements in the North American context. Some Christian Reformed Churches have been moving fairly evangelical, and so you'll see things like stage, stage lighting, informal dress, guitars, worship leaders, this kind of thing. Some Christian Reformed Churches, especially church plants in the 80s and 90s, and particularly in the Midwest, not so much on the coast, I'll talk about church planting on the coast a little bit more, but in the Midwest they tended to follow the seeker methodology, the seeker methodology pioneered by Bill Hybels, who incidentally grew up in the Christian Reformed Church in Kalamazoo, Michigan, and then of course planted Willow Creek Community Church in the greater Chicago area. So if some of you take a peek at this, you'll notice that this is fairly standard evangelical type liturgy, and they'll sing the songs, you'll have a message by the pastor, and he gives an opening message to Synod. I won't make any comments on his message, but it was in many ways an appeal for unity, and that was how Synod was convened. Part of what's happening in Synod now is that there are increasingly, what to call them, political groups, advocacy groups, that are intent on shaping and taking the denomination in one direction or the other, and so right now there are more progressive groups like All One Body. There was a project called the Hesed Project, I'll put all the links down in the notes. Now a lot of these are revolving around the Human Sexuality Report that the Christian Reformed Church is going to be taking up at Synod, and so All One Body and the Hesed Group both want to see the denomination go in a more progressive direction. Another group called the Abide Project, I've spoken about these before, want the Christian Reformed Church to go in a conservative direction. This afternoon I discovered, interestingly enough, a couple of pastors on the Abide Project YouTube channel did sort of what I was thinking about doing. They did their own little commentary on the opening parts of Synod, and so I thought, I was thinking about doing this myself, really haven't gotten around to it. I had mixed feelings about whether or not this really fits my channel, but given all the Synod stuff that we'll be doing, I thought, well let's take a look at this. Now pay attention to the aesthetics. So you'll notice right away of course that the convening church for Synod is a church plant, and so you have all of the aesthetics of that type of church. Now these are all Christian Reformed Churches of course. These two pastors out of classes Zeeland decided to present themselves in this way, which is interesting. And so you've got a flannel button-down, untucked shirt, and the other pastor is wearing khakis. Both of these individuals are fairly well known as conservatives, in the denomination, and I thought their take on the opening of Synod was quite interesting. So I thought since I always do commentaries, let's do a commentary on this one. One of the many, or some of the many with the Abide Project. Tonight we're coming to you from Coopersville CRC. Now it's really helpful to note that architecture, aesthetics, all of these things matter. So what you have here is what many people who grew up CRC, or many people who have grown up evangelical, let's say, in the the pre-seeker days would be very familiar with. You have pews, you have an organ in the background, you have a cross, you have a pulpit in the center. This is a very typical traditional Christian Reformed Church sanctuary. You'll notice that, well, there's some banners up. Banners sort of came into the Christian Reformed Church sort of in the 70s and 80s, and they're sort of here to stay to dress it up. This particular congregation has a flag in the front, which is interesting. So you've got the American flag on one side and the Christian flag on the other side. And again, the pastors aren't wearing vestments or anything like that, or clerical collars. When we are instructed to dress, how to dress for Senate, it's business casual. And that tells you something about the culture and where the Christian Reformed Church is at. And so the Senate meeting is sort of the business meeting of the church. And I remember going to these meetings in the 70s when my father and grandfather were delegates and they were held in the Fine Arts Center at Calvin College, then University Now. But it's just very interesting noting the different aesthetics in these groups. So let's listen to these guys a little bit. A little bit after Senate just wrapped up their activities for the night, but we're not down at Calvin, Tyler. We are not at Calvin because they actually wrapped them up online. It was the Zoom part of it, the first part of it that the COD had worked with the executive director on. They won't be meeting in person, what, about another week and a half or a week or so on June 9, June 10. So yeah, we got over two weeks before their meeting in person. But they dealt with, especially tonight, besides the opening, kind of an opening sort of worship and opportunity to hear a message. The big thing was the election of office bearers, or excuse me, of officers for the four different officers in the Senate. Now the way this goes, and you can actually find the video where this happened, so I'll put a link below this. If you go to the CRCNA, the Christianity Forum Church in North America webpage, you can see the May 25 convening and then the May 25 part two. And so actually the convening worship service was taped because the president pro tem was doing this from his church offices and people had to be instructed in how to, we did a roll call, people had to be instructed into how to do the voting. So it was very Zoomish and very, very much reminiscent of a lot of COVID. Now the way this works is that there are, there's an executive team elected by the Senate itself to help run the Senate. Now in our denomination, each Senate, each meeting of Senate in some ways stands on its own. Okay. And there is a council of delegates that is supposed to deal with the business between Senates, but each Senate sort of stands on its own. And so that each particular Senate will elect officers to preside over that Senate. It was very interesting the way the, the way the elections went. Let's see if I can find that parts of the video where this went. So in fact, so what happens is that, especially this year, it's a little bit different. Usually we elect the officers the first day of Senate. What they're trying to do here with Zoom is actually a huge improvement over that by trying to elect officers before Senate, because it's, especially if you're an officer, it's sort of nice to be elected before you get to Senate, just for some practical reasons. You know, a lot, some of the previous Senates I was at, there were a couple of pastors, actually classmates of mine who were elected at Senate, but they live in Western Michigan. So they can of course have their whole closet there. If you're coming from a place like California, you sort of prepare for Senate and prepare for Senate in a variety of ways, depending on what your role at Senate is going to be. The officers of Senate, the most important officer of Senate is the president, not because these officers necessarily have a lot of power or influence over Senate. Their basic job is to make sure that the proceedings are run correctly and that Senate can get done in time. There's a president, a vice president, a first recorder, and a second recorder. The recorder positions don't have to do a whole lot anymore, partly because there's denominational staff that works behind the scenes to make sure that the minutes are all taken. The recorders generally take the roll call and administer the votes. And now this is all done electronically and it's all done really via Google Docs these days. So we were doing all this on Zoom and it was interesting because we ran through the election once and elected a president, Jose Reyes, and then basically they discovered that they had made a mistake so we had to run it again. Now Jose Reyes I think was very much a shoo-in candidate to win because before Senate they released a document showing the amount of experience that all the different delegates that have allowed their names to stand for office have. And Jose Reyes is the only delegate to Senate this year that had experience on the executive. And in fact, Jose Reyes from Clases, Arizona has been a delegate to Senate many, many, many times and he's by far got the most synodical experience of any of the other delegates and so in many ways he was a natural choice for president. But what happened was quite interesting however. So let's just play some of this. Just jump right back in to the conversation after being away for a little while here. Thank you everybody for your extended patience. In full transparency in the last round we cannot confirm that it was done 100% accurately. Oops it's like we're in Florida all over again. Actually the second. So we are going to revote with a new slate for president. Again apologies but we want to make sure that it's completely that this president and V. Can I is this and can you give us any information about what happened? Suddenly there's drama. There's so of course you know it's fixed it's rigged. Well I would have to refer to technical to be 100% accurate. Okay. But what I do know is what I'm told is since we can't confirm that 100% of the votes were counted as they should be as they should be and then correct I have with as much integrity as we can. So it all takes time. We three. Okay so then we did voting. Should have been displayed in the first time around are in alphabetical order Derek Bucamah, Jose Reyes and Paul VanderKlay. Okay so those are the top three. So usually what you do is you get the list of names and then you before they even say the names they just say somebody has certain number of votes another person has another certain number of votes another person has another certain number of votes. Now these now Jose and I were both in the running but Derek Bucamah was not in the running the first time so obviously there was an error or something different so then in the second round of vote Derek Bucamah got was included in the top three with Jose and myself. And you're going to let us know when it's time to start voting. You took ready it's coming in. And then when it was all said and done so this is this is there's this is Derek Bucamah when it was all said and done Jose Reyes was again elected to president and then it was vice president and and then it was myself and well there's a oh there's there's one of my other delegates for my classes he was just up that's Colin Watson. So then Derek was elected to vice president and then you had election for the first recorder and that was another pastor from classes Zealand and let's jump over to their commentary coming up so yep yep that was what the focus of and was the majority of the evening although they spent a good amount of time together in prayer too tonight so they did they did do that. So got started with the first recorder got started with the speaker or president pro tem. Yep is it president pro tem. I'm a dirt vernack pastor of encounter church in the Grand Rapids area and he gave a message really just talking about I know getting along the importance of that he talked about his kids and the importance of them in the back seat when they're traveling south about them getting along and people always remember the sermon illustrations more than anything else in the sermon even the pastors. So he kind of just extrapolate that and said it's a denomination we're kind of like almost all in a car together and we're squabbling right now and he said sometimes we don't get along and sometimes we do but then he brought it to Jesus's high priestly prayer which a lot of times I've been to send in a number of different times it's a fairly typical way that a lot of these kind of start out talking about the importance of unity and so I know he went to John chapter 17 especially highlighted verse 21 right right but the problem with highlighting 21 and I mean we've heard this call several times but as we form Christians we know the importance of context and if you go back just a couple of verses to verse 17 of John chapter. So I did find this interesting they're critiquing the president pro tem's convening message for synod and again these are from the the abide group so they're from one of the conservative they're from the probably this year the predominant conservative social media presence there's classes minn kota classes is sort of a regional body they're sort of the conservative classes in the denomination that's that's been gathering other conservative churches even ones that aren't geographical to them and so if there's a split to the right after the after synod a lot some people expect that classes minn kota might be a group that sort of splits off from the denomination. Chapter 17 it talks about sanctify them in the truth your word is truth before we can come together in unity as one we know we have to be founded on that one truth we have to be solidly planted on God's word. This sort of reminds me of the after you get the um the state of the union address the other party gets to have a rebuttal so it's it's just fascinating to me the way how and of course I'm fully a part of this how communications and social media are impacting the church now it's interesting that the abide channel has 93 subs and as of today this video has over a thousand which is you know a pretty good size video for a small channel and and probably because there are many people in the denomination that are looking for synod news synod news via youtube and so that is the challenge and I mean that is what is on the agenda for synod this year that's big time on the agenda so um I know he mentioned you know Jesus at the time was praying for synod 2022 really wanting us to be one but again you have to read it in the context as reformed Christians we really understand that and um otherwise in many ways if you just take 21 out of context we could one of the interesting things to watch in this senate is going to be the different ways that reformed is used because what I find is that sort of both wings of the denomination use the word in different ways um ever since the young wrestlers and reformed movement the that's sort of the context in which okay we're reformed sort of you know John Piper um we're we're reformed in that way not reformed Baptist of course but we're reformed in that way progressives will tend to use the word much more in an always reforming sort of way so it's very interesting how both sides will sort of take on that word and for I would say that this group is very much in the confessionalist camp of the denomination so they'll use that word very much in a confessional context whereas the progressives will tend to use the word in a let's say an exceptional context and say well why aren't we one with the Roman Catholics for instance so if this is exactly what Jesus meant by that without any context of the truth of we are woefully lacking in many ways of kind of living that out just on a day-to-day level and so but we have some serious disagreements with Roman Catholics for instance right I love their fried food and fish and a friday night so I could go along with that but no there are but it's very difficult to do to do of a church with them in terms of the mission the work of the church and in many ways it's some of these same kind of issues um even though we have christian reform under the name we have a greater understanding and clarity that uh we we very likely are not on the same mission in fact I don't think we are on the same mission and this synod will really help to chart us and I'm not sure if he's saying they're not on the same mission with the Roman Catholics or not on the same mission with people on the other side of the human sexuality report forward right which which Christian reform church will we be and that's why the officers the selection of officers the election of them can be very important because it helps to set the pace about where the delegates initially what are they thinking what kind of direction do you um would they like synod to go in and and I I agree with him on this point because and and we'll walk through the election of all four delegates all four are conservative and the way the election sort of went especially when we get to the election of clerk I think it's enormously telling where synod is going to go and I don't I think the progressives are not going to like it at all that's pretty clearly the way this is going so far you never know that's why you have the synod but I was really encouraged by that I don't know about you I'm guessing you were yeah yeah we were thankful for I mean uh we ran into some technical difficulties you get 150 170 uh 190 whatever the amount delegates trying to get them online and not everybody does that real regularly and uh you know technology I was wrestling with my laptop this morning and so I understand uh those kind of challenges so they had some challenges getting going and we had a vote and the president elected and then we had to go back and make sure we did it right and do it again but an error was made and they admitted that early on that's why they had to go back and revote on the president because they left off one of the top three vote getters who they selected we didn't have to storm the denominational building from eventually to vote to be the president and so they eventually went back um and said okay well these are actually the top three that were supposed to be there was uh and I wrote I wrote these down to Jose Reyes who's the only officer or former officer of synod he's the only one who's been an officer right to some extent it makes sense that he'd be president I mean he's the one but that's gave it away actually boy then he got elected president so so um Paul Vanerclay and Derek Yukima were were the rounded out the top three right but but um and knowing I know Derek I know Jose and I know I know of Paul but I know those two personally and I know both of those are are very south orthodox um uh traditional on uh the issue of human sexuality and marriage and those and so you can you can sense the politics now synod is a political body it's also an ecclesiastical body and so when I say politics here I obviously don't mean secular politics but there there's a sense of using the machinery to pursue an outcome and I don't think that's illegitimate but part of what struck me during the votes was a fair amount of intentionality those were the two by far the two top vote getters yeah and and it's it's very interesting that um now if you go to the abide project and you go to events after synod there's an upcoming event let's see where is it it so abide has a convention of confessional christian reform churches remember I said that for a long time I've sort of called this grouping sort of a confessional faction so they're they're taking on that word um in bold letters for almost a decade now I've been asking that the christian reform church have a confessional conversation um um not a lot of takers on it um and so here we are but at oarland park crc and derek bukama is one of the speakers of that he's the pastor of oarland park chad steenwike um you'll you'll see these names um you'll see these names come up again and again so in many ways the confessionalists or the conservatives are quite organized and I think they were quite organized in voting and the truth is that if you if you have a voting block that is 30 or 40 percent of synod you can probably get your way you've got probably about 25 percent of people at synod so synod is made up of a pastor an elder a deacon and then a wild card which can be pastor elder or deacon sometimes a commissioned pastor there'll be a fair number of retired pastors sprinkled around in there but at any given synod 20 to 25 percent of the delegates are probably not terribly engaged in the politics of the church and as I've noted before a survey in 2016 of crc clergy asking about human sexuality found that 14 percent of the denomination's clergy were in favor of the church adopting a more affirming posture towards same-sex marriage so even if that number has expanded to 16 18 20 percent that means that 80 percent of the denomination at least doesn't want to change the official position and or more and more conservative after that by and large the christian forum church is a fairly conservative denomination so if you have a self-conscious faction that has my guess based on the voting for officers and I followed it quite closely my guess is that that voting faction is probably about 40 percent if you have a solid 40 percent and then if you can garner another 20 percent of let's say people who aren't politically connected you're probably going to win just about everything and that could very well be what happens at this synod um and they decided between the two of them and jose rias came out on top with that then they went to the vice president and uh and again that went to the top two it was paul vanderclay and derek bukama right and uh and derek ended up as the vice president again so and i don't know jose personally i know he's been very involved and outspoken um on for orthodoxy and yes yes on the concejo again the language that they're using i find i find interesting and i'm not i'm not critiquing or criticizing it's just the word selection is interesting oh latino yeah and god is one of the leaders of that the hispanic churches and the denomination come out very strongly and powerfully um for the human sexuality report and all of its recommendations yep and and this is a tension that i've spoken to many times it was true in the reformed church of america and it's certainly true in the christian reformed church the progressives have generally been pushing for more ethnic diversity the irony of their pushing for ethnic diversity is that generally speaking the groups coming into the denomination not from let's say historically dutch american or dutch canadian crc communities african american hispanic asian american they're almost all by and large at least as conservative as the some of the most conservative crc groups confessionally they might have a little bit more flexibility on certain things but in terms of an issue like human sexuality this is what happened in the rca and what has sort of you know bro is breaking the rca up which is that it was the ethnic it was a lot of the ethnic clergy that finally said to the crc or the rca hierarchy unless you do something about the basically the mainline rca east we're done we're out of here and and so this is you know this is a lot of the dynamics that goes into play so in other words the more ethnically diverse the denomination gets probably the more conservative it will get on a number of these traditional issues um and in fact even saying that it reminds me that the korean council just i think just this week came out with a statement of representing the korean churches which are a sizable number of churches in the denomination also saying essentially so the korean churches are about 10 percent of the crc a lot in california and and some on the east coast some of the places where koreans have settled in the united states same thing that they wholeheartedly come behind the human sexuality report and in fact unequivocally they use that word unequivocally support all the recommendations okay and so now we have from the hispanic church community we have from the korean church community and also from classes red mesa so from some of the native voices at least classes red mesa is the is a community of native americans mostly navajo in the desert southwest there's there's one classes of of navajo churches in the united states have spoken out very strongly on this as well very very same very similar right on that so yep so yeah but i know jose going back we actually went to seminary together for a couple years and worked with him and it's another point that christian forum church is a fairly small denomination and many of our relationships are face to face especially because still the majority of crc clergy go through calvin seminary i'll see a good number of my own classmates there so um yeah a lot of these relationships are face to face people are known and they're known sort of within their own their own factions and interacted with him at synod's but uh but i think you know derek right i know i know derek i don't know i've never met haven't had the privilege of meeting jose yet but i've met derek uh derek actually was interning at my home church on his first summer internship uh in 2010 uh the that summer oh this is interesting we've got a zip over to this this is the president of your guys this is from march 20 and and this is this is jose and he's jose rias westminster seminary california so we went to he didn't he probably did a if you go to a different seminary than this than calvin seminary uh most often you'll wind up going another year to calvin seminary to pick up crc church history and in many ways to get to know the denomination and jose i'll say rias westminster seminary california mdiv serves by vocational pastor at valley ridge community church in soroco texas also serves the stated clerk of classes arizona has been delegated to send it multiple times a lot of times in a small class that's not uncommon you'll find people that like to go to send it and are available to go to senate and senate actually depends on people going to repeatedly because it's a little bit of a different process and so a little bio of him here and so he he has also had a a presence here on the abide the abide group former my father had a massive stroke uh ended up in the hospital right away and it was derek who was in the office when i had to go and talk about uh removing life support from my father and so yeah i was thankful to see derek's name up there and know he's served well and know the integrity that that he has as well as his uh pastoral heart that he's had right from seminary so it's very very thankful to see him there i mean very solid uh a pastoral heart i know one of the big things he's really labored on chicagoland where he pastors is uh is trying to bridge some of the divide between different racial congregations and especially in the black community has really worked and uh swap pulpits and so it's really led in terms of by example of how this can look like as brothers and sisters in christ um being able to do some common mission together even we disagree on some other things but on the course when we have the core correct we have a high view of scripture when we love jesus christ want others to come to a saving a lot of things you can do yeah yeah there is but then we also had the first and second clerk right you moved on to the clerk and that was also very exciting that was interesting to watch uh that got narrowed down to two on the first clerk and uh we had a little face-off between a couple of classes classes uh zealand which were very partial towards we are because we are both from classes here now that's also interesting because zealand is a community in western michigan um i think historically had been so the dutch settled in western michigan um in the middle of the 19th century my father's side went to western michigan because immigrants tend to clump a lot of dairy communities a lot of farming communities so classes zealand will be one of the more conservative classes in the denomination classes grand rapids east not too far away one of the more progressive classes in the denomination classes grand rapids east is a um is the classes that is sort of the center of attention because neil and avenue which is the church that has announced to the denomination that they have ordained a woman who is um i imagine she identifies as a lesbian she has married another woman and they have ordained her as deacon she had been a deacon prior previously when she was single i believe and that's of course at the center not only of the controversy not only the human sexuality report isn't the only controversy that's sort of the other pole of that controversy so that gives you a little orientation of classes zealand and classes grand rapids east classes zealand pastors and so we know very well our brother erin freesman reverend erin freesman who was one of the two names as well as rebecca jordan haze from classes grand rapids east grand rapids east and so yeah so it's kind of boy if you want two different kind of visions of where the denomination want to go yeah classes zealand versus uh classes grand rapids east in terms of vision very different visions and and there was between these two officers that sin it had a very clear choice right and which direction did they choose well they went with erin they went with zealand okay i mean it makes sense i understand okay yeah so that's right so but we know erin i knew something was going on when erin was elected because after i saw what happened with the previous vote i was texting some of my um buddies coming from some of my buddies in my own classes and we were i was watching this i was participating it and um and and then i i knew that once uh derrick had been elected vice president i looked at the list of candidates for first for first um for first recorder and i said erin's gonna win that and sure enough now part of what's going on here is again there's tension between the elements in the denomination so this is calvin christian reform church in classes grand rapids east grand rapids michigan this is a historic church in the southeast corner of grand rapids which is one of which is really in many ways the hub of the denomination um now it's interesting that you'll see in terms of the aesthetics it would be similar to say what you'll find in in classes zealand it's different from what you'll see here and what you'll see here in a church plant and and this in some ways sort of gives you a taste of the establishment in the christian reform church now i want to nuance that a little bit because another element of the establishment is actually my former church in grand rapids madison square and i had dave bieland on the channel and we talked about his story and his history and dave bieland has been on the abide channel dave bieland was one of the um pastors a bit outside of classes grand rapids east he was not in favor of some of the progressive statements and reports that and postures that classes grand rapids east has adopted so madison square is also in grand rapids east and if you look at madison square you'll get much more the sense of it's got a little bit more seeker flavor madison square had been a chapel i talked about some of those those issues with um with dave bieland and some of that history but that's much more of let's say an inner city congregation it's a little hard to peg because they've been big promoters of ethnic diversity they've been big promoters of women in ministry but at least dave bieland held sort of a side b line which is the which is really kind of the the official position of the christian reform church and madison square has three campuses there are multi-site church in grand rapids they went from being a little chapel to being a um you know one of the one of the larger churches and more most influential churches in grand rapids and there are a number of establishment um individuals that have high status positions in the denominational bureaucracy who worship at madison square and so in some ways these are sort of my tribe but you can just just if you look at the website you can learn a lot about a church by its website if you look at the website it has a very different feel from calvin crc that's in the same classes now if you go to madison square let's see if we can find there about usually you go to about and you look at the staff and leadership page and then you can see okay see they've got they've got um different they've got some women ministers some men ministers so pretty pretty standard for classes grand rapids east now if you go to where this comes into play let's see about then you go to staff and you have rebecca jordan highs who was up for first clerk now the really interesting election actually happened for second clerk and he's written quite a bit in the banner that's very insightful pieces as well as other places he's uh he's taught he's i don't know if he's an adjunct but he's taught classes at calvin university religion classes and so um so he's again very thoughtful pastoral heart so we'll do an amazing job yeah he will yeah and now again the recorders don't do a lot the recorders the the executive has some say in terms of the agenda for the meeting trying to get everything done the way senate works is that everything comes into these advisory committees and whereas you can watch the plenary sessions in public the advisory committee meetings um are closed and so when senate starts everyone's a little surprised because nothing happens the first few days well actually a lot is happening because i'll show you the books because we haven't had senate for a couple of years everything from these two massive books goes into the advisory committees and the advisory committees distills it down into recommendations that go to the floor of the whole senate and these advisory committees there's about 25 members of the advisory committee they're made up mostly of delegates there are certain advisors senate has calvin seminary faculty advisors they have ethnic advisors to spread out ethnic diversity advisors don't actually vote they just participate in the meeting but they have no voice but no vote vote they have so they have a variety of different advisors they have young adult advisors because senate tends to skew old so a number of years ago they established young adult advisors again they don't vote but they can participate in the meetings and so the advisory committees take all of this stuff and boil it down into recommendations and it's actually those recommendations that go to the floor of senate and the executive team has to figure out basically how to once plenary sessions start to keep senate flowing so that all of this stuff can get done by thursday the 16th of june because that's the that's the time to end and so they've got to get as much done as they can so that's really the job of the executive and so the president basically manages the the president and the vice president the president gets tired lets the vice president do things for a little while they basically manage the the the plenary meeting itself and then the second uh second clerk someone i don't know um but again it was uh rebecca um jordan hayes from classes for amputees and uh luanne sanky okay so luanne is from my classes and luanne actually um i know the alameda church fairly well i've worked with them on a bunch of projects and um i believe luanne's husband participated in sierra leadership network for a number of years and i don't know if this was first time at at classes but she we went to classes and there were pastoral nominees on the agenda and elder nominees but we didn't have any deacon nominees and so she graciously volunteered to stand as a deacon nominee and she in fact was sent to from our classes i don't believe she's ever been dissented and so this was i think the most telling election now i'm not going to say this to say anything against rebecca jordan heiss i don't know her at all but as these guys pointed out she's from classes grand rapids east and i think that's probably what defeated any attempt to have her elected which is telling now what's interesting is that she has a resume that is ideal for sort of an establishment crc position raised in fremont michigan that's north of grand rapids attended calvin college and princeton theological seminary now for some of you alarm bells are going off and i think that's probably what happened and so they they elected someone with zero synodical experience someone who doesn't have any any dog in the fight um alameda is probably one of the more conservative churches in our classes but i think in and her husband works at calvin university and so when first when i saw that erin was elected first clerk and she wasn't and then when luann was elected second clerk over her i knew what kind of synod this is going to be um thank you okay yeah so yeah and uh and it was kind of a run-off i guess between them i know synod a lot of times likes to have uh you know different kind of representations of the denomination up front and the officers and so and he's exactly right synod generally does like to have some rep using different representation up in terms of the officers and so it's usually the case that you'll get ever since women have been seated at senate you'll get a woman in the admin team you'll usually get someone who is from not dutch background in the admin team and that's in fact what you had here interesting to note however there's no canadians in the admin team and that's sort of noteworthy at this senate because well another one of the big issues it's sort of the human sexuality report and the controversy over same-sex marriage sort of blots out the sun that's what everyone is focused on but another big thing coming to this senate is about structure and and binational structure in terms of the u.s and canada and there's a report coming and some canadians have uh don't like exactly the way that the u.s and canada are going to be don't like exactly the way that the u.s and canadian relationship looks like so i would say that's probably the second biggest issue coming to this senate so again the election of officers i saw and i thought as these guys did it's probably a pretty conservative senate i my guess is it's a very conservative senate what that will mean is hard to know so the human sexuality report as i noted in a previous video one of the recommendations from the report is to declare that the traditional position of the denomination has always been confessional on this issue it's hard to know how something like that would be applied let's say to the whole denomination all at once if you look at the video that i made i'll put the link to it in the notes about i think if we would approach this instead of on the basis of prohibitions but rather ideals we could perhaps find a better way into the conversation than what we've been doing but given at least the early signs of where the senate is going i would imagine the human sexuality report gets passed pretty much as is i don't know what's going to happen with the confessionality thing it might pass the difficulty i don't know exactly what they're going to do with neil and avenue or classes grand rapids east seeing that you had basically a woman pastor of a historic and to a certain degree prestigious pulpit from grand rapids lose two votes in a row the second one to someone who is you know in terms of denomination of politics and near unknown says something about the mind of senate that enough people had this on their mind to not want her on the executive those are at least indicators but i'll tell you every senate is different because as i mentioned all of this stuff comes into those advisory committees and in those closed meetings which have decent representation from the whole body in those meetings that's really where the sausage gets made most of the time senate will pass the recommendation from the advisory committee now some of you who are more suspiciously minded might say oh they're they're cooking it in closed door meetings i don't think that's it at all it's because these advisory committees are in a sense a pretty good sample of who's on the floor and so in the smaller group you get to have all of those voices you get to work out the compromises that need to be worked out what you'll look for coming out of the advisory committee meetings will be if an advisory committee on a particular point comes out with a majority and a minority report you'll know that the advisory committee could not find consensus on a particular matter and when the advisory committee can't find consensus on a particular matter that means that the debate on the senate floor is sort of up for grabs because your sample from the larger body then is sufficiently decided decided divided that they could not arrive at consensus so these are going to be some of the things to watch let's see how these guys end this so it's between uh two women and and luann got it so not rebecca and i know rebecca from classes grampits east contact so um so as i look at the the top officers i'm really encouraged right of the direction of senate already it looks it looks promising it looks very promising and hopefully it's an encouragement to the orthodox delegates there to say this is an opera again interesting to the orthodox so we've got orthodox delegates and i guess we have unorthodox delegates i don't know what list they would have me on opportunity to really set a good course for the denomination and to not be timid on that but instead to with a boldness and with a confidence say this even in the selection of our officers we are very strongly in one direction i'm a weekend in that now this is very interesting because again if you looked at my previous video my my rule of church unity is that churches break right and leak left i as i mentioned before i don't know that synod can necessarily do anything sufficient to hold some of the more conservative churches and i mentioned that i that you know i participated with first rip in here in my classes that recently left the denomination they haven't joined another denomination even if the abide group gets its way which totally which it might based on what we saw from the election of office bears i don't know if that's sufficient for how many of the conservative churches now something like gravitation sort of matters no one is expecting classes zealand to leave classes mincota further away harder to say if the denomination sort of takes a particularly hard line to stand on this issue we could see churches leave to the left and whereas there are a couple of churches that over the last 40 50 years have left have left to the left most of the time it's been individuals that's why i say the church leaks left it doesn't usually split left or break left but what's interesting about this is that if this synod takes a particular hard line and really looks for a way to sort of punish classes grand rapids east that could get very interesting is one word um that could get very chaotic as well part of what happened is what there was a large number of calvin university staff and faculty that signed a communication in disagreement with the human sexuality report unlike dort and some of the other colleges and the redeemer calvin is owned by the christian reform church the other schools are not historically calvin was founded by the christian reform church to train clergy and then teachers and then it's expanded into a liberal arts college but so this yeah it's going to be very interesting to see what happens in that in that confidence of that we can go forward and we can really in a healthy way move the denomination right in a solid orthodox way and so it sounds like abide is feeling positive so far also the majority of the officers yeah yes yes and so this is i'm really excited by where this can go and i hope the delegates of of synod really are empowered by that and really go forward with kind of that the energy and conviction of god's word and uh and knowing that they aren't alone yep so that's what we need so it is other than that the only other vote i think or the only other vote i caught between uh my two-month-old was needed in our bottle but another vote i saw was the accepting the program committee's report and uh that closed the work of synod officers 2019 so that's yes that's the other job that synod officers do the synod officers from this year if there are no interruptions in the next synod which will come in the next year the synod officers put together the program report and what the program report does is assign the chairs and reporters and the topics for all the different advisory committees and the delegates on those advisory committees again it's a it's a significant job but being elected to that doesn't necessarily steer the denomination in a significant way again looking at who was elected is sort of an indicator of who the delegates are and it's it's not that the executive necessarily has a large amount of power in and of itself we should give a big thanks to those four officers that served three years longer than any other group of longest ever program committee program committee has ever had to serve before but in these unusual times that's that's how uh their work wrapped up and came to a close hopefully hopefully even though we have two we have you know i trust more solid officers this time hopefully we don't need them for a couple years so we'll just keep asking god's blessings on the denomination be much in prayer absolutely for it because what yeah two weeks they'll be meeting in person over two weeks together in person at calvin having committed oh they edited did you see that cut they work at first for the first couple of days and then after that meeting monday they start meeting and kind of plenary session that or something like that so yeah yeah and uh keep following the abide project certainly we continue to put out information and we're going to continue and again this is this is interesting because this is new now now in all fairness i got there first so i mean i can't be pointing fingers at them in terms of using social media this was let's see when when when did i make this video this was before any of the jordan peterson stuff i was again playing around with video this was june 16 2017 940 views i remember the next year people asked me if i do another report and i didn't do it um i had been blogging um i'd been blogging at that point and doing you know blog reports after synod hi my name is paul van der clay i'm the pastor of living stones christian reform church in sacrament look at this crappy sound quality and you know i didn't have powerpoint or i didn't have any of that you can see my i used my cell phone there's the production values you'll you'll notice the site which we do the freddie and paul show in there sometime meadow california there's been a joke going around how watching synod on the live stream would be more fun if we had uh commentators like at football or hockey games and so in the spirit of that i thought i'd give my synod 2017 post game show my title for this synod is tectonic fault lines and culture tear at western civilization the crc rather unselfconsciously goes along for the ride i'm still me why do i think that well again i live in california and california you know all about the ring of fire because this this is the area that is supposed to expose and press against each other part of the way that you hear the conversation about that the day of justice the conversation about that the bell heart something that has come through repeatedly for us and then the decision in 2016 which kind of looked at it and then 2017 came full to full life understanding contemporary testimony as a category rather than a subtitle of our world belongs to god i think senate had its donald trump moment when the advisory committee four came in and assumed that yeah the the overture from encoda this is the kind of thing that they always complain about and so we're going to talk about it we're going to see the points that they make but for the most part business should go on as usual it's kind of like here in the united states where people thought yeah hillary's way ahead in the polls and um we'll have the election and so friends you see this nice group of uh white friends from the snl squid that's a david chapelle skit uh very funny it's worth watching um i'll imagine that well here at senate we're going to talk about this and then code is going to make a lot of noise and then we're going to vote it down and go on as business as usual and then senate adopted some of the recommendations from committee four and then the first recommendation that um senate not a seed to the overture was defeated and then suddenly it's like oh my what happened minn kota is supposed to be this fringe out here that nobody's paying attention to and a majority of delegates saw enough in the overture that they said stop there's your donald trump moment where everyone says well i thought things were just supposed to keep on going and so now looking back at 2017 and looking at today i think we've seen the conversation continue to evolve and the sweep of conservative officers i think are probably i think we're probably seeing exactly what i expected to see long term in the crc people are like well we're going to see the crc go become an affirming denomination i said i don't think that will ever happen i don't think that will ever happen and the reason i don't think it'll happen is i should probably show you one other video there was a report at the council of delegates meeting where dr neil carlson of data wise consulting gave a presentation to the council of delegates i'll put the link to this also in the notes to the council of delegates on decline of crc membership what sort of prompted this was the the oh how can i say this in the best way if you look at this chart in the 90s when the crc made the decision to allow women in office there was a pretty significant departure from the denomination to the right um probably somewhere around 60 000 members this has been used as an argument that moves along this line our death to the church the point of this presentation was that the christian reform church has in many ways simply been following the same demographic trends as the rest of the nation fewer children aging populations smaller families the crc is wealthier and better educated than americans and americans or canadians in general therefore kind of the point was that the crc is sort of along the same lines as the trends of the rest of the church and didn't really want to directly address the question of doctrine progressive or conservative doctrine with respect to growth or decline so that was i didn't find it to be a terribly interesting didn't find it to be a terribly interesting presentation there were some there were some footnotes in it that i thought were interesting that i do want to look up one of them was on political polarization and disillusionment here's sort of the summary gave um concentrations and enclaves around north america to anywhere they want to live and that causes them potentially to reaffiliate with another christian tradition um but also reasons for deaffiliation include other things like becoming more educated makes you more ambitious study uh called church refugees shows that a lot of people who've left the church have not left faith not turned away from god but have left because their ambition to become leaders in the church has been turned away by sort of institutional fossilization so that's on this slide actually i spoke too soon some other national and global factors in declining religiosity one of them that i alluded to earlier is declining social pressure to affiliate um political polarization and disillusionment are a demonstrable documented contributor people leave the church from either side if they feel like their political perspective is not welcome institutional resistance to leadership ambition that's the hope and packard church refugees book i referred to that's a snowball sample of folks in colorado where the sociologists hope and packard kept expecting to find some folks who left the church because they were disinterested uh had fallen away and backslidden or whatever when they kept getting referred interviewee after interviewee to people who left because their hopes and dreams for the mission of the kingdom were not being realized um in the council delegates meeting there was a question about this later that i'll allude to there's a question on the our journey 2020 our journey 2025 surveys that i designed that asks people about how satisfied they are with their involvement in decision making in their congregations and we've demonstrated repeatedly with statistical models that folks who feel um like they're not included as much as they would like to be also evaluate the health of their congregation is significantly lower than folks who are satisfied with their involvement in leadership decision making and the last one here that i'll point to is some recent coverage from this year of an epidemic of loneliness um in this study a few years ago it was true that folks who went to church were much less likely to report being lonely than folks who reported going to church and now millennials and generation z who attend church are no different in how lonely they feel than folks who don't go to church that's an amazing finding and that's not just the pandemic and virtuality this the survey data some of it predates the pandemic so we have a problem potentially with social connection and community not just in the christian reform church but across um so so overall kind of the message i got from this piece was nothing to see here or at least i mean the previous slide victims of our own success i don't i don't fully buy that partly because the evaporation experienced in the christian reform church is not uniform um the christian reform church has been losing ground rapidly in urban areas and continuing to show more robust health in rural areas and that definitely has a theological skew and so this i think the resurgence of a certain conservatism is very much a a response to the fact that for the most part the christian reform church is losing in urban areas and that loss in urban areas eventually gets translated in a loss of influence in the denomination itself continue to bring out news information it won't always be tyler and me that you're stuck with the we'll get other prettier faces in front of you too that's right so apparently abide is going to continue to give news and perspective and punditry as it were as synod goes along so it seems that um oh where's my where's my uh where's my video it seems that i am now no longer alone so like i said if i find time at synod i and i also need a good internet connection so anybody listening to this and you know maybe i'll talk to the calvin it people and say hey like once a day i need a i need a um i need a connection i need a good ethernet connection to a data port where i can upload video and if i have to do it over you know 20 or 30 gigabit or megabit per second wi-fi in the calvin dorms y'all might be in trouble i might have to do stuff from my cell phone and my at&t so we'll see what i can manage to do the folks at calvin are always super helpful for me and the folks at synod are always super helpful so so yeah so there's a there's a pre-synod report and um we'll see again next week i fly into chicago and i have events tuesday and wednesday in chicago tuesday at pod is podcast day links are going to be below wednesday is the big event at the elmhurst crc where myself and bethel magrue and moe a crc church planter are going to be talking about past present future of apologetics and i think i'm gonna really skew that much towards evangelism and then thursday um i think jacob is driving me jacob from the discord server he'll bend my ear for four hours from chicago to grand rapid so if anybody wants to ride along find jacob and ask him uh so then i think jacob drives me to grand rapids and then i get in the dorms and i've got uh voices anonymous what's that voice crc voices is this little group and um we always have we call them voices anonymous meetings because voices is so addicting or at least has been in past uh decades so we get together with a little group physically from crc voices that evening thursday night and then friday morning synod gets going and as i said the first couple of days at synod there won't be a lot of news because i and others will be in advisory committees and those are closed committees and so i won't be doing any reporting about anything in my own advisory committee because that would be um against the rules and i want to keep those rules i'll also not be tweeting from the synod floor i will however reserve my reports for probably the evening and again i'd kind of like to talk to a variety of people and hear what they have to say and i guess i should figure out exactly what equipment i'm going to take so maybe i can pull this off so maybe it'll it'll expand beyond the synod post game oh actually maybe i should play a little bit more of this there's some of this that probably many of you would be curious about i'm a little curious about what i said too it's ascendancy well that that brand is now under fire and you can see that and some of the things going on actually maybe what i'll do is i'll just put that video at the end of this video and so if anybody wants to listen to it or watch it it'll all be there so thanks for watching and i know these videos aren't going to be the cup of tea for a lot of you but that's kind of standard for my channel hi my name is paul van der clay i'm the pastor of living stones christian reform church in sacramento california there's been a joke going around how watching synod on the live stream would be more fun if we had uh commentators like at football or hockey games and so in the spirit of that i thought i'd give my synod 2017 post game show my title for this synod is tectonic fault lines and culture tear at western civilization the crc rather unselfconsciously goes along for the ride why do i think that well again i live in california and california you know all about the ring of fire because this this is the area that is supposed to expose in a sense to us these tectonic plates and along the places that they rub and press against each other you'll find volcanoes and earthquakes and tsunamis and part of the way that you here in california we have these this rather california oregon washington up in bc you have some rather beautiful mountains that are actually volcanoes and sometimes these volcanoes erupt and if you want to kind of understand what's going on beneath the surface in the christian reform church in north america it's important to look at what we fight about i think the volcanoes we saw at synod 2017 were emerged along certain areas the do justice blog the conversation about that the day of justice the conversation about that the bell heart something that has come through repeatedly for us and then the decision um in 2016 which kind of looked at it and 2017 came full to full life understanding contemporary testimony as a category rather than a subtitle of our world belongs to god i think senate had its donald trump moment when the advisory committee four came in and assumed that yeah the the overture from encoda this is the kind of thing that they always complain about and so we're going to talk about it we're going to see the points that they make but for the most part business should go on as usual it's kind of like here in the united states where people thought yeah hillary's way ahead in the polls and um we'll have the election and so friends you see this nice group of uh white friends from the snl squid that's a david chappelle skit uh very funny it's worth watching um i'll imagine that well here at senate we're going to talk about this and mencota is going to make a lot of noise and then we're going to vote it down and go on as business as usual and then senate adopted some of the recommendations from committee four and then the first recommendation that um senate not accede to the overture was defeated and then suddenly it's like oh my what happened mencota is supposed to be this fringe out here that nobody's paying attention to and a majority of delegates saw enough in the overture that they said stop there's your donald trump moment where everyone says well i thought things were just supposed to keep on going like they always have well there are some pretty significant fault lines going on in western civilization right now we see this in politics in the united states we see it in politics in europe and i think part of the a good way to understand it um is through two books that i've read recently uh david brooks book on the road to character in many ways really contrasts kind of the old dominant regime that fought the second world war with the new ascending regime uval harari and homo deus understands the 20th century i think in a rather helpful way where he says really what happened in the west in the 20th century is that three different forms of humanism battled there's there's the form that got its expresses expression in nazism and that was defeated by kind of by the combined forces of the soviet union and then the western powers and then the cold war then was the war between kind of this evolutionary understanding of class warfare versus capitalist free democracies and in the end the free democracies won and then that old that old um that old school was was very much embodied by the old mainline churches uh the neo-orthodox churches in north america and their brand of humanism their brand of classical liberalism um kind of reached its ascendancy well that that brand is now under fire and you can see that and some of the things going on at berkeley at evergreen university in washington in yale in the black lives matter movement in the lgbt movement i think there's there's an ascending there's an ascending rise of of really a new orthodoxy i i tend to call it a liberationist progressivism those those are the terms that are that are this is what human life is for individual liberation to be free to do to have safe spaces and all of this now the mainline churches are cratering as an institution but but their ideas of the new mainline of the new ascendant which i really think is is basically a new civil religion that is replacing the old civil religion that won the cold war and the new mainline creating a new secular theocracy without church with with church or god not required this gets into some of the stuff that jonathan hait has been writing about how a lot of the discussions about free speech are really discussions about blasphemy that that kind of a moralism has taken on a new religiosity and right now that's behind a lot of the things battling in our culture james bratt towards the end of the 20th century wrote his book about dutch calvinists in modern america and he had this matrix that may or not you may not be able to see too very well on the video kind of between the seceders and the pietists and the infralapsarians between the neo-calvinists the kyperians and the superlapsarians there's something of that going on that continues in our struggles in the christian reform church most people when they watch these struggles will say there's progressives and conservatives so minn coda is kind of the conservative and the kind of the grand rapids east camp they're the progressives and so you have some of these traditional things happening but i think one of the most important things that i've read over the last number of years about to understand crc history was james scops what about a bicentennial mr and mrs crc and the main point that he's making is that conditions in the united states continued in the united states and canada and all of western civilization really continue to evolve and what that means is that our fights are no longer our own prior to world war ii the the christian reform church was rather isolated technological advances in radio and television and now obviously the internet technological disruptions have very much made the christian reform church just another one of these immigrant denominations that increasingly fights along the broader lines of conflict and factions in american christianity my read of the major factions right now in the christian reform church is this you have the the crc confessionalists and minn coda has kind of become the standard bearer of the confessionalists we see churches that are against women in office going over to minn coda assimilating in that group and they they produce pretty much every year a steady stream of overtures they are engaging the christian reform church in its traditional way of looking at leadership and and understanding senate as kind of the the key to power now they're confessionalists and they've been waving the banner of confessions for years now until of course the bellhar came where groups that weren't terribly interested in confessions suddenly got a taste for them again looking at the long term story of the christian reform church that's an important thing to watch so you have the crc confessionalists and their standard bears right now are kind of classist minn coda but they are not alone and we saw that in the donald trump moment we have the crc evangelicals they really came and came into their own after world war ii and i think were especially present in the rise of christian reform home missions when they really got in touch with church planting the seeker movement willow creek saddleback now this group culturally again kind of reached their pinnacle in the 80s but are by no means gone they in fact have weathered the storm better than the main lines and and they're they kind of in the christian reform church found their found their heyday in the old sunshine church that that grew into one of the crc late 20th century's most important mega churches you heard some of their voice when we had the conversation at senate about numerical decline and you heard a number of points being made at senate about well you know we can help the poor and we can do all these things but what really matters for eternity is that we bring people to christ and they have a saving relationship that's very much evangelical language and now you can find a lot of commonality between the confessionalists and the evangelicals there but that really sets up a lot of the a lot of the conflict with the third camp who are the crc progressives now again that camp has been around a long time they and the confessionalists have have really been doing battle for a long time but the progressives have also been deeply influenced by the changes in western civilization in the 20th century and what confessionalists and evangelicals who are really on the conservative end of the culture war are seeing in the language and the behavior of the progressives are what they're seeing in the broader culture war a few months ago i didn't write a blog post but i was going to a little bit of advice to the social justice camp about if you keep triggering the the reflexes that we're developing in the broader culture wars within the crc we're going to continue to see factional division and factional strife within the clc excuse me crc and because of the way these factions line up you're going to start losing a lot of those fights and again that's what we saw in this donald trump moment i think actually when synod said no we're not going to go along with the first recommendation from advisory committee four this was a sign this was probably the most important moment in this synod so others are reading crc progressives in a particular light now there's another faction which which doesn't get much press but which i think people need to be watching in the crc and that are the emerging sacramentalists and these are a lot of people who are reading jamie smith and listening to what he's saying about cultural liturgies and getting in touch with church fathers and reading calvin in the light of the church fathers and exploring augustin this is an emerging and an ascending faction in the crc that is going to be vitally important for the future while in the midwest now if you have a church planted they'll for the most part use seeker methodology out here on the west coast you get a church planted a lot of them are going to be using more sacramentalist things they're going to have communion every week they're going to be having liturgies church of the servant was again kind of a vanguard church for this but if you know some of the politics around this group they're very much going to shake up kind of the political factions in the crc they're very much going to be a swing vote that decides whether the the coalition between the confessionalists and the evangelicals kind of try to subvert the institutional advantages that the crc often grand rapids based and now really the canadian church coming online strongly in this faction so you're going to see a lot of the interplay between these factions in the crc for years to come in the crc a lot of what we've often done to try to understand ourselves and the factors that are pushing on us is look at the rca now the rca is a very different church than the crc is we saw at this senate a big discussion what's our relationship going to be with the rca i really want to give kudos to the crc staff people who made following our senate very accessible the banner staff the denominational staff putting it up on live stream and then quickly posting it on youtube made it very easy for those of us who live out west to continue to follow the crc tried to follow the rca the rca is having are they're having the kinds of conflicts that threaten their unity in existence and and it'd be probably to nobody's surprise within very few years you watch significant breakup or remorthing of the rca one of the most important things that came over in the rca was an overture from the senate of the of the far west to affirm that the heidelberg catechism question 108 and 109 categorically states that god condemns all unchastity which includes same sexual same sex sexual activity and that faithful adherence to the rca standards therefore entail the affirmation that marriage is between one man and one woman the rca right now is going through really an existential conflict you kind of have the old rca east that is much more mainline that that group numerically has been declining the part of the rca that is growing through church planting tend to be the young restless and reformed and evangelicals in the far west and also in the midwest which tends to be most like the crc that tend to be conservative on these issues this won pretty significantly at the rca senate and this is just another step in this multi-year battle which probably will result in the pushing out of the rca east that's very much going to change their denomination and this is really important to keep watching if we're going to be talking about what does it mean for us to collaborate or even this new creation idea i'd love for us to have some very interesting conversations about that once this passed though it was followed by fred harrell who's the pastor of the christ church san francisco a church that was pca came into the rca to afford women an office and just a couple of years ago made some moves to join the room for all affirming lgbt community in san francisco and so this is really a hot button area but fred harrell then makes a motion from the floor that general senate affirms that the heidelberg catechism question and answer 74 categorically states that infants as well as adults are included in god's covenant people and therefore infants should be incorporated into the christian church through baptism right there you begin to see how the sacramentalist faction is going to play in some very different ways against the old factional alliances that the crc has seen we're going to continue to see this in the crc and it's really important that we continue to watch what happens in the rca as these things happen progressivists tend to assume that well this this line of progress which has women in office and and same-sex marriage and all of these things as time goes by this progress progress will continue i think what we're going to see is that if you watch the decline of the mainline institutionally we will probably see churches swinging back in a conservative way this is why i really don't think we're going to see the church the christian reform church take a big swing towards affirming same-sex marriage i don't think at least within my lifetime and i don't know if ever those are much longer bigger questions so i want to make three points at the end of this video the subtitle becoming a category is probably a good thing when the crc was gifted the bellhar it became kind of like our three ecumenical confessions things we can't really tinker with because they they impact the relationships we have with other churches when now that we've made the bellhar a contemporary testimony we've kind of defined this new category we now have a chance to actually have what i call confessional conversations we actually have a chance to look at the bellhar and say huh what in this do we like what in in this do we have questions about and there are a number of delegates that said well the bellhar expresses liberation theology now we're getting in touch with the bigger conversations that are going on in all of western civilization that brings me to my second point that we have the theological resources to critique and engage these larger shifts the column old school post world war two crc progressives very much had a mission where they wanted to they wanted to impact the larger conversations in north american culture i think the christian reform church can continue to play that role we have the theological resources we have the institutions we are not using them in the church and we're not doing our best work in terms of engaging these things we have to figure out how to use them part of the difficulty is the technological disruption that's happened we're seeing this in the conversation about the do justice blog what is a blog how do we have conversations how do we use youtube how do we use blogs how do we how do we do twitter now this gets into my third point which is we haven't figured out the relationship between leadership and our institutions we changed from having a general secretary as such to an executive director but but i think as a denomination we haven't really talked about how leadership is exerted in the denomination and what this looks like part of the difficulty is that we have factions and so part of what denominations want and you see this in the rca is that denominations want institutional unity and so leadership of institutions tend to be referees they want to make sure that process is complied with and that people play fair and that nobody leaves the fold that's a natural inclination for institutional leadership what that doesn't help us do is work out the kind of ways that the broader tectonic shifts are impacting and changing our factions and help us to be actually helpful to one another and helpful beyond ourselves and so what we really haven't figured out is is how should leadership work in the crc if you look at kind of the early part of the 20th century the christian reform looked to seminary professors as leaders towards the mid to late 20th century the crc kind of looked at banner editors as leaders the banner is not what it has been partly because magazines have been disrupted the crc is not what it used to be because technology has changed how we feel how we sit within the broader conversation of american culture and so what we've not really figured out how to do as a denomination is how does leadership work with our institutions how can we with all of these technologies have what i call again confessional conversations how can we process what's in the bell heart how can we take our theological and institutional resources and leverage them productively so that when these shifts happen we as a denomination don't just rather unselfconsciously repeat the kind of battles that are happening let's say between jim wallace and the southern baptists or or the other conversations going but how we as a denomination can use the gifts that we have inherited and say how can we apply these to our situation and how can we be helpful not only to our own people but to the world beyond and how in the process can we in fact understand our identity and our existence as a christian reform church so that's my synod 2017 post game show i'm going to be posting this in all the various ways i post things please engage me in this conversation you can leave a blog a comment in my blogs as i post them on facebook on youtube on twitter i'll be in all those places so please let's have the conversation