https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=On3EwpEwdqA

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do a video delving a little bit deeper into the religious aspect of the moment. And right now a number of people on Twitter and on Facebook have been noting all of the religious rituals going on in the street, unselfconsciously religious. And I got home from a walk on Sunday and I decided to write something that is entitled How Critical Theory Works. Beaten wives matter. And so I put it on my blog. I have a little blog that I keep. And mostly, again, now if you see something on my blog, I am not promoting it. I'm just saving the link. I post links on my blog of things that interest me. So I get, I regularly, the more people go to my blog, the more they find things they disagree with and then they, and it's fine to leave a comment saying how much you disagree with something I put on my blog. But don't assume I necessarily agree with it. Sometimes I do, sometimes I don't, sometimes it's indifferent, sometimes I change my mind. I'm a human being. So I wrote this little thing called Beaten Wives Matter because I wanted to run this through what I called the critical theory algorithm. From time immemorial, wives and other women have been beaten by their domestic partners. For almost as long as we've had civilization, wife beating has not only been legal but often condoned and promoted. You can find Ricky spanking Lucy on I Love Lucy. Wife beating has been institutionalized and perpetuated by institutions to the degree that we can call it systemic wife beating. You don't actually have to have beaten your wife to be guilty of systemic wife beating. If you have participated in institutions that have perpetuated wife beating, you are guilty of participating in this injustice. You don't have to be a man to be guilty of participating in wife beating. Many women have been guilty of beating their domestic partners as well as participating in the institutions of systemic wife beating, therefore perpetuating the cycles of wife beating. These have persisted even after legislation has been passed against it and institutions have been founded to eliminate it. The struggle against wife beating will go on until um until not only wife beating stops but the institutions and imaginations that perpetuate wife beating stop. You don't have to be married to have participated in wife beating. There is something inside you that makes you not just a potential wife beater but someone who will participate in systemic wife beating even if you don't realize it. You have always, you have always, you have always and will always be guilty of participating in systemic wife beating even if you've been beaten yourself and been the victim of systemic wife beating. The best you can do is to sit and listen to beaten wives, to learn about your inner wife beater, and to continue to acknowledge the guilt of wife beating that you have participated in and perpetuated even unknowingly. Any resistance to fully embracing your guilt of wife beating is a sure sign of the guilt of wife beating. Wife beater fragility is more common than you think. Those who stand against wife beating also stand against all other forms of impression but especially those forms from a special lift that anti-wife beating advocates have named. Now when I posted this a good friend of mine on Facebook was she didn't quite know what to make of it because she knows me and she knows I'm not in favor of wife beating. She knows I'm not in favor of racism. So why would I post something like this? And you got the sense that are you mocking? Well who do you think I'm mocking? Do you think I'm mocking anti-racists? Do you think I'm mocking wife beating? I post it this way in order to sort of confuse the coding because on one hand when you read it the coding is very clear. If you've read enough material that has come out of critical theory the steps are all abundantly clear. So if you just start with a phrase like beaten wives matter the piece basically writes itself. And I also know this because it comes from a much older script. A script that I was taught in my youth. A script that many in the Christian Reformed Church who were schooled in the Heideberg Catechism in their youth. This script sort of follows and you can just kind of substitute wife beating or racism for sin and the script really works quite well. It all sort of follows along. Now what I've done basically again and this is pretty clear I just followed the script and I just changed a couple of variables and it was a little clever and the cleverness is in order to sort of confuse our brains because black lives matter begins with a B and then lives and wives sound the same and I use the same last word. One has to do with wife beating and the other has to do with America's skin color racism. The problem well why well Grant Napier who is a was a TV announcer for Sacramento Kings and had a radio program was recently fired from his radio program and one from the Sacramento Kings. Some of the former players of the Kings contacted him and asked him about black lives matter and he said all lives matter and this was found to be insufficient by his bosses and so they fired him and some of the members of the team called him a racist. Now I don't know if he is or isn't a racist. I don't know the guy at all. You can debate whether or not he should be fired for this. Maybe he's always been a racist and everybody in the team has known this and this was just the last straw. You know when people get fired again if I'm asking people not to just look at one variable then you know who knows why they did it but that of course caught attention because a lot of people feared that oh we have sort of a blasphemy law but I want to hang back a minute and ask why does all lives matter feel offensive where you know black lives matter feels right. Beaten wives matter feels like a trick but there's something about all lives matter that doesn't work. Well what doesn't work? Well it doesn't accurately run the script. Now like black lives matter that's true. Beaten wives matter that's true. All lives matter well that's true too but it feels offensive. Well why? Because there's something in the coding of the script that doesn't work. What it fails to capture is it it fails to capture the validated victim component of the code and you see that with beaten wives matter that has the let me who really right now is going to go out and say wife beating should be back on the moral menu. Not too many people I know and and so that's why beaten wives matter isn't as offensive as all lives matter because part of the code is that there's a validated there's a validated victim element to the code that makes the script work and all lives matter also fails to understand the moment. Now some of you are gonna right when you hear that you're gonna react and say oh paul is you know fine think of me what you will but you might want to hear me out. Why do moments count? Well actually moments are important and just for the last couple of weeks as many have noted we've had zeitgeist whiplash. Now zeitgeist geist is ghost, geist is spirit. A holy ghost is actually holy geist and geist in German is far broader than ghost in English and it's far closer to spirit which is why holy spirit is better than holy ghost at least in contemporary English but you know just a couple of weeks ago we were celebrating first responders which include the police and people were you know banging their pots and cheering them and and you know cops were social heroes and now suddenly whoosh the script has flipped that fast. Well these these moments do count for something they count for a lot they're very real. And just a couple of weeks ago we were noticing as you know first it was sort of the shock of COVID and then sort of the the racial consciousness elements in the conversation started noting well people of color that's pretty broad in California it's mostly Hispanic. Now to be very to be very careful and accurate Hispanic is not a race. Mexico is not a race. Mexico is a multi-ethnic culture because in Mexico there are people of varying degrees of European ancestry, people of varying degrees of American indigenous community ancestry and on and on and on and on. But it was noted that in many places many people people of color as the phrase goes had COVID at higher rates and a lot of this was because many of them in fact were working jobs like police officers and firemen and EMT and nurses and transportation and and all of these kinds of things and and many of these civil service jobs for African for the African American community over the last 50 years have been good jobs and and and many African American families have been able to improve their lot by working for city and state here in Sacramento by working for civil service jobs which are usually highly unionized and you know when Arnold Schwarzenegger tried to take on the civil service unions teachers and and and nurses and police officers and firefighters and EMT well you know EMT not always as well unionized but pretty powerful and so that was part of the story of the high rates of infection in certain ethnic communities as opposed to to others. But there's an image zeitgeist going on and in one of my videos Mary who some of you know from the channel made a terrific little video the psychic power of an iconic image and she talked about all of these images and talked about these are these images have iconic power and and the image of of George Floyd being killed by a Miami not a Miami by a Minneapolis police officer was iconic just in the way the whole thing was set up that's part of the power of this moment and we are nodes in a network and depending on where we are in this network when something of high voltage comes through our mouths start working and so we sort of level up as something happens like this now now again reality is pre-chewed for us either by mainstream media or by social media people that say well I can't believe mainstream media because it's organized well social media is organized by something else it's more organized by the zeitgeist and the the political layouts that are there but it's just as much propagandized as media that is more centrally controlled what we sort of do in these moments are we trade agency for community we trade independent thinking for being part of the group and and we participate in the principality of the moment well what's the principality well Uncle Sam is a principality where well can you lay your hands on Uncle Sam well yes and no you touch Uncle Sam every time you go and touch a government building you touch Uncle Sam when you go to Washington DC and see these what ancient pagans would look at as ancient temples and these statues in them that ancient pagans would look at as gods but there in a sense is Uncle Sam all right you you join Uncle Sam when you join the army you participate in Uncle Sam when you pay your taxes this is all of what's going on and so there's an image zeitgeist that's going on and what happens when people participate in something like nationalism is they they take part in the formation of what the bible would call a principality or a power and and now you know suddenly i've triggered a whole bunch of you in terms of your natural supernatural distinctions and i've left a whole bunch of questions in your mind that i'm intentionally going to leave sort of floating out there but but what happens is when we see an iconic image we we very quickly participate in a body and when a when a social conversation develops we we participate in a body and and we have all kinds of language that articulates that the right or the left or the the woke or the religious and and on and on and on these things go now notice the language here corporate what is corporate what is well it's of a body and remember back in Mitt Romney's campaign well corporations are well we said people but corporations are persons their principalities and powers and and so what happens now is that corporations must speak and and corporations are judged by the value of their morality as persons within the zeitgeist they are actors and players and so apple and walmart and and cities and localities and churches and denominational offices and everyone suddenly now thanks to social media not only has a voice to speak but is demanded to speak and well what are they going to say now you might think we all sit down separately and write things but what you very quickly notice is that all of the things that come out of our mouths sort of sound like a whole bunch of other things and they sort of line up across these principalities the boiler plate is sort of a tribal signal and you signal what part of the tribe that you're on and so Washington DC you know in big letters Black Lives Matter puts it on the street with the permission of the of the mayor of the city here in Sacramento in the in the dead grass of of Sacramento summer Black Lives Matter gets burned into the gets burned into the the thoroughfare there in front of the in front of the state capital because the thing is we participate in multiple principalities and and they make demands in terms of our loyalty and the words that we must say you demand up as well as you receive down from these principalities and if a corporation that you're following or a church that you're attending is starting to make noise with the boilerplate of a group that you disagree with well you might just switch to android or find a new church or something like that because to deviate from the liturgy is heresy and you signal to the pack that you are if you signal to the pack that you are not a part of the pack well a wolf pack knows how to deal with that as does a as does a what do what do monkeys organize themselves into a tribe they're certainly not a herd but but the wolf pack will act accordingly because basically the wolf packs survival mechanisms are all coded for cooperating in order to compete against rivals and that's why keywords will get dropped in corporate boilerplate or keywords will be avoided everybody's listening very carefully to all of this code and looking for the signals to try and figure out where everyone is in the ongoing pack gang warfare of the Serengeti in the midst of a culture war now i've confused a lot of people on my channel for a long time because very quickly a bunch of people that were on the political conservative side saw jordan peterson and and and saw a potentially conservative ally and then when i tell people that i voted for barack obama twice they were horrified how could i do that and when i get an opportunity i explain that well you know i i have pasty white skin but i grew up not in some lily white american suburb but in african american patterson new jersey and i grew up very much in the time of second wave anti-racism so principalities impinge upon me and i express those principalities as i speak and those have gone into my formation and here's a picture i never got to sit on the balcony we always had to sit on the main floor and as a kid i always found i was always jealous of that but this was a pretty typical this might have been easter or something like that i don't know because you'd usually take pictures on on special occasions but here is a picture of what church was like for me growing up and it was black and white folks together in the 60s and the 70s in patterson new jersey and many the crc churches by this point had moved out to the suburbs and many crc people saw the suffering of the african americans who had moved into patterson for industrial jobs and they had a a sense of burden of the gospel but not only of sharing with them this articulation of the gospel which is what they understood to be their religious duty but also helping with food and with training and all of this stuff now second wave anti-racism had a whole bunch of values in it and it called for sacrifice so yeah they're neither of my parents grew up in african american communities my mother grew up in a small town in massachusetts and a mill town where she grew up amongst freesians who were dairy farmers and mill workers and my father grew up on on the plains of the the plains of the midwest during the depression and then the and then the time of the second world war and grew up mostly working on farms and with with these little dutch crc enclaves there but but they moved to patterson new jersey and they moved into a place that was you know where you had well it was a very diverse community even for patterson then and new jersey tended to ghettoize more than i've seen here out west in sacramento so what the call was was to have authenticity and credibility you move into the inner city and you share life with the people you're worshiping with the call and second wave anti-racism was integration and we followed what dr king preached in 1963 don't judge people by the color of their skin but by the content of their character and you practice you practice mutual love in the context of the body of christ and you learn to submit to one another on the very rare occasion that there might be a foot washing ceremony you would wash each other's feet you would learn to serve one another and because you live together you saw a broader life on life view of one another and so often in all of the rage of contemporary anti-racism i i so often find that you know color is forefronted and people is set to the rear of the bus but i grew up as i was born into this context and and my babysitters were of various cultures and the beautiful thing is that if you come into if you come into a community as a minority if you're a white person coming into a black community as an adult you know you're a powerful person so you're gonna have to earn their trust which my father did but if you grow up in it well you're just part of it and they treat you like a kid and you're one kid amongst the other kids and you know now i i went to christian school which is also part of being dutch and so that's a longer complex story but you know it yes in many ways my father's church was a racial reconciliation church in paterson new jersey but the race thing is old and small and and and and and we're just people and we get to know all of the foibles of of the complexity of human beings and and it's it's just how you live and it's who you are and it's how i was raised but then as john mcwater calls third wave anti-racism comes along and well things have changed the process of secularization has secularization has continued the the deep black the deep roots and the black church of of dr king's civil rights movement in the south there were there were other codes added in and everybody wants to throw in marxism here and i'm you know yeah but marxism you know when jordan peterson sat down with zizek and jordan peterson brought his copy of the communist manifesto most marxists today looked at that and said well you know we're kind of marxists like your calvinists well what do you mean by that well was john calvin a calvinist ask richard mueller who was a professor at calvin seminary who wrote that paper and presented it at westminster it's it's more complicated than you think now i've been i've been rereading um bearing the cross and it's a pulitzer prize winning book and reading it again after a number of years i read it differently than i did before i know more theology i know more history of the mid 20th century and and so i can i can understand tillick and and some of the other voices that young dr king in seminary and grad school was was working through so you know it's part of the mid 20th century was part of his coding and i'm going to use this kind of language as coding language a lot in this video and i i choose it because for a variety of reasons but you know don't look too far into it there's a lot of ways to talk about these dynamics um today is significantly more secular the church has lost a tremendous amount of power from the 1960s and the 1970s now jordan peterson says that ideologies are crippled religions and as i compare critical theory code which i ran through with beaten wives matter and i compare it to the code of the heiternberg catechism i look and say you know a lot of the code that i received in second wave anti-racism the code has changed in the third wave anti-racism and i can still sort of read the code like the people in the matrix you know you look at all those green characters dropping and the people in the movie or you know watching it as if it's a movie like they're showing us and part of me because again i was trained in the heiternberg catechism when i read critical theory code it's like i recognize a lot of this code tom holland was right a lot of this just comes right out of protest and christianity so then of course robin diangelo white as me i mean this stuff comes from white people just stating the obvious here um this comes from colonizers and the truth is when i read critical theory i read more european colonization it's it's just a new version and if you look at the ardent way they're proceeding into communities of color and third world countries and using the power of the united nations and sometimes the united states government to to to manifest their ideology well china is doing it now too but but just with their ideology this is as colonial as anything else but but when i look at the code compared to let's say the code of the heiternberg catechism the categories are rigid and permanent and and they're and they're and they're terribly american-centric they i spent seven years in the dominican republic they don't translate there although there was deep racism in the dominican republic if you were to call a dominican black they would be offended no a haitian is black and the dominicans had all kinds of talk about the color of their skin and of course trujillo who was the dictator used to wear makeup to to to lighten himself and so when i hear about the history of of colonialism and whiteness and there's a degree to which i look at that and say yeah you know some of these some of this literature is really helpful in identifying a lot of what went through but but when it goes from the descriptive to the prescriptive and really begins to take on a religious code i read it and say i know the source code and this is a bad copy now now they try to integrate fluidity in sort of a different way and and to me it just looks like a clutch because the old way that i'd read in the heiternberg catechism that integrated fluidity quite easily even though it's 500 years old and coming out of well the same place that critical theory came out of actually you know that you try to get at at fluidity in other ways which violates the material code and that's exactly what's triggered the the modernist materialists like the like some of the the non-woke new atheist tribe and and that's made for some strange bedfellows between you know some conservative reformed people and and these new atheists and i've been watching this you know i've always been to the left of a lot of these very conservative reformed tribes and i'm watching them with the new atheists and you know i've talked to i've talked to peter begosian and james lindsey and and i'll talk to them again um i've got no problem with that but watching people to the right of me in terms of the the the the conservative reformed spectrum in them it's like well this is interesting this is this is fascinating sin is the discarded variable but again if you read my beaten wives matter little algorithm well you can just take out life beating and put sin in and yeah it it runs perfectly there's this something deep in me that that has always been in me and i'm and i'm not actually going to get rid of it and and every week i go to church and i confess it and and you know it's not just my sins against women or my sins against other racial groups it's my sins against well it goes all the way down and it's pervasive and it's all over the place that's what i call total depravity and well what sin does if you just sort of put this in and change the variables is it exposes the forgery now a while ago my friend camera and michael did a very interesting video and i did a video talking about this too talked about fields and matter and consciousness and talked about the fact that fields are you know they kept drilling down into particles and now they've discovered that at least the current the current state of the science to the degree that i can understand is that what there are out there are fields and karen and michael talked about the possibility is there in fact a a consciousness field and and you see there are these underlying unities that are going on beneath the particles that we are seeing now now sin is sort of like that field for us and and sometimes it gets manifest in racism and sometimes it gets manifest in wife beating and and often it gets manifest in whole other different ways but it's it's always sort of present but it sort of becomes particles at different times in different places and and part of the problem i have when when critical theory goes from from pre-script from from descriptive to prescriptive again i can learn a lot from critical theorists on its descriptive to understand some of the ways that my sinfulness manifests itself itself in in institutions and systems i don't deny that that that wavelength of sin is through everything i touch and do now that might make some of the materialists and the atheists feel uncomfortable but again this is this is old old code for christianity and the the reformation leaders like john calvin picked up on it because of course the church fathers had talked about it and so this is this is old christian code and again when i see the falling lines of it in critical theory i say yeah i recognize that code i can read it you can read it very easily but there's a common error in the contemporary code and jonathan pointed this out jonathan peugeot pointed this out really nicely in his video the meaning of protest and now i know for a lot of for a lot of people jonathan's videos are sort of hard to get and jonathan just recently did a video with andrea and mercury which i loved that conversation did a video with andrea and mercury where you know they jonathan acknowledged he said you know if i'd been making these videos 20 years ago nobody would have got it but modernity is breaking down to the degree that that people are getting it now and and what the meaning of no is is that the meaning of no is the proper protestation of the inferior to the superior and in jonathan's video he gives a number of potent illustrations when your stomach is hungry it protests to your con no i'm putting some of my words on here to the to the consciousness congress that it's time to give the stomach some love and if you know if you're and all our appetites are this way your sexual appetite your appetite for for interest i mean it's all this way but but the consciousness congress is superior and and the stomach is inferior and if the consciousness congress basically to start decides to starve the stomach well the stomach's gonna you know express some of its consequential power towards the hegemony of the consciousness congress and the whole world is this way if if the if the boss takes good care of the workers and the workers are happy well they'll sacrifice for the boss and so actually the way this stuff works is in a hierarchy the superior sacrifices for the inferior and the inferior sacrifices for the superior but just putting it this way a lot of people get triggered because no the problem is you're using the language of superior and inferior and all of this has to be banished because that's that's part of hierarchy and we have to get rid of all hierarchies hierarchies really really do you really think you can do that i'm more than doubtful in fact i'm awfully sure that in fact every time you try you just create a new hierarchy and if there's anything we've seen in the woke movement that's been exactly it in the in the name of banishing a name of banishing hierarchy they've created the oppression olympics and and you know that that's that's the way this thing goes so now equality and hierarchy always come together and they work together it was a number of years ago when i was you know my practice for a number of years has been i've been on the lectionary a lot this year for some different reasons but generally speaking i go through books of the bible and when i go through another book of the bible in my sunday school class or my sermon series i try to buy a new commentary i work through a commentary that i haven't worked through and i worked through joel green's commentary on the gospel of luke and what joel green really helped me with was was show me for the first time i sort of saw the way status and hierarchies play in the gospel of luke and and jonathan peugeot has has really schooled me on this in a terrific way by by showing how this works with jesus because jesus well i'll get to that in a minute but but here's the thing a lot of people will say well i'm all about diversity and i'm against inequality well diversity and inequality are almost two words for the same thing because think about it what is diversity well it's difference what is inequality well it's one thing is not equal to the other well here's the thing whenever consciousness comes into comes into impact and desires come into impact with with with options a hierarchy develops and again jordan peterson went through this whole thing too that that what happens when we have to choose how to live in this world is hierarchies develop do i choose which word to say which where to put my eyes and in fact our bodies are so it's so built into our bodies we develop these hierarchies natural and they they create in our lives when i wake up in the morning the inferior of my bladder tells the consciousness congress consciousness congress stumble into the bathroom and relieve me please because you you drank a lot of water sitting there watching tv with your wife last night and it's been working through your system so you ignore my pleas at your peril this is the meaning of protest that's about inferior and superiors and and when the system is working correctly superiors and inferiors in fact have their place in the dance with each other now again this was stuff that has taken me a long time to sort of run into but you know with the help of joel green i began to say well gosh it's all over jesus the last will be first and the first will be last where's the equality in that the greatest in my kingdom is the servant of all do not lord it up so those are very hierarchical and then next thing jesus will turn around and and and espouse equality do not lord it over one another like the gentiles do you are all brothers and you have one master so look what he did there you have equality and hierarchy it's pretty flat all brothers and one master sometimes the hierarchy is this way and the equality is thin but you find jesus doing this constantly in everything that he taught and and practicing it constantly and we're going to get into some of those manifestations a little bit later in the video and then when i i read the book of first peter this is a number of years ago i know i just did it in the sermon series i discovered that oh my goodness this is this is all over this book because of course in the ancient world you were born into a hierarchy everybody had their place in the pecking order that was one thing that was also true of haitian culture everybody has their place in the pecking order and you're born into your station and some people are born up here and some people are born down here some people are born to command and some people are born to serve but here's the thing those who command had better serve the ones down below and those who are down below had better every now and then give some commands to those who are up above if they're not doing well and and this of course sounds horrible to american ears but try and live without it and and the great passage that deals with this is in fact the christ song in philippians 2 in your relationships with one another have the same mindset of christ jesus who being in very nature god did not consider equality with god as something to be used to his own advantage in other words jesus had the highest status but he did not consider having that highest status to be used to his own advantage he is the picture of the perfect leader he is the picture of the perfect one at the top of the hierarchy he's the servant of all exactly what he says and so you say well well what's he doing to this hierarchy he's not abolishing it he's just showing you what it's for rather he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant actually a doulos a slave and and most english translations translate doulos as servant and and there's there's real reason for that because servant slave in the roman empire and slave will be heard in the the antebellum context in america for where they're selling a lot of their bible so you know i don't want to pick on them too hard but but some of the resonance of this is lost but made himself nothing by taking on the very nature of a slave being made in human likeness and being found in appearance as a man he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death even death on a cross which again read tom holland therefore god exalted him to the highest place and at the name of jesus every knee will bow and there it is the superior and the inferior and how they're both supposed to function that at the name of jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth all top to bottom three tears and every tongue can acknowledge that jesus christ is lord lord he's boss he's master he's king to the glory of god the father so there it is it's all over the bible and once you begin to see it well you can't not see it c.s lewis in his great sermon the weight of glory and and you can find it compiled in a in a book the weight of glory which has other excellent essays in it as well was the one who gave me the language of the specific pleasure of the inferior when i began to look into this matter i was shocked to find such different christians as milton johnson and thomas equinas taking heavenly glory that the sermon is about glory taking heavenly glory quite frankly in the sense of fame or good report but not fame conferred by our fellow creatures not fame as in what everyone wants to have they want to be fame i'm gonna live forever i'm gonna learn how to fly high i'm gonna go to heaven people remember my name it's not fame amongst each other but fame with god that's what glory is approval or i might say appreciation by god and then when i thought it over i saw that this view was scriptural nothing can eliminate nothing can eliminate from the parable of the divine accolade well done thou good and faithful servant with that a good deal of what i had been thinking all my life life fell down like a house of cards and go ahead and google on the internet c.s lewis's essay on membership and google his essay on equality lewis says equality is good medicine but it's bad food why you eat in a hierarchy your stomach and your consciousness are in a hierarchy if your stomach becomes your master you're going to have a problem and it's a common thing with that a good deal of what i'd been thinking all my life fell down like a house of cards i suddenly remember that no one can enter heaven except as a child and nothing is so obvious to a child not in a conceited child but in a good child as is it's great and undisguised pleasure in being praised just do it sometime see a child and delight in that child and praise that child and it's not just children adults love it too but adults are a little sneakier because they know adults can be manipulative but a child just enjoys the praise of the superior not only in a child either but even a dog or a horse i have a dog at home when i get home this afternoon that dog is going to be jumping and what does that dog want from me pet me pet me look at me give me attention when i used to have a big dog the dog was in the house the dog would come up and it was a 115 pound rottweiler made a muscle the dog would put his lap right at his head big old head right on my lap like what are you going to do now give me attention praise me apparently what i had mistaken for humility all these years prevented me from understanding what is in fact the humblest most childlike most creaturely of pleasures nay the specific pleasure of the inferior the pleasure of a beast before men a child before its father a pupil before its teacher a creature before its creator i'm not forgetting how horribly the most innocent desire is parodied in our human ambitions or how very quickly in my own experience the lawful pleasure of praise from those whom it was my duty to please duty to please you see the superiors have duties it was my duty to please turns into the deadly poison of self-admiration narcissism now one of the things that is so deadly about the way some of this is playing out is that it's lucy and the football because groups are demanding give me all your attention suck up to me tell me the script i want to hear and i'll praise you the first and the second time and the third time i'll come along and say nope god not good enough next level up this is the hungry heart of narcissism and it is never fully satisfied and you can right now find it on both sides of the political aisle but i thought i could detect a moment a very very short moment before this happened during which the satisfaction of having pleased to those to whom i rightly loved and rightly feared was pure and that is enough to raise our thoughts to what may happen when the redeemed soul beyond all hope and nearly beyond belief learns at last that she has pleased him whom she was created to please the bride of christ that's why he went to the feminine there will be no room for vanity there she will be free from the miserable illusion that it is her doing with no taint of what we should now call self-approval she will most innocently rejoice in the thing that god has made her to be and the moment which heals her old inferiority complex forever will also drown her pride deeper than prospero's book perfect humility dispenses with modesty if god is satisfied with the work the work may be satisfied with itself it is not for her to bandy compliments with her sovereign i can imagine someone saying that he dislikes my idea of heaven as a place where we are patted on the back now if you haven't read the madness of crowds by douglas murray i recommend it and it's really helpful for reading right now douglas murray deals with a lot of these things and if you don't understand how this is built into us well look how it gets built into sexual relationships this is a comment he makes or perhaps the whole pretense is in fact built into an impossibly large landmine after all a man trying to work out what a woman wants today might be forgiven for being wracked with confusion what do men want to do to woo a woman they will dress differently they will spend lots of money they will do all sorts of things to gain her affection she is the superior he is the inferior he will go and sing at her window he will bring flowers he will hold the door open what is what is the business with men holding the door open for women oh it's the patriarchy no it isn't it's the dance of superior and inferior because of course if you had a servant or a slave it's the inferior that opens the door so the superior can walk through why does the man open the door for the woman because they're engaging in a dance of inferior and superior and they go back and forth and that goes on in the set and that goes on in the bedroom and it can have its perversions a young man starting out on his attempt to understand the opposite sex currently has to face a world which tells him that he must have the consent that he must have consent classes in school and in universities that dictate exceptionally precise rules about what does and does not constitute inappropriate behavior and yet he can go online and down or down to his local bookstore if he can find one and discover that the books which have recently sold in the greatest number to women including those of his mother's age group are the ones centered around women's rape fantasies fantasies that could not possibly be discussed or attempted to be understood but which are so public that the books in question are also made into movies shown in cinemas and grossing profits to date of around half a billion dollars it is groups it is is it groups of men who go to the cinema to see christian gray tying his girlfriend up for sex and then being redeemed by her or is it demographic or is it more if demograph or is the demographic more female and so what you see is that long in terms of the relationships between the male and the female the superior and the inferior and now critical theory comes along that says the men are always taking the superior role and it's like really have you paid attention can you read symbolism at all when a man opens the door when the man brings flowers when the man when the man goes after effort after effort to try and gain the woman's approval the man becomes the inferior the woman becomes the superior and what happens in the course of a marriage they keep changing roles in some aspects one's superior the other aspect the one's inferior and round and around and around they go in this dance and they both enjoy at times the obvious pleasure of the superior it's nice to have someone else open the door but the specific pleasure of the inferior woo me seduce me take away my agency and incorporate me into this principality of two which is a marriage i can imagine someone saying back to c.s lewis i can imagine someone saying that he dislikes my idea of heaven as a place where we are patted on the back but proud misunderstanding is behind that dislike in the end that face capital f which is which is the delight and the tear or the terror of the universe must be turned upon each of us either with one expression or with the other notice he's the terror and the delight either conferring glory inexpressible and the pleasure of the inferior so bringing us rapture or inflicting shame that can never be cured or disguised you see some of that critical theory code in there it's distorted it's twisted obviously very coders without much skill or theological education or even understanding or honesty about human nature coded some of that but you can see the codes that they were cribbing from by god himself i read in a periodical the other day that the fundamental thing is how we think of god by god himself it is not lewis says how god thinks of us is not only more important but infinitely more important think about eric weinstein's comment about well the problem of the god is you have to worry what the god thinks about you he's exactly right what happens when you're face to face with that god and that's what we're talking about here we're talking about the god of the god of with that god well done good and faithful servant that's what we want to hear depart from me i never knew you that's what we fear indeed how we think of god is of no importance except in so far as it relates to how he thinks of us it is written that we shall stand before him shall appear shall be inspected the promise of glory is the promise almost incredible and only possible by the work of christ that some of us that any of us who really chooses shall actually survive that examination shall find approval shall please god we stand before an audience of one and though the world condemn me he must i follow is that dangerous when we're wrong you bet it is but it's also a power that everybody putting signs up so as not to catch not to lose status with others that's not something they're fully thinking through the promise of glory is the promise almost incredible and only possible by the work of christ that some of us that any of us who really chooses shall actually there's that agency shall actually survive the examination shall find approval shall please god to please god to be a real ingredient in the divine happiness to be loved by god not merely pitied but delighted in as an artist delights in his work or a father and a son it seems impossible a weight or burden of glory which our thoughts our thoughts can hardly sustain but so it is that's just a little taste of that sermon it's one of the best things c.s lewis ever wrote go out and find it you can find it read to you on youtube see here's the problem with the code from critical theory there's not enough space in the secular world for the drama miroslav volf is one of my go-to guys in terms of how secularity actually brings up heaven when we're trying to pull down hell it's the story of the tower of babel he just tweeted in 1934 bonhoeffer wrote to gandhi of a dangerous fever making germany and lu and europe lose both self-control and the consciousness of what they are doing volf says i felt the same in 1990s in croatia serbia and bosnia herzegov herzegov herzegov yeah i'm feeling the same today in the usa i hope i'm wrong i hope he is too because here's the thing when we try to pull down heaven we pull up hell critical theory is a child of the enlightenment which wishes to keep all dramas on this stage such a foolish dream you know you would think just seeing the fact that none of us are ever fully satisfied by this world should cause us as it did to c.s lewis to imagine that perhaps in some weird version of the world we in some weird version of the ontological argument we were made for and this is all participation and a preparation for a world to come this this creates a utopian impulse that that people find terribly hard to ignore and as he says in this this this quote that i'll put a link in the in the bottom well maybe i should read it because some of you are listening on the podcast one could object that it is not worthy of god to wield the sword or to pick and choose among us is god not love long-suffering and all-powerful love a counter question could go something like this is it not a bit too arrogant to presume that our contemporary sensibilities about what is compatible with god's love are so much healthier than those of people the people of god throughout the whole history of judaism and christianity recalling my argument about this is from his book exclusion and embrace recalling my argument about the self-immunization of evildoers one could further argue that in a world of violence it would not be worthy of god to wield the sword to wield the sword if god were not angry at injustice and deception and did not make the final end to violence god would not be worthy of our worship here however i am less interested in arguing that god's violence is not unworthy of god than showing that it is beneficial to us atlant has rightly drawn our attention to the fact that in a world of violence we are faced with an inescapable alternative either god's violence or human violence most people who insist on god's non-violence cannot resist using violence themselves or tacitly sanctioning it in the use by others or denying god for that fact they deem the talk of god's judgments irrelevant and think nothing of entrusting judgment into human hands persuaded presumably that this is less dangerous and more humane than a belief in a god who judges that we should down the powerful from their thrones seems responsible that god should do the same as the song of that revolutionary virgin explicitly states seems crude and so violence thrives secretly nourished by a belief in a god who refuses to yield the wield the sword my thesis that the practice of non-violence requires a belief in divine vengeance will be unpopular with many christians especially theologians in the west to the person who is inclined to dismiss it i suggest imagining that you are delivering a lecture in a war zone which is where a paper that underlies this chapter was originally delivered among your listeners are people whose cities and villages have been plundered they were burned and leveled to the ground whose daughters and sisters had been raped whose fathers and brothers had their throats slit the topic of the lecture a christian attitude towards violence the thesis we should not retaliate since god is perfect non-coercive love soon you would discover that it takes a quiet of a suburban home for the birth of a thesis that human non-violence can corresponds to god's refusal to judge in a scorched land soaked in the blood of the innocent it will vary it will invariably die and as one watches it die one will do well to reflect about many other pleasant captivities of the liberal mind so i've listed some of critical theories flaws they're flaws in the code it's too small a stage because all narratives are limited to this age you are locked into your misery and everyone dies unfulfilled it can't understand the dance of hierarchy and equality it can't understand what jesus does it can't understand the dance between superior and inferior as they so often go back and forth there's no understanding of the specific pleasure of the inferior in fact it's denounced as heresy it is a religion while denying that religions exist its roots in the enlightenment are revealed here as well as some of the marxist branches that it takes but i don't want to stop there because of course the sociological way into the reality of religion is something that the celebrity atheists have had a much more difficult time with and where the religion of critical theory is so much more obvious because a religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things that is to say things set apart and surrounded by prohibitions now watch how many prohibitions people who are practicing and who are priests in the school of woke religion throw out you may not do this you may not do that you may not do this you may not do that 40 years ago all of that was the this the the complaint that the organized religious people were doing that look who's doing it now you may not do this really why not please tell me and especially since you've given up your god maybe you can kill me but i serve an audience of one so it makes religious people so very powerful so there are these sacred things that is to say things set apart and surrounded by prohibitions beliefs and practices that unite its adherence in a single moral community called a church and god god is only a figurative expression of society he was a secularist but he understood how religion worked what makes this religion so potent is the supernaturalism question can be simply set aside it isn't necessary for the definition this is what adam frendit has been doing on his channel for a long time their religion tends to center around reason or something like that often but now we're seeing that change as modernity and its sacred aspect of reason is increasingly put away which is of course why james lindsey peter begosian and many of the new atheists who are not atheist plus are complaining you see religion is necessary for human success john calvin said man's nature so to speak is a perpetual factory of idols brett weinstein said we corrupt we cooperate in order to compete jonathan height noted when a group of people make something sacred the members of the cult lose the ability to think clearly about it that's really key when you find out what critical theory makes sacred when a group of people make something sacred the members of the cult lose the ability to think clearly about it morality binds and blinds jonathan height notes we discover some value or for or something around which we find agreement powerful psychological and sociological forces align to create both cooperation and competition around the value or thing create and or the thing creates a powerful idol what is an idol an idol is something that functions as a god but is less than god it's often a good thing made ultimate and in fact that is what's functioning here now someone might say black lives matter it's absolutely true someone might say beaten wives matter that's just as true how do you know which to say when is black lives matter your idol is beaten wives matter which is it well critical theory saw that and they knew that you know people are just going to fragment and so you need a cohesive idea something that cannot in a cartesian way be doubted so oppression becomes your idol your experience of oppression i am oppressed therefore i am and nobody can can cause me to doubt that they're not paying attention to what that does to identity however so last year i made a video because you know it really became clear in the conversation i saw between benjamin voice and james lindsey about this dynamic that well oppression becomes the one thing you can't deconstruct because and this is why i had um i forget his name right now but the frame guy this is why you have oppression becomes the frame because you need one thing that's why we make idols we need one thing through which to see the world so we can organize our moral community in order to make a world you need a sacred but the problem is there's so many possibilities in the world now it's a very clever trick to make my experience of oppression my sacred thing it's sort of become your personal household god because of course intersectionally speaking your experience of oppression is unique but what makes difficult is figuring out how to form a principality because once you get something sufficiently powerful as your sacred thing it might be a communal injustice it might be a grievance grievances have been sacred things for many many years remember after 9 11 never forget that's making a grievance a sacred thing and you can build a community around that now again we participate in multiple principalities at the same time but they're going to stack up in a hierarchy because they're going to man service from us maybe the service might be saying the holy words in order to create the community maybe the service will be a financial contribution maybe the service will be showing up in a march but service will be demanded and hopefully something will come down to us in response to that service if it's an element in the world and here's the problem if you take something and make it sacred that's part of the world it's going to frame a lot of things out so 9 11 never forget all right it means that other things are going to have to be forgotten that means that other grievances are going to have to come down lower in the hierarchy and so well my oppression well is my oppression maybe my oppression is having been a minority white person growing up in a majority black community that sometimes makes a very ugly idol and we're not going to go there if it's an element in the world it will limit your power because it frames out too much the cartesian certainty leaves you finally and ultimately alone in some ways and all of your other principalities cross-pressured and this is the problem with idols now how do these principalities work well in the 1980s an anime series called Voltron came on the scene and Voltron is a wonderful way of understanding how principalities work and how diversity works to create something powerful now the cool thing about Voltron which now if you understand a little bit of symbolism and you watch the anime series and you watch the anime series and you a bunch of the shows of Voltron you begin to notice the pattern that well there's some chit chat at the beginning and then some threat comes about and the five lions go out to try and address the threat and then undoubtedly at some point some robeast comes on to the scene and the robeast is usually a hodgepodge of various scary elements and we're going to talk about Daniel 7 a little bit later and and the the the five lions separately try to address the robeast and they can't and so finally then they form Voltron and if you've never seen the show and i'm going to use the word Voltron a lot so i want to play how it goes and it goes the same every episode and anime can sort of be anime can sort of be cheap in terms of well how to put these things together it's always the same clip and if you follow it a little bit you discover that one of the Voltrons come one of the lions comes out of a cave of fire one of the lions comes out of the smoke or the water one of the lions comes out of the earth you know so you have all the elements and you know it's it's very archetypal the way this whole thing functions now they're going up into the sky together and something's going to come down out of the sky then he's going to fight the robeast and he's going to win and the world will be saved until the next episode when the whole cycle comes all over again now this dynamic power is mobilizes human beings because of their diversity into a massive Voltron like entity that is far stronger than the sum of its parts see this where diversity and inequality sort of go together one might be stronger one might be smarter one might be richer one might be more beautiful now what if you can take all of these qualities and put them into one well you have a corporation human diversity which is the same thing as inequality ironically creates the potential for this Voltron like trick that humans can do to accomplish many become one you need something that coheres the group into a Voltron now if you read the book the secret of our success um henrik goes into this it's not that we're so much smarter than the monkeys basically i'm going to put it in my own words we're able to create principalities we're able to cooperate in order to compete and and there's always competition even in the way in the cooperation but there can't be too much or you can't get cooperation of course pretty much every show about Voltron has the negotiation of how the five and usually it's some great external threat that forces the five to create a hierarchy so that they can actually accomplish something and this is where there's so much naivete in so many today that no we're not going to have a hierarchy and you're probably not going to get a lot accomplished because we can accomplish this trick of creating principalities and powers we have dominated the planet look at how the opposing dynamics are marshalled into a hegelian market dynamic of meritocracy we are rivals within principalities principalities compete with one another's and competition levels up go to daniel seven you find these beasts and they're composite beasts of all different powerful animals you can find this in other religions you find gods with human bodies and animal heads and it's all the same thing they're all trying to take the relative strengths of different things and and create a a more positive principality out of the diversity and to recognize it in a certain way now in daniel seven the beasts come out of the ocean like something out of pacific rim and they're they've got all of these manifestations and powers of animals put together but they're not a cohesive hole and the ancient of days put them down and an eternal kingdom is given to a son of man who descends from heaven know as the lions go up vultron comes down and a vultron looks like what he looks like us now there's a lot of controlled competition here you need competition to divine the strength through engagement with the world think about that because competition well right now they're they're in competition to create vaccines for covid and they're hoping that competition will stimulate the different elements to do the best that they can but at the end of the day the best will win out and what that's how you know if you think about divining rods what do how do we're using that word we're trying to gain in a sense a monarchical vision of the world to see clearly to know truth so that we can wield you need competition in order to compete and divine the truth between groups which group is right which group is stronger which group will take the head now you have jordan peterson's wolf story that there's competition but i'm gonna i'm gonna threaten you wolf and i'm gonna i'm gonna bear my teeth and i'm gonna become as big as possible and maybe you'll back down and if you back down i don't necessarily have to kill you because all of us wolves are in competition with other wolf packs and with other animal groups and so if i can get you to back down and submit well then i can colonize you and take your power and wield it more now renee jurard of course worked all this stuff out and and the scapegoat here's something that's really crazy because the scapegoat the one who is killed as the enemy of the people becomes a god because he's the one that actually brings unity and allows the group to become voltron he creates the power and and so yeah definitely read renee jurard now we talked before about this framing element this this one thing that that that that the community can cohere around the element around which we cohere is not arbitrary nor is it incidental we learn what works and what doesn't work because what works wins immaterial ideal immaterial ideals and idols are more powerful than material ones well if you burn down every building that the united states government has do you really destroy the government if you kill the functionaries of the government do you really destroy the government and notice that the immaterial is always more powerful than the material now material has its own power and again inferior and superior they work between each other and sometimes they change places but generally speaking it's the spirit so using a physical idol to express an immaterial or spiritual entity attempts to create a sacramental power all right once you fix something in materiality it loses some of the power of variability and this is why the hebra's said well the angel said god is holy holy holy you cannot affix god in a material human beings can't do this okay so god commands humans not to represent god by anything within their now notice the personhood within their creation yet right from the start man was made in his image so we understand why michael angelo paints god as a man but actually that causes problems because then we start to think of god as a man and no he's still holy holy holy now god will become a man but he'll be a man god so you know this stuff gets tricky and nuanced but if this is maintained you've got an enormous amount of power because you know it's sort of like in a third world country where if the general can get inside the oval office and say i'm in charge here and the rest of the government just complies well you've got a pretty weak government theoretically with our government you you make a vow to uphold the constitution well you can go into the museum of the archive there and shred up the original copy of the constitution the the the constitution isn't limited to that piece of paper the paper itself is in a sense a sacrament that connects you to the constitution itself which is immaterial now notice how we're so used to playing with this stuff and again um i keep it around here this is in a sense a sacrament of a dollar now if i destroy this i lose a dollar but if even just a little bit of it remains and i send it to the united states government they'll credit me a dollar why because it isn't a dollar isn't made of paper the paper is in a sense the sacrament of the dollar now oppression as a frame won't let you really voltron sufficiently it'll only as in a sense you might be able to show up for the robeast but you're not going to be able to maintain yourself now now let's run this code we've been talking about this code let's run this code with respect to the skin color variable why did skin color become such a powerful artifact in american history well here are three books that are very much worth reading if you want to go into something like this guns germs and steel by jarrod diamond 1493 by charles man and sapiens by uval noel harari skin color is a low resolution marker that colonialists used to divine something they had no model for which was malaria and imagine that again environment environmental changes shape genetics very slowly northern europe people with northern european ancestry like myself have pale skin that makes vitamin d with low levels of sunlight that's a good thing but we burn in the hot sun of california and our skin starts you know taking gotta gotta wear a hat all the time because when your skin gets thin and crinkly people in places with intense sunlight don't burn so easily and apparently some are saying that it takes more sun for them to make vitamin d because our skin makes the vitamin d that we need west africans developed a resistant to various forms of malaria but were also susceptible to sickle cell anemia those two things came together but they were more resistant to they were more resistant to malaria now what would happen of course and i'll get into this in a minute what would happen of course is that when basically the southern states came into drug money the drug being tobacco and couldn't grow enough of it to the degree that the the government had to order people to at least devote some land to growing food because they were so excited about growing tobacco because they could sell it like crazy they brought in indentured servants like crazy and how did the mason-dixon line develop the mason-dixon line was pretty much the line by which certain disease carrying mosquitoes couldn't cross because of the climate and so everyone south of there where they were growing tobacco realized that they could keep bringing indentured servants in from europe and they just kept dying of tertian fever which was malaria and then well i think i've got that a little bit later yeah now europe in effect took a big jump forward a great leap forward they had been pretty much behind the islamic world and the and the asian empires of of china where they had been trying to get and the question is why was it something in their religion that allowed them to voltron in a way the others couldn't now they were competing with each other too but you know it all seemed to develop in a very rapid way in europe at a particular time and in that develop and in that development all sorts of practices that gave them an astounding competitive advantage when i think it was admiral perry's fleet rolls into tokyo harbor the japanese knew they were in trouble they needed to change stuff needed to happen now that set up the second world war and their domination of korea and so on and so forth it's a pretty ugly history but competition it pushed them into a different ecological environment and pushed the europeans into different ecological environments that they were not suited for they did not know how to grow and so as 1493 notes they become they begin to terraform they begin to make north america into europe they bring over sheep and goats and well they kept corn but they brought over wheat and eventually rice and well they discovered potatoes and sweet potatoes but you know basically the americas didn't have all that europe asia and africa had developed and so the europeans brought that over and pretty much dominated now globalization happens in 1493 and they're creating voltrons that span ecological diversity and the multi this is multi-layered that to it is to an astounding degree and again read the book it's to and it's commentorially explosive just one thing creates another change now you've got first tobacco and later cotton growing and and they first tried indentured servants from europe and they kept dying and stentured servants were the the option of choice but then a dutch slave ship shows up and well what are we going to do here and they start working and lo and behold the black folks from west africa don't die like the indentured servants from europe and a slave culture develops and again there's a lot written on this but so was america founded by drugs namely tobacco at least the southern colonies people see opportunities and threats and so we reshaped the environment colonists remade the environment to suit their needs and tastes and they decided finally to tag slavery to skin color and it doesn't mean um that doesn't mean there wasn't racism before that doesn't mean there wasn't white before but the particular brand of american slavery race-based slavery took root over time the advantages and disadvantages and biological differences were increasingly irrelevant they believe that before again many of you learned this in school before the cotton gin slavery was just going to die of its own but then suddenly when you could process cotton with the cotton gin much more quickly well suddenly slaves could be used in the cotton trade now african americans are descendants of both slaves and slave owners and if you haven't seen condoleezza's rice rice's interview on face the nation this week you should see it she talks about the fact that her her great great grandfather and her you know was the slave owner and her great grandmother was the slave and she is the product of both how do you figure that out in terms of oppression how do you figure that out in terms of of jordan peterson often says well you know patriarchy you have fathers and mothers all the way up skin color becomes a tag it becomes a way to divine who can live in a malarial place but the tag goes through history and becomes in some ways irrelevant and takes on a lot more baggage now empire kingdom clan and nuclear family these are also scaling up and scaling down and we became less natural as we terraformed the united states and live in houses and have electricity and cooling and heating and we become less natural in our families too family structures which were relied upon for caring for elderly years caring for the sick by you know banding together to make the farm work that all gets changed and institutionalized in different ways families level up to larger institutions using the technology that we've developed now natural malarial resistance is no longer as important the rationalized strategies no longer hold and new things uncle tom's cabin um you know there's again well recorded history the racialized strategies no longer hold now remember we're always working blind in a sense and that people just begin to practice what was practiced by their ancestors and you know i lived much of my life not understanding about malaria and why african slavery grew the way it did in the americas i just watched thomas soul someone had posted a thing on twitter and he made the point that unlike the americas in the caribbean another place that i've lived they always grew their own food in a long you know because the slave owners didn't give them everything is that a reason for the fact i mean thomas soul will draw some of those conclusions it's an interesting thesis but racism no longer affords an adaptive advantage well so how do we get it out of the system well every culture has its problems with different particulars and racism in every country and it's found everywhere that i've been in this world well it's it's arisen for certain reasons and attempts at dismantling it happen for certain reasons and so what we do is we use religion to fine tune our voltron systems so we've got plaza attempting to deal with racism but then we've also got beaten wives matter attempting to deal with beating up domestic partners and violence against women so now anti-racism gets religious in order to remove the race from our competitive systems but oppression is too small a frame and too incapable of creating a multi-variable community if you want an illustration of this see the story of emmett till back during the cavanaugh hearings we heard that well women ought always to be believed well there's a long history in the south of white women making complaints about black men and white men lynching those men those black men it's the story of emmett till and it tells a terribly important story in the history of race relations in this country should a woman always be believed is a black man always a victim reality affords this complexity critical theory struggles with it which one do you put on top of the hierarchy black lives matter or beaten wives matter well a lot depends on what's happening in the news cycle right now oppression won't let you voltron very effectively and that's why well it's june and in previous junes well gay liberation was at the top of the hierarchy but well some people are trying if they're black and gay to try and meld them but very quickly it doesn't really work because they're different narratives and well there's somebody who's got a tremendous amount of power who says time after time it's not fair it's not fair it's not fair anybody can play the victim card anyone can have an experience of oppression in fact the more spoiled your life has been the more oppressed you feel yourself to be now back to the heideberg catechism the original code well not really the original code but part of an ancient code that's been expressed and pretty durable at least for my denomination is a multivariable thing racism is sin wife beating is a sin sin is a truly flexible variable it's missing the mark it's transgressions and there's actually a lot of code and machinery that are there to deal with sin now part of what everyone will run to is that well one of the things that critical theory lacks is a possibility of atonement that well you seem to have to keep confessing your sin and someone may pronounce you absolved for the moment but there's no centralized entity where the absolution can stick now obviously in christianity there's god and you are forgiven by god now do you believe it is that instantiated is it rehearsed is it reinforced in the community does the community have one set of rules by which absolution may be found found. Now, and this is where we get into the problem of people, because all of us are connected with these things in innumerable ways. I am white, I am a man, I have a Dutch-Jewish descent, Frisian-Jewish, you know, Frisians and Dutch, and you know, on and on and on and on, and I am a sinner, but I'm also a leader. Well, what happens when you have sinners who are leaders? Well, they make mistakes. Now, recently, Ravi Zacharias died, and Julie Royce, who is a journalist who works a beat of basically calling out misbehaving pastors, I just noted the tweet where he was one of evangelicals most popular apologists who authored 30 plus books. He was also plagued by a sexting scandal and claims that he overstated his credentials, and I thought he had three sentences or four, five sentences, and that got one of them, and that's how to summarize someone's life. How do you keep proportions with that? Now, is Julie Royce a racist for raising this? Was Ravi Zacharias a sexist for his sexting scandal? How do you sum up a man's life in a tweet? Now, we've had very high standards for clergy. Why? Because clergy are supposed to embody an archetype, and every clergyman or woman fails. Now, and again, look at what's happening in June. Last June, IKEA was proud to raise the pride flag at all of our stores across Canada. Well, what flag are they all flying now? Now, what happens? Well, here you've got three flags. I suppose you've got the Canadian flag, you've got the provincial flag, and then you have the rainbow flag. Now, you're going to put up another flag? You're going to add another flagpole? Are you going to put up the Black Lives Matter flag or the rainbow flag? Well, what about is there a flag against violence for women? This is the difficult of this narrative. Pride Month has been eaten by Black Lives Matter. All corporations must act like moral agents and take stands, and there was this video from CBS News that astounded me of this woman complaining that some of her white friends continued to post recipes on social media. How dare you do that? I'm sorry. What you really need is a life where all of these things can find their proper place. And again, we'll always get it wrong, and there are times and places for different things, but are you demanding the whole thing? Now, and here's the problem, because critical theory can't manage multiple screens well. Stevante Clark rose to a little bit of fame here in Sacramento when his brother, Stefan Clark, was unarmed, had a cell phone in his hand, and was killed by police officers not too far from here in my neighborhood in Sacramento. And I got all kinds of messages from all the places in the country. Paul, what's going on in your congregation because of all the Black people in your congregation, are they talking a lot about this? No. What are their thoughts about it? Their thoughts are more complex than the news media suggests because they are complex human beings. They're not just flat figures for a political narrative on TV. The same is true of Stevante Clark. Right before the protests and then riots started, I caught in the Sacramento Bee a report that he was being arraigned, and because it was during COVID, you could watch him standing in court with his lawyer, being arraigned for violence against his domestic partner. I don't know if it's his wife or exactly what it was, but hey, beaten wives matter. Not too long after that, when things were getting unruly downtown, he stood up and spoke eloquently for nonviolence, and because his brother was killed by police, he had authenticity and authority with the crowd, and the mayor quite rightly praised him for what he had done. So is Stevante Clark a leader on race issues in Sacramento? Yes. Can he be a leader on domestic violence issues? Well, that might take some time. Well, which is more important? No hierarchies. You're really going to have problems dealing with Black Lives Matter and beaten wives matter for the leadership that Stevante Clark can obviously bring to at least questions of protests recently. And there's no redemption. And one of the moments that this was illustrated so profoundly was Jordan Peterson at the Monk debates when Jordan Peterson basically said, can you give us a dollar figure that will atone for America's racial history? Now, they didn't like the question. Why didn't they like the question? Because they couldn't answer it. Because the answer for it is a religious answer. It's an answer that the material world can't fully satisfy, but it must be satisfied within the material world. It's a connection that's fundamentally religious. Can the answer be anything but infinite? No. Where can you find something of infinite value? Where can you find a sacrifice of infinite value to atone for these sins? The Heideberg Catechism knows, the book of Hebrews knows, critical theory will never know it. And that means there will be no redemption, no atonement, there's no resolution. This religion cannot bring peace. And it never will. Because of how it's set up. Because of its code. Now we've seen all sorts of Christian symbolism. And some people are horrified by this symbolism because it's religion. I'm not horrified by it. I understand it. I'm not horrified by foot washings. Because again, the superior, the inferior, Jesus and the hierarchy in John 13, Jesus is playing the hierarchy. He comes, he is the master of his disciples. They all understand the relationship. He strips down, wraps a robe around him and attempts to wash Peter's feet. And Peter says, no! No! You will not wash my feet. And Jesus said, unless I wash you, you can have no part of me. And then Peter says, then wash all of me! And he's like, feet's enough. Why? Well it's symbolism. But what's being symbolized? Well it's everything that Jesus said. The master of all becomes the servant of all. And that's manifest and symbolized. You don't have to wash all of him. Just has to wash his feet. Jesus is making a point about what he is about to do on the cross. And this has been ritualized in church. Now what critical theory does, this is a bad copy because they don't understand the symbolism. They sort of get it. Well, let's have mayors wash the feet of protesters. I can totally understand that. Now you'll notice from my bowing and kneeling video that I didn't give you an answer because the answer depends on the moment and on the specific relationships and the instances. There are times when the superior draws a line and holds it. And there are other times when the superior serves the inferior. And often the superior serves the inferior by drawing the line. Parents do that with children all the time. But you need the superior and the inferior to make the symbolism work. So again, when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic and worked with Haitians, I and their structure was the superior. Now coming as from second wave anti-racism, I had all these issues in my head about this. Why are all these black people serving me? I don't like this. I've lived my whole life against this stuff. And at some point I had to say, stop it. I'm pouring issues from patterns of the person into the Dominican Republic in a stupid way. Learn how they create. Learn the code so you can translate the code for the specific instance. But you have to understand the source code in order to make the specific applications and APIs work. Okay? So our drivers, let's say, the drivers that run the screens and the cameras and the microphones and all this stuff. Okay. So how does it work? So then when we did Lord's Supper with the Haitians, only members would be around the front. And I talked about this in one of my questions and answers recently. And I would be on my knees there and I would wash the feet of the Haitians. And actually that only made sense because they lifted me up. And again, there's a lot of colonialism that I really tried hard to sort of, if I could deconstruct for them. But at the same time I had to appreciate the narrative in which they lived. And so I did the best that I could. But I washed their feet. And because they had exalted me, that was Jesus washing their feet. And that's what gave the moment power. The superior and the inferior. And if these things aren't functioning, actually the people out on the lines when they call the police or the military to march with them, they're trying to figure out that dance. It's not just tearing it down. The reason they're calling to the military and the police and the mayors and the governors to march with them is they're engaging in the dance of the superior and the inferior. And if you banish that, it makes no sense. Well you're not going to banish it anyway because it doesn't really banish. It's above your pay grade. So what we have here is a crippled religion. Because it takes from the source code of religion, but takes selectively, corrupts some. And again, you can learn a lot from it. You can learn about it descriptively. But prescriptively, I'm not impressed. Why work off the blurry copy when you can read the source code? Now the church should know better. We've been running this code for centuries. And if you can't recognize it, it's because you're not familiar with the source code. The new church is unstable and fragile. It can't Voltron. The lions will fight with one another. That happens in the church too. I know. But that's what years of ritual and practice and discipline, that's what religions do over time. They create communities and principalities that have capacities. They train for things that you can't just walk up and do. Church leaders need to figure this out and create language rather than repeating worldly boilerplate in a sycophant's quest for legitimacy from the zeitgeist. Because the problem is, there's no atonement here. And you see adaptation. People are figuring it out. And again, first we act and we watch and we dealt the language. So I'm not wholly optimistic. In fact, I'm not pessimistic. I'm concerned. But I'm not finally pessimistic because the code is the code. And the best code is the best code. And the history of the church is of mucking this up and eventually getting something right anyway. Sometimes takes centuries, often a lot of bloodshed, but eventually we get there. So let's pay attention. Let's learn the code. Let's understand that Black Lives Matter and Beaten Wives Matter and all along the way.