https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IwSiTQIDod4

 Hi, this is Paul. Didn't really have time last week to do a big video. I don't know how many more of these I'll be able to get out before my Australia trip. I've got a fair number of conversations queued up, and so I hopefully won't leave the channel barren while I'm gone. But I want to talk about this quest for the search for an integrated universal moral system and what's in play. There's just been a lot of topics out there that deal with it and what I call the monarchical vision of morality. So to get into that I want to just run through a mini history of Western civilization, which pieces of which I've dealt with in many videos before. Let's well actually let's begin at the fall of the Roman Empire. The Church was the only institution left standing in the rubble of the Roman Empire, and the Church in the process of conquering the Roman Empire had integrated Greek philosophy with Greek philosophical thought with Hebraic biblical narrative. Okay, so if you actually look at early Church fathers, Justin Martyr, Origen, Irenaeus, many of those Church fathers, what they really tried to do in order to evangelize the Eastern Roman Empire, they integrated biblical ideas with Greek categories and ideas and philosophies that were around in the time. Platonism, middle Platonism, Augustine obviously with Neo-Platonism and Platinus, all of this stuff got integrated and brought together within the Church. This process goes all the way through Aquinas who uses Aristotle. So this is you know Western Christianity, Western and Eastern Christianity all have this fusion of Greek philosophical thought with Hebraic biblical narrative. Both of those things come into Christianity and the Middle Ages was a slow simmer. It wasn't, they didn't go backwards. The pace got slower, more thoughtful, more deep, deeper. It's kind of a kind of a slow cooker. So from Aquinas to the Renaissance the project reaches its climax and as I've mentioned in past videos, I'm getting this from Philip Carey's Philosophy and Religion in the West, that great course of series that you can find on Audible. You have this great regard for texts. Truth comes through texts and it comes through the texts of Aristotle where you have science and physics. In other words, as Philip Carey noted, if you wanted to learn Aristotle before, if you wanted to learn physics before the modern period, you studied Aristotle. You didn't study nature. You didn't conduct experiments. You studied Aristotle. Aristotle would tell you all about physics and of course as John Verbecky has noted, Aristotle is a polymath. He covers everything. Science, morality, knowledge, physics. He covers it all. So at the height of medieval Europe, you have the regard for the text. Everything is in the text and with Renaissance humanism, you have this return to the sources, this rediscovery of the classical period and that again is part of the great integration of the classical period with the, it's the great integration of Rome, Athens and Jerusalem. So Aristotle for science and physics and the Bible for morality and narrative, but also the Bible for history. It was the fundamental historical narrative that European culture built itself upon and even though Europe was fractured politically, religiously there was a deep underpinning of the church, which of course was the last institution standing at the end of the Roman period. In the Protestant Reformation, the turn to the texts reached its peak. The Protestant reformers were attempting to address the corruption of the Roman church and even if you look at a historian like Brad Gregory, who was a Roman Catholic historian, who has done a lot of treatment on the Reformation that gets often negative critiques from Protestants. If you look at his work, which I found very interesting, the Reformation didn't complete the task, but everyone was dealing with corruption in the church. And what happened in the Protestant Reformation in Northern Europe and in Western Europe was more of a break from the church, whereas Southern Europe and especially in Italy, you stuck with the church. So corrupt institutions of man, which would be the Church of Rome, as seen by the Protestant reformers, were rejected in favor of a devotion to a text. In other words, the text of the Bible runs up to the top of the hierarchy in the Reformation above the institutions of the church, which meant the fragmentation of institutional churches in the Protestant Reformation. And again, that makes sense. If the top of your hierarchy is the institution of the church, as in the Roman Catholic Church, all the way being personified and identified all the way into the Pope himself, a real personality, well, there is your unity and you can have diversity under your unity. And that's what the Roman Catholic Church has been doing ever since. What happens in the Protestant Church is that the text goes up to the top of the hierarchy and the institutions fracture and fragment. And so instead of trying to maintain institutional unity and belief diversity, which was what you have in the Roman Catholic Church, you express belief diversity in the Protestant realm through institutional plurality. You multiply the institutions. You have the confessional movement. Each institution embodies a confessional instant. That's the whole process of confectionality that happens in the early reformational period. But the Protestant Reformation was a failure. It was a failure because the Reformation didn't conquer Rome and Rome couldn't stop the Reformation. And so what you had was a sort of begrudging truce at the end of the Protestant Catholic Wars. Neither could kill the other. So the theological wars and the physical wars ground down to a begrudging truce and that truce has continued in the church today. But what happens in that process is that the story verse, this layer, so you had an institutional church, which you could recognize and lay your hands on, you had a person which embodied the institutional church, as in the Pope, that was a life, that was a physical human being living in the church. And so you had a person living and breathing. Sometimes you had more than one Pope, but they brought it together down to one Pope. And you had to do that because you had to maintain the discipline of a hierarchy. Well, what happens is that the story verse, the thing that texts contain gets problematized because Rome couldn't defeat the Reformation. The Reformation couldn't defeat Rome. And so the skepticism comes in in terms of our ability to use texts to resolve plurality, to resolve doubt, to resolve division between us. Luther starts the Reformation hoping that around the text, the church can now finally agree. What happens in Luther's wake is the failure of Luther's project in that we can't all agree on the text. So in other words, you have confessional communities develop. My denomination, for example, is a confessional community. Our confessions are the three creeds, the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene Creed, the Athenation Creed, and then what we call in our denomination the three forms of unity. The Heideberg Catechism, the Belgic Confession, and the Canons of Dor. Those are our texts. And the idea is to be a minister in the Christian Deformed Church, you have to subscribe to these texts. In other words, the story verse, actually it's an early modern approach to knowledge in some ways, but the story verse is that which binds the community, not the institution. And so if the story verse fragments, institutions fragment. So philosophers and critics look for a new way forward because part of what human beings are always trying to do are stop these horrible divisions between us. That cause so much strife and violence and death and war and all of the problems that we face. And you see that all the way back to the Genesis story where the first thing out of Adam's mouth after the Lord confronts him on eating the fruit of the tree is, it was that woman that you gave me. Right out of the block. So philosophers and critics look for a new way forward since the theological and religious institutions have reached an impasse. Maybe there is something beyond the text that can guide us into certainty and what's even more important from certainty, unity. Something that can finally bring us together and heal the divisions between us. So then you have the beginning of Descartes and modern philosophy that turned to two non-textual sources of knowledge, which are reason, which is in many ways the heavens or math and empiricism, which is the earth, this space for objects. And so then at this point in the early modern period, science is a turning away from Aristotle's physics and an exploration of the physical world. There's gravity, things drop. There are properties here in this object. So turning away from texts towards things in the physical world and also pure reason, logic, math, that which we can conceive of in those ways. Maybe if we can use these sources, which seem harder, which seem more foundational, which seem more basic than texts, then we can get rid of all of our strife and warfare and division. And in fact, that project, the hope of that project is really what modernity is about. Through reason and empiricism, we can now basically drive error from the field, drive reason as the means by which we try to drive error from the minds of others. And through these two methods, through reason and empiricism, we can now finally, well, we can reconcile heaven and earth. We can end all wars. We can end all divisions. We can end the rebellion that nature, since Genesis 3, the story of the Garden of Eden, we can end the rebellion that nature has been holding against us. And of course, in the biblical scheme, that rebellion is entered when we end our rebellion with God. But the hope of modernity is to end the rebellion of nature against us and end the divisions between human beings without actually having to deal with God. And in many ways, the easiest way to handle that is to have God go away or have God become private and personal and non-objective. So the subject becomes problematized. Well, what do I mean by that? Well, if people are the problem and people are always the problem, people don't agree, people disagree, people fight, people rebel, people kill, get rid of people. Well, we're not really going to get rid of people. We're just going to get rid of the thing that is at the heart of what a human being is, which is the subject, the person that's got control of the mouth, the person that keeps disagreeing, the person that keeps quarreling, the person that keeps having a different perspective. You want a monarchical vision of the world. You want one view of the world that all will bow to. Sounds quite a bit like Sauron. In order to keep the objective, the subjective must be hidden or suppressed. And this is again an ongoing theme we see in human civilization. It's the view from nowhere. And because we can't achieve this, what we do is we scale over time and we scale over viewpoints. Well, this seems true for me. And if maybe using reason and demonstration, I can prove that it's true for me and you and me and you and you and you and me and you and you and you and you and you and you and not just for today, but today and tomorrow. And tomorrow, it's not we not only have object permanence, but we have thought permanence. We'll continue to agree on this today and tomorrow and the next day and the next day. We'll have covenants together. We'll have agreements together. There'll be accountability and right away you can see Jordan Peterson's Piaget equilibrated state that goes out over time and goes out amongst people. That's how we can try to get a reasonable facsimile of the monarchical vision. If enough of us can agree, well then suddenly we get the crowd dynamics of social knowledge, of sociology of knowledge where, well, if all the elephants are agreeing, then the riders feel comfortable and then maybe we can get, have finally one herd all moving in the same direction and end these counterproductive strife and wars. And because we can't actually achieve the monarchical vision because of the multiplicity of individual consciousness, well, maybe we can get as close as possible to it by creating large groups. We can all share one vision. Now, God has been, let's be agnostic about God, God has been an enormously useful imaginative platform by which we could see through him, not see through him, but through his eyes into the monarchical vision. That's essentially what Descartes does. God wouldn't let us be fooled, so therefore we have true knowledge. And this maintained itself, you know, while Christianity continued to have hold on us, continued to have purchase in the culture. So God was enormously useful and this makes sense of all of the rear guard actions we see in philosophy and theology all the way into the 19th and 20th centuries with guys like Rudolf Boltman really trying to keep Christianity alive. Carl Barth, many of these other theologians, philosophers, Kant trying to in a sense keep this monarchical vision alive because it's just simply so useful for building communities and institutions that actually allow us to be productive in the world. But now theological wars and the loss of authority of texts cast doubt on the enterprise. God is dead is the cry in the streets and Nietzsche notes, well, what are we going to do without him? He was incredibly useful. Well, we need to replace him. But now you run into Jordan Peterson's question. Can you really write a fairy tale? We say sure, we write fairy tales all the time. But here's the thing. But here's the thing. Are we know our fairy tales through a sort of Darwinian literary tradition by which and this is undergirds Jordan Peterson's biblical series, this Darwinian literary tradition whereby the best texts survive. So even if you write a fairy tale today, it's going to take a few centuries or maybe thousands of years to know whether or not you've done it. Now you've just written a story. You haven't written a fairy tale because a fairy tale is not defined in the story itself, just like in Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris's conversations about the Glass of Elton John. You can't look into the story and say, ah, that's a fairy tale. You can feel the fairy tale-ness of it, but you need to run the test through multiple different cultures, through multiple different people through because again, this is how the monarchical vision, we arrive at our facsimile of the monarchical vision. It needs to endure through decades and hundreds and maybe even thousands of years in order for us to say, ah, there it is a fairy tale. But we also have the problem of skepticism with texts now because texts are in fact the conveyors of this or at least have been. We'll see if YouTube survives. YouTube is another conveyor of this, but the texts have been the conveyors of this. So right away, you've got a problem with the storytales are embedded in text and we've already suspicious of text. We're already suspicious of the story verse, so we're a little adrift. So we're looking for to somehow establish a science because we're really excited about science and what that's been able to demonstrate and help us with. We want a scientific morality, a way to tell us how to live not just in a space for objects, but in a form for action. And this is where we have Jordan Peterson's fork in the road. This is where he begins maps of meaning. The world is best conceived of a space for objects, ontology. Materiality is foundational. The story versus dependent or a form for a form for action, which is morality, which very well implies the story verse is foundational. The story verse is foundational and materiality is secondary. Now this is exactly where Jordan Peterson is currently. This is the fence he is straddling because he knows that the story verse continues to govern, but he's sufficiently modern to not be able, at least if he's on stage with Sam Harris, to not be able to retreat from the position that story is actually foundational. So you have the truce of late Christendom. Don't accept the Bible as an authority regarding objects, which is history and science. Because that tends well. See, in history again is kind of on the fence because what history really is, is the story we tell about the movement of the past, including its objects. Embrace the Bible as authority regarding actions. Okay, morality. Morality really does trump objects because static objects in space are our possessions. We move them around. We act upon them. We act through them. But human actors in time are our rivals. They're not simply objects. That's the problem of the subject. That there are rivals, our enemies, and our threats. And so what we established the truce, 18th, 19th, early 20th century, where he said, okay, we're not going to use the Bible for history and science. We are going to use the Bible and traditional morality for morality. And that indulges in many ways the modernist fantasy. We so happily colonized the space of objects and subjected it to our will that, wow, cue Steven Pinker. Look at what we've been able to accomplish. This is really amazing. If you can look at Yuval Harari's Sapiens, we've managed to banish in many ways plague, starvation. We've managed within civilization in many places in the world, certainly not all. In many places in the world, we've actually managed to create a decent space for biological creatures to continue to maintain their physical existence. But when people in, let's say, San Jose High School, people whose physical existence is no longer under threat start to exhibit signs of a meaning crisis, start, while they're no longer threatened by starvation or plague, now they're taking their own life. And now we know that suicide itself can be a contagion, that it can pass virally through human beings. So suddenly we're left to wonder, well, what are we really? See, this filled us with optimism, the power that we've managed to accumulate in the developed world. This filled us full of optimism that the scientific searchlight can be shown on morality to reveal a convincing objective morality that could be, see we don't really finish the sentence. Because once we have this objective morality, well, what are we trying to do with it? We're trying to banish the problem in the story verse. We're trying to get rid of the problem of conflicted fairy tales. We're trying to, I mean, this is Sam Harris's argument, this is the argument of the new atheist. We can now get rid of all the old obsolete stories and what? Well, we will all agree on what is moral. Okay. Someone like C.S. Lewis in the Abolition of Man might say, well, okay, you can agree on what's moral. Actually, we've been doing that for a very long time. What we haven't been able to do is actually do it to be moral. That's really our problem. Most people will agree on some, C.S. Lewis calls it the Dow, most people agree on some semblance of morality. That hasn't really been our problem. Our problem is that we can't do it. So what exactly is behind this quest for objective morality? Well, I think part of it is that, well, if we see it, we'll be able to know we're not going to walk off a cliff or jump off that bridge because that would be just irrational and lead to our death. Yet people walk off cliffs and jump off bridges, even if they do it because they know it will result in their death. So does this really, any of it get at our problem? And I think part of what's hiding behind this is also what you see in the novel Brave New World. What we'd really like to do is colonize each other's will. That's the last chapter in C.S. Lewis's Abolition of Man. That's the final subjection of humanity. That's Sauron's great final goal, to colonize the wills of others, to finally banish subjectivity. But then what reigns? Objects? You can't get to and aught from it is, says Jordan Peterson and Immanuel Kant, and they have a point. So then we look for scientific morality. We want a non-story based, and you can hear this rumbling about in Jordan Peterson's conversations with Sam Harris, we want a non-story based system that we can wield. Well, you have to ask the question. Again, when you ever hear someone say something like that, who is we? Who is we? In order to create sufficient consensus to enforce it upon all, except me, or we apparently, usually me. This has always been the problem with morality, as C.S. Lewis points out. We've always had, even the Apostle Paul in Romans 7 says, the good that I would, I don't do. And the evil that I don't want to do, I do. This, this is, Plato's been talking about that. We've been talking about this forever. And so then we, in a sense, try to scale out morality, just like we did knowledge to avoid skepticism. So the state enforces laws, and in democracy, people bound themselves together in a process in order to achieve laws that then will be held against them. No taxation without representation, no law without representation. Legislators make the law. We get all upset depending on which way the court blends when the court starts making law, right? You need a non-story good and a telos end goal summon bonum that can be as universal as possible apart from story. That's how you do it. You need a scientific good. A space for objects, good. So, well, what do we look for? Well, now, basically you're at Jordan Peterson's Darwinian Truth. Survival is a nice bottom line. That which promotes survival is good. There's a problem in there too, though, because survival of what? Maybe, maybe the survival of human beings is to bound, to bind us with machines, to use some Ray Kurzweil's vision of offloading my consciousness into a computer so that parts can be replaced and I can be backed up in the cloud and so on and so forth. But you have to then answer the question, who is we? Is, is, and there was one Black Mirror episode that dealt, there's a few of them that have dealt with things like this, but one where everyone is backed up into this computer and they live their life on a server. Okay. Well, is that us? Well, what is us? What is a human being? We're going to get to that in a minute. Now, postmodernity, in a sense, tries to do a hit job on narratives and this doesn't, it doesn't seem too hard to understand why this is in postmodern. This is the thing after modernity. Modernity tries to have knowledge by getting rid of subjectivity. Well, postmodernity goes all the way by killing the subject. It's the hermeneutic of suspicion. All narratives are stories told by someone, suspicious we out there, who wants to do you in. All narratives are that way. Therefore, no narrative is permissible in the public sphere. Well, then suddenly what is permissible? This annihilates human beings, essentially, because this is what we are. We are stories. Human beings are actually best conceived as embodied stories going through time. The cells of my body change. I am a very different, I am a very different creature than I was when I was five years old or five months old or five weeks before my birth. I somehow lived even before my conception in the story of my family. I somehow live beyond the physical death of my body on YouTube in the minds of my children and perhaps someday grandchildren and all of this stuff. I go on living. What is me? Am I a body? Is in fact the material foundational and the story derivative? That's a really hard question to know. And in many ways it's just a question of definition. If you want to define me, well now in space and time, now we're okay. So at 1253 on March 11 here in Sacramento, California, Paul sits in a room in his house and talks at the computer. Is that me? Or is me this this experience that I have? This story that that this body embodies, which is critically linked to this story and brain and in ways that we are only beginning to understand. This is deep in our hardware and software. But now remember, survival is supposedly the bottom line. But survival exactly of what? And see I would argue the Greeks said, well eternal life is the story going forward. Is being remembered. The great deeds of Hector and Achilles and the Battle of Troy. This is eternal life to be remembered. We're still talking about Plato and Aristotle and many of the ancient Greeks. They have gained eternal life. They continue to colonize the world. But for most of us, that kind of story rings a little hollow. It's utterly imaginative and terrifically theoretical. But that story rings hollow. Now what we are, are we homo sapiens? Are we are we rational? Are we thinkers? Or are we fundamentally story? This is a great conversation. In episode three of your series, which came out just this past. Oh, this is Benjamin Boyce and John Verbecky. You talk a lot about narrative and you talk about basically, you do a pretty strong critique about the current generation or I guess just the current few generations of the West where we have biblical illiteracy. We don't really understand like not just the religion, but what you call the grammar of our cognition. And you go into that and narrative is one of the things that is included in that. And this idea of the self going through kind of an orgasmic, you know, dip and climax and resolution and stuff like that. Yeah, yeah, very much. And I mean, that's, I'm going to come back to this later when I go to the scientific side of stuff. When I talk about the cognitive science of narrative. I mean, there's a lot of work on going on now that you act that the so first of all, the narrative is the Psycho technology. You are not naturally narrative. Daniel Hutto has really good work on this. You we practice of all day long. We tell stories. We watch stories. We read stories. We practice narrative with our little kids. And notice what we do. We have to really, really simplify the narrative. Tinky winky goes to the market because we're constantly practicing narrative and then the idea and what's interesting is right up until about four or five years of age when kids get that when they internalize that psycho technology of narrative, they don't really have what you and I experiences autobiographical memory. Right? They build it, you know, you have a you're an autobiography. You're largely a store. Right. And what's interesting about that is this ability, this form of memory sort of take shape from internal. At least that's what I think some of the best science is pointing towards. Right. We actually acquire our autobiographical memory and become temporally extended selves, our very sense of ourself and what we are a story extended in time, right is brought in from internalizing a particular narrative. And and and and and and and and it but it goes two ways. This is about the participatory stuff I talked about, because as you're becoming a story and you're actually getting this cognitive function of autobiographical memory, the world is starting to be a storied place for you. So everywhere you look, there's a so you're that's what I mean about that's this conformity theory that Aristotle's right. You and the world are conformed. You share a fundamental identity. You're both stories. It's not a belief you have or even a set of skills. It's a sharing of identity between between you and the world in a deep, deep way. Yeah, yeah. That's interesting because I spent a lot of time working in preschool. And one of the things that I experienced was that narrative is basically our reality. That's what I thought, because as soon as I started speaking in a sequence of events with a character going through a sequence of events and like you say, it's very simplistic. There's no real resolution. It's just one cascading image after another. But there's still that central character. I always thought that that narrative is not a technology. It's just how we already see the world because the children would automatically like everything would they would turn off. It's like like they were just plugged into this. And that's that goes through that goes to Daniel Segal's work and others people's work. So, you know, the idea of psychological attachment, not the Buddhist notion. This is the attachment relation, the bond that forms between parental figures and young children. And it's absolutely necessary to our survival. If you don't have attachment, you're doomed. Right. And so what's important is what in the parent predicts attachment. Well, one of the things that's very predictive of your ability to attach your child and get your child attached to you is your skill with autobiography. So you're actually plugging into that that right there. See what autobiography autobiographical skill really does is again, you are setting yourself up to be imitated by the kids. And this is a kind of learning. This isn't them just having beliefs about you or even getting your skills. They're identifying with you. They're taking on your perspective. They're trying to internalize your perspective into their metacognition. Right. And so that is a very powerful, very powerful way in which, again, a psycho technology actually transforms us at the level of identity, the way the agent and the way your agency and the arena of the world are being co-defined. And the fact that this this this is a meshed historically. It's sourced in, you know, ancient Israel and time as a cosmic narrative and that, you know, the future is open and that the future itself has the time itself has the structure of a story, a climax, a turning point, a resolution. And that, you know, and that your your choices matter and steer the course of things. Right. And so we can talk about progress and we still talk this way. Right. And we still it's like that's what I mean, because this autobiographical narrative and then this mythology again in the positive sense of the word is so woven into us. We experience ourselves as beings in need of progress. Yeah. Right. And we have to we have to choose and direct and right and sense. Where is this going? And it has to progress. And we we that's and that's how we experience ourselves. And like I say, it's not just like we it's not like a self-directed belief we form about ourselves. You know, it wells up from the foundations of our psyche. And is that particular to the West or is that just a human thing? OK, so let's just articulate it in a particular way or not. Now notice he's making that he's asking the question, is this for the all of us? Is this our whole species? Remember, this is the goal to unite all of humanity and in fact, to unite heaven and earth. But we can't see heaven and earth outside of the story. And that's where John Verbeke goes into into the axial age. So what's what's interesting is narrative. And this is Daniel Hutto's work. Narratives the universal. We practice it everywhere because narrative is basically how you turn a biological human into a moral person. I mean, right there, right there. It's a space. It's a form for actions. OK, that's narrative is dependent or narrative is the platform for the human being. It's not the platform. It's the substance of morality. All right. That's really important when we get to Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris talking. Narrative is the substance of morality. It is that which morality is made of. Now, critical to Sam Harris's work, he is trying to make morality without narrative. And you're not going to do it. You're an act and somebody who can actually do something because they can conceive of something as a sequence of events. Not only that, they can take moral responsibility for it, which is an additional thing about being just an intelligent agent. So I want to get both of those things in the sense of person, right? The confidence and moral responsibility, the two together. That's universal. And the practice of narrative is universal. But the idea that that could then be extended to understand time. Yeah. OK. Right. The way of understanding this actual idea that there's an illusory aspect to reality or a decadent aspect of reality and a transcendent or more real aspect of reality and understanding that as this movement from, you know, a captivity in a pre-axial empire like Egypt and a movement to a promised land. And so we and notice how many so-called secular ideologies are so utopic in way of understanding thing. And it's the same thing. History, right, history has this grammar and we figured it out. This is how it should go. And yeah, it's a very much. OK. Watch the whole thing. The whole thing is the whole conversation is good. So morality is an aspect of the story system. The story system is foundational to morality itself. It's the entire system in which we conceive of morality. You can't have Luke Skywalker outside of Star Wars. You can't have Gandalf outside of Lord of the Rings. Morality is that dependent upon the story system and the autobiographical system. And this is why it scales up into principalities and powers. This is why morality seems to disappear if you are using the asset of post-modernity. Well, post-modernity is about eliminating narrative. Well, goodbye morality has to be. You're going to banish Star Wars. Luke Skywalker disappears. You're going to banish Lord of the Rings. Gandalf disappears. Morality is a function of the story verse. This is also why the scientific quest for scientific morality will always fail because you must necessarily destroy the system, which is story, that is dependent upon that it is dependent upon in order to do your science, which at its foundations gets rid of the story, gets rid of the subjective, gets rid of the the little creature that's going through time. It's you're trying to have a monarchical vision where there's no subjectivity. And this is why trying to do a scientific morality keeps failing because implicit in the scientific project is the elimination of the subjective, of the subject. To science is to de-storify, to de-subjectify. Now let's take a look at critical theory, intersectional feminism, what I call progressive liberationism. Neil Senvi has, he's not about these, what's his status? Well, he's got about 600 Twitter followers. He's been talking at a few places. He has a nice blog post on Christianity and critical theory. Did I link to it? Yeah, I did. Okay, good. Well, let's just drop over there. What is critical theory and why should we care? Conflicts between critical theory and Christianity, critical theory in the church, advice for a dialogue. And it's a nicely done, I think it's a nicely done blog article about critical theory. Now I got into this, of course, because I began noticing what I was calling progressive liberationism happening in the church. And what he does, and you're welcome to comment on his, I'll put the link to his website in the notes. He says that there are these six premises to critical theory. Our individual identity, who we are as individuals, is inseparable from our group identity. Now there's a lot of, well, inseparable is too strong. Connected to is certainly there, because as Jordan Peterson mentions, we are not only part of one group. We are all part of multiple, multiple groups. I am a male, I have white skin, but I am Dutch white and Jewish white, not English white, or, but I'm also American, so I'm part of that group, and I'm six foot four inches tall, so I'm part of the tall group, and I'm 55 years old, so I'm part of the 55 year old group, and on and on and on and on. Right away they've got a promise in premise one, a problem in premise one. Premise two, oppressor groups subjugate oppressed groups through the exercise of hegemonic power. Premise three, our fundamental moral duty is freeing groups from oppression. There's your ought. Four, lived experience is more important than objective evidence in understanding oppression, because actually oppression, I would argue, is a story verse concept. You're not really going to conceive of oppression outside of story. Again, so all of this is dependent upon the story verse. Oppressor groups hide their oppression under the guise of objectivity. Well, there's a lie, so they're hiding their oppression. Individuals at the intersection of different oppressed groups experience oppression in a unique way. So, see, and Jordan Peterson has pointed this out about intersectionality many times. Premise six and premise one, well, there are actually issues all throughout these premises which are in fact being experienced and we're seeing them playing out in the world today. But this is, I would argue, an attempt at objective morality. Why? Well, look at this. We have a group, so we're going to define it a unique way. We're going to be able to define that. Oppressor groups subjugate. Well, you're going to have a problem with story verse, because that's a very storied line. Fundamental duty, that's our ought, our great ought. So I think by, and this is what we usually see, by taking language which is highly theoretical, we try to make it sound like science. But there's, can this really become a science for us? Can this be, well, what's that part of a lot of our scientific projects? It's the attempt to find a template that can be placed on every context. Again, that's speaking to this unifying dynamic, how we want to get rid of all human division. So we want to use words and categories that are universal. And so all of these terms are universalized, oppressor and oppressed, group, individual, lived experience, objectivity, is all very sciency, but how does it play out? So this is part two of Mark Nania. I keep my dyslexia gets in. Are you talking? This is part two of Mark Nanas. I guess that's how to say his name. Mark Nanas, he's been the one doing all the videos behind the hoax paper conspirators, Pluck Rose and Bogosian and James Lindsay, who I talked to a number of weeks ago. This video is very interesting because it illustrates all the problems built into what Neil Shen, I can't remember his name either, calls critical theory. The people who fought for our freedom were not cops or wealthy white city officials or gun toting libertarians or glad handing politicians looking to get our votes. They were hustlers, injection drug users, people who lived on the streets. They were black and brown. Notice how she's spinning a narrative. Notice how she's employing these sciency titles or group identities that are sort of social sciency in order to tell a story, in order to tell a very moral story. But notice how all of the different elements of these supposed groups fracture. Which is queens and trans women who do not have the option to decide that their struggles are just about gay rights. The people who fought for our freedom took care of each other, creating safe places to be themselves. When the white gays, the white middle class assimilationist motherfucking gays. So it's the white gays against the gays of color. But of course of color is a huge group because it's supposedly the, if you draw a Venn diagram, they're the non-whites, but of course white, not white. I mean, this is, yeah. Took over the movement later with their assimilationist goals, kicked them out because they wouldn't act grateful for the scraps gained to them by the racist politician, racist police forces and racist housing policies. Despite the persistent efforts by many white people, including so-called allies, to turn the conversation about race from a conversation, away from a conversation about black life, away from a conversation about police brutality, and away from a conversation about the white supremacy that lives and breathes within every single white person standing here right now. I refuse to shut my mouth and let white people set this agenda. I was at this meeting and there was a particular faculty member who was instigating much of the tension around race at Evergreen. And she was there, she tended to go to these things. And we were discussing the question, there were all these allegations about white supremacy at Evergreen and every so often somebody, sometimes it was me, sometimes it was somebody else, asked about, okay, where is this white supremacy? Can we see it? Can we evaluate it? That's an objective question. Can we see it? Can we locate it in the space of objects? Even though it's sort of a form for action type thing because it's a moral question, but let's get objective about it. And this faculty member said... Now again, remember, objective is about enlarging the group as far as possible. It's supposed to be that a reasonable person, again, a theoretically reasonable person, can look at this and come to the same conclusion as this whole other group of reasonable people. We've just established another group identity. Ed, that she said to ask students who are suffering from white supremacy to tell us about the instances of white supremacy is itself racism. See, and what she does in that move is essentially cut out the modern agenda and project. She's basically saying it is impermissible to play the objective game and to get rid of the subjectivity. That's her move, okay? And that's important because, and this is why the IDW is really in many ways a very modernist communion because they are doing their best to keep the modernist vision alive. To say that we have to maintain this project of objectivity. Now again, remember, objectivity is a facsimile of as many people as possible over as much time as possible. It's the same project of we can't agree on the story verse, which is maintained by text. We have to find space in object things to ground things upon, okay? And so right away when you see that, you begin to see the connections with the celebrity atheists and with the scientific community and with all of modernity. That's been the goal of it. And post-modernity comes along and says that whole objectivity game, that's just a con perpetrated on people of color and other minorities for the winners of modernity, which tend to be white European colonizers. And she said, we must stop asking them because we are inflicting harm on them asking for evidence. And the phrase, you know, inflicting harm again, which the modernists will say, now, wait a minute, you've just made an objective claim. Ah, but then go back to these premises. Oppressor groups hide their oppression under the guise of objectivity. She said to ask for evidence of racism is racism with a capital R. And as she said, racism with a capital R, she leaned forward in her seat and she looked directly at me. And I had been leaning back in my chair. There was no opportunity to ask questions in these meetings. And I sat up in my chair and I said, are you talking to me? And she said, yes. And I looked around the room and nobody said a word. And I said, you know, there is a ton of subjectivity in that last little story. And I really want to do a video on the relationship between this video, teaching transgression and Calvinism, because all of these all of these relationships have been worked through in early modern Christian history in Europe with different language. And in a sense, theology has played with all of this terms, these terms long before the critical theory people came across it. All these relationships. But that's not the focus of this video. At some point, you might want to check into whether or not my history lines up with the accusation of racism. Objectivity, evidence. Because you might be very surprised. And if you don't look into it. And the assumption that this other person is a rational agent and therefore the evidence can be viewed from an objective, not a subjective, from an objective posture and evaluated. And the two people can come together and agree. Well, it happens quite a bit, but we tend to see it more in much more space for object spaces and not so much. Forms for action spaces, because it is it is very easy to say, I have a headphone case right here. It is very hard to say my motivation surrounding this headphone case. And the way that this headphone case fits into a much larger story. OK, that's the story verse. It's going to come back to bite you. And the chair of the faculty said, Brett, this is not the place to defend yourself against accusations of racism. And I said, that's fine. Where is the place? And then the faculty member who leveled the accusation says you should not expect a place to defend yourself against accusations of racism. I looked around the room. The president of the college is sitting there. The provost of the college is sitting there. Nobody says a word. Now, remember the terms by which we achieve knowledge in the facsimile of the monarchical system. We do it by agreement of individuals. We do it by in small spaces. Testing subjective individuals to see if they come with agreement. This is why Brett Weinstein is so upset. Right. So I would be too, because the critical theory is being successful at colonizing his old school. That's what the story is about. That the facsimile of achieving the attempt at achieving a facsimile of a monarchical vision is in fact agreement. And what this gets now to Jordan Peterson and Solja Knitzen. Jordan Peterson says in order for tyranny to flourish, everyone along the way must buy into the lie. Well, what is the lie? The lie is a truth claim. It's a disputed truth claim, but it's a truth claim. In other words, part of the flaw of the monarchical system, the only way we can, the monarchical vision, the only way we can practice it is by virtue of communities. And psychologically, if you're within a community of a certain size, you will accept whatever that community believes as objective. This is a point that atheists have been making for a long time. This is a point about human beings. We calibrate our ideas of what is most real by virtue of the community that we are in. So if you can via something powerful like critical theory, colonize a whole college, well, it's all real to them. But is it real? Now, it's always easier to bind a group if there's a perceived threat. And this is the power of critical theory. So the perceived threat is, well, white men. It's history. You can get a group together very quickly. And Adam, over from Think Club, has made this point again and again and again. The easiest way to get a group together is to find a unifying threat. The kinds of actions enabled by this tend to be reactive and prohibitive. We might not be able to agree on what is true and listen to the beginning of that video I just played. We might see huge disagreements between white gay men and black straight women. In fact, I remember in Prop 8 in California, many blamed African-American women for the defeat of gay marriage when it was put forward in California. They said it was black women who voted it down. Well, obviously, lots of other people voted it down, too. But what pollsters looked at was, well, they expected these black women who generally voted Democratic to vote yes on. I don't remember which way Prop 8 went. I think yes was actually no. Anyway, so on and so forth. But those black women that were assumed to have been, well, they're going to be allies of the same-sex marriage group. They should vote in favor of same-sex marriage and they voted against. And so that was picked up in the papers. Well, why did they? Well, it's about perceived threats. It's more difficult to create a group to build something that will be generous towards outsiders. That's a much more difficult project. How can a group bind themselves together? How can all these individuals who are part of all these different groups, how can they actually be mobilized to do something productive? I look at, in a sense, the European Union. Well, they could all stand together in NATO against the threat of the Soviet Union. But can they actually hold together? Despite years of different languages, different cultures, so on and so forth, for perhaps the sake of economic prosperity. It's more difficult to create a group to build something that will be generous outside of the group of builders, generous towards others, generous towards the future. There has to be a viral positive vision and I would argue a story. It has to be an autobiographical story, overt or implied. There has to be a principality. There has to be a governing person. It's a personality. This is Jordan Peterson say it's conceived as always. A personality is the only realistic human vehicle to achieve that. I think that's true. Do you want to be a racist or a homophobe? That's what the United Methodist Church had to deal with. Are you going to lift up voices of people of color and people from non-colonizing nations such as the African bishops? Or are you going to lift up the gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender groups? That's what the vote came down to and the Africans won. Well, Africans are having a lot of babies. African Methodist churches are growing. American Methodist churches are declining. Unlike many other denominations, they decided to keep their main denomination transnational and that's why they had the vote that they recently had. See, here's the difficulty with critical theory. It keeps breaking down and we see this, well, as long as Brett Weinstein is the enemy, well, they can all be together around him because he then represents the enemy, the white man. But once he's gone, where does that go? Now recently we've had, there was a Michael Jackson documentary on HBO and a very, a very interesting, a very interesting conversation with R. Kelly regarding his treatment of women and underage women. And I found a very interesting conversation about these three. Now listen here for, listen here for how critical theory is breaking down because the group identities of the people are cross-pressured by the supposed narratives that they're supposed to be fulfilling. It was a lot. Okay, so like watching it, for one, it was a different experience, obviously, from watching the art. Now what's interesting from her is that she hasn't really come to a lot of conclusions and what she's really doing in this interview is basically processing out loud and so this is kind of a nice insight into kind of the raw processing outside of the conclusions. Kelly, it was a lot. Yeah, actually, what was your kind of feeling? What did you walk away from after seeing that? It was a lot. Okay, so like watching it, for one, it was a different experience, obviously, from watching the R. Kelly documentary for like many reasons. One of them, me and my friends were kind of talking about this, like how, like, some of us have had to like not so much check ourselves but like figure out what. Check ourselves. There's a key word because in the critical theory community, that's key language. You need to check yourself. You need to check your privilege. You need to check all this stuff. Now they needed to check themselves. Why? Because their narratives were being crossed because there's two, the oppressor oppressed. Oppressor oppressed. Well, I'll say let's redo Solzhenitsyn's adage. The line between oppressor and oppressed runs through every human heart. What we need to know. One of them, me and my friends were kind of talking about this, like how, like, some of us have had to like not so much check ourselves but like figure out what we need to sort of unpack around. Well, we didn't want to check ourselves. That would be, that's, now you're into Brett Weinstein. Are you calling me a racist? Me? Don't I have anti-racist credentials? Well, we, we're, me and my black woman friends, well, we don't have to check ourselves because, well, because you have privilege in this new oppressor oppressed game. And that's the irony of the game. The moment you become a victim, you have victim privilege. Had to like not so much check ourselves but like figure out what we needed to sort of unpack around. Seeing not children but now grown up white men telling the story about Michael Jackson. Notice how she forefronts their race. Now, because that's now critical. If these were children telling us about this, well, when Michael Jackson went to court, the children weren't believed and some of the children spoke in favor of him. And, and their evidence as, as children giving testimony was allowed to stand and one of the guys in this documentary in fact flipped. He gave, he gave testimony in Michael Jackson's defense, which eventually led to Michael Jackson's acquittal when he was a child and now as an adult now having children, he's changed his story. So suddenly, we have all of these questions of ontology flooding in. Well, what is that guy do does the color of his skin matter? Does his experience matter? This critical theory stuff breaks down pretty darn fast. It's something like figure out what we needed to sort of unpack around. Seeing not children but now grown up white men telling the story about Michael Jackson like it's something that I feel like automatically puts people at like. See now she never finishes her sentence, but we know what she's saying. You know, story about Michael Jackson like it's something that I feel like automatically puts people at like, you know, like they don't, it is somewhat discredits, for whatever reason. Oh, what do you mean for whatever reason it discredits for the reason that's being given because they're white because you can't believe them because they're white. But but they were children. So so so what were they? What is their identity exactly? And I think that all kind of ties into like, you know, the visibility that white men typically have or the access or the fact that white men typically have. People will believe them, you know, the visibility that white men typically have or the access or the fact people will believe them. But they were abused as children. So that was what I was just like totally stuck on when, you know, there were moments when I believe it was Jimmy was talking about how he's a father now and he has a son who was the same age as him. He was seven and he was also being. See, now we've got another identity marker. Now he's a father before he was a white man. Then it was a child. Now he's a father. What exactly is their group identity? Which identity is supposed to govern the moral mappings of the story? You know, allegedly abused by Michael Jackson and just sort of like going back and having to like remember that all all victims survivors should be humanized. Well, now we have a rule in her moral landscape. All victims. Well, we don't want to call them victims. All survivors. She checked her language should be humanized. Well, aren't they human to begin with? Well, we have to treat them as humans. Well, do we have to treat them as humans if they're white? Well, maybe we have to treat them. We can only treat them as humans if they're victims or survivors. This this cannot stand, you know, all going back and having to like remember that all all victims survivors Should be humanized, you know, no matter what they look like. Ah, there's the older story that we should judge people by the content of their character, not the color of their skin. No matter what society applies implies about them and their experiences. But you're asking for that. We adopt an implication of their experience that we privilege their experience because they were victims or survivors. But this, of course, is based on the question of whether or not they were actually victims or or survivors. You know, Jesse Small is is is lurking behind this conversation because, of course, he had all of the identity markers gay black man and told the narrative and is now, you know, fighting for his freedom because of it. So it was I mean, it was interesting because like, you know, obviously Michael Jackson is no longer here. So a lot of people I think were like, well, what is the point of all this? Now, that's an interesting new bit into the conversation. He's no longer here. So maybe this is old news. Well, what about history of founding fathers? What about George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, who who owned slaves and Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemming? And well, they're no longer here to defend themselves. But but what they don't they don't get a say. But Michael Jackson, maybe we shouldn't talk about this. How can we even hold him accountable? And how can you even hold him accountable? Now we're in the box of secularism. See, and a point I've made often that Miroslav Volf's way it makes is that actually in the iron box of secularism, the the the slippery slope towards tyranny. Is actually worse because, well, you'd better hold our Kelly accountable now, because if he gets to die, reputational assassination, Allah, other evil people in history is insufficient. In fact, this community itself is discussing whether they should talk about it at all, because Michael Jackson is dead. I'm like, well, you can still hold somebody accountable, even if they're somebody. Somebody what somebody his reputation is that still a person is that still a story? In what way does Michael Jackson remain today? In what way does Michael Jackson and his art and his music colonize today? No longer here. And I think that the first step in that is at least acknowledging and listening to the survivors and but of course you have to determine that these actually are survivors, unlike Jesse Smollett. You have to believe in them. In other words, believing in them gives them validity, not believing in them. This credits them. It's purely subjective. Because like that, you know, like it's we can't send him to jail in the ancient. Well, in ancient times, we would dig them up and burn the body and and scatter their ashes. That was how you got back on someone at someone who was dead, which is why. Well, what did they do to Osama bin Laden made sure his they couldn't set up a monument for him? Oh, we can't because like that, you know, like it's we can't send him to jail. We can't you can't bring him back. But the one thing that I think that we can do is to honor the people who were harmed by him and listen to their stories and and figure out what what gets in the way of, you know, being able to fully believe this. I just office. I've been having I don't know if you've had had talks with people who are just kind of. Well, fully believe it. Well, this this has been, you know, if someone if a if a person from a privileged background, a victim privileged background makes an accusation, you have to believe them. But, of course, if you look at Emmett Till, how many black men in the Jim Crow South weren't killed on the basis of the accusation of white women, even the most foundational elements of this group. Male, female, black, white. It can't hold together. It keeps breaking down. And now these individuals, they're trying to sort it out. And the cross pressure is is manifest in their internal attempt to process this because it can't be done. Reason actually exists. I was like, wait, y'all, you know, even that's even the questions of like, well, their parents and I'm like, these are the same things people were saying about our Kelly thing. And you were like, no, you know, like, OK, their parents might have been a bit negligent, but like that still does not ever justify what what happened. Who who was the person in the wrong? So she's actually got way down in that below a pretty good moral value, which says children are not to be used for the sexual pleasure of adults. Good for you. I'm glad about that. And and I know that it's also I think for me just in terms of with our Kelly, it was it was different because there were beyond black girls and women and we all. It was different for our Kelly. Well, why? No, our Kelly, it was it was different because so so molestation of white kids is different from molestation of black young women. There were beyond black girls and women and we all know that there's like there's always some doubt around. Yeah. So just trying like not to repeat that, like really toxic and harmful sort of, you know, like that was just like fighting off with that specific documentary. So you may. Let's jump to the next clip. Running out of time. Two o'clock conversations. One very personal thing about me and my kids, I have two children, I have two sons, and I played them older music, older than, you know, my son's my youngest favorite rapper right now is Drake. And, you know, he'll flip flop between Drake and Kendrick, probably depending on who has a new project out. But he knows Biggie. If a Biggie song comes on, he knows Biggie's voice. Ah, we're making a fairy tale. Biggie's surviving in time. The question is really, should Michael Jackson survive in time? He knows Pac's voice. He knows Prince and they know Michael Jackson. I played him Michael Jackson music and, you know, we'll take long road trips and I'll tell them how great Michael Jackson is, was. Is, was. Michael Jackson's still alive. Well, how is he still alive? He's still alive in his music. And that points to legacy, right? And as I'm watching the documentary at home, my kids are coming in and out the room. But now I have to have this discussion, and I'm sure they're hearing what's going on. Right. But as much as I told them how great Michael Jackson was, now me and my sons are going to have to have this conversation about really what's coming out and how do you deal with it. How are we to regard Michael Jackson? Because implicitly when we listen to his music, we're in a sense praising him. Ought he to be, does he deserve praise, having been a pedophile? Points to legacy. So, you know, I say, I say. All of this is about whether or not we're going to let Michael Jackson have the status of fairy tale. How do we feel like their legacies will go from here with R Kelly and Mike in particular? What? Did you have a? Yeah. Yeah, I mean, legacies. Well, OK, you can't take away a person's legacy and what they've done previously. I think they did a really good job of talking about that in our Kelly documentary on my time, just in terms of like, yes, all these great musical things that you have done are true. You did them. You're good at doing them. They were successful. But your legacy as a musician is not wholly your legacy as a human being. That's a very interesting statement. Your legacy as a musician is not wholly your legacy as a human being. How exactly does that work? I'd love to pause her there and have her spell it out. And so I think that, like, within your musical legacy, there is another side to it. And so, yes, if you want to hold on to those old records and say, oh. So in other words, the legacy of founding fathers maybe ought not to be necessarily the legacy of them as individual slaveholders. True or false? These are the questions we're debating today. You know, he was the best songwriter ever. Fine. But I mean, legacies often change. And I think that now we don't. Why do legacies change when the person is dead? Well, it's because living people are regarding them in different ways. This is the Darwinian process by which fairy tales emerge. I don't think there's really any value right now. I can't see and focusing on any of that stuff because that stuff is like that's that's the most obvious. That's the easiest go to. It's the most visible wherever you are. It's easily accessible. It's you know, it's in your face. So I think that, like, we need to be. I'm not exactly sure what she's talking there. I think she's talking about if you're talking about Michael Jackson, don't go to the pedophile stuff. Well, why not? Well, maybe it's the other way. Well, if you're talking about Michael Jackson, don't go to the stardom stuff and the important stuff in history. He was one of the first musicians to break through on MTV, one of the first black musicians. Which stuff are we not to go to? I think I'm a little bit more vigilant about having having some input into this new legacy that is coming up, which is one that is totally marred by the realities of his abuse. How does the abuse alter the legacy of the music? It's just, it feels a bit more like it feels bigger. Hierarchy. There's a hierarchy. Abusing children is worse than abusing women and girls. What? Abusing boys is worse than abusing women and girls? Is that your hierarchy? Well, he was bigger and more talented. Yeah, it feels, just in terms of talent, of course, but just in terms of the vastness of his legacy, like you were saying, even going back to things that he sort of broke through in the industry. In terms of just the way that his legacy has been able to totally transpire. I just feel like with Michael Jackson, because he's not here. Back to the dead thing. Because he doesn't have the agency to be here and say, hey, I did or did not do this. Because Michael Jackson can't put up his own defense? Well, I think his estate probably has pretty good money to put up a legal defense. I don't know. It's really hard. It's cross pressure at work. I mean, I also feel like I wouldn't really know the right answer, but I also don't feel comfortable saying his legacy still stands. And it's okay. And again, I think also, Mark, in the moment of time that we are is really taking in information. Time. We're going to look at Piaget in a minute if I have time. I'm kind of hitting home. And I think it's okay to say I'm still figuring it out. I don't know, but Miles might have a different take. And I think that because of Me Too, and because I think that social media makes things move way faster and feel more intense because of the Me Too, it just feels like a lot of things are happening at one time very quickly for a lot of people. I do think that this false legacy panic that we're having that as somebody who's... False legacy panic? ...studies the history of men and the history of kind of like patriarchy. I was like, men's legacies tend to be fine. Yeah. Now, so let's not worry about their legacy. Because they're men, their legacy will endure. So let's not critique their legacy. And it's like, what moral system are y'all using? I was thinking about... Even OJ. I put in Rick James the other day. And then I randomly was thinking, I was like, why am I listening to Rick James? And I'm mad about Michael. And I forgot that Rick James went to jail for torture and sexually torture a woman. But what I know for sure is Andy Warhol, Rick James, there's just so many countless men who have done heinous things. And then you give it time. So our generation, these generations are able to view what's happening. I think we're always going to have a certain narrative with Michael because he betrayed us. We loved him. And now this moment's happening. Ah, but will we continue to feel he betrayed us? But there's going to be a generation that doesn't really remember Whacko Jacko, doesn't really remember this moment. And his legacy is going to be informed by stuff, just how we talk about presidents and how we are able to hold that you founded this country. And you also enable African slavery. And we're able to hold both of those things. I think that's what's going to end up happening when it comes to men. Are you saying it's good that we hold both of those things? And I think this panic right now about legacy is really, I think that it's a little bit dramatic. And I think that also it kind of takes away the focus, which the focus should be on people who are being sexually abused. People who are survivors of sexual abuse. And how in this moment, even though Michael Jackson is dead, this is such a great moment to show people who have survived pedophilia, who have survived sexual abuse, that hey, no matter who the person is, you should always feel safe for coming out. You should always feel safe for telling your truth, no matter how much proof you do or do not have. No matter how much proof you do or do not have. Look, Google John McWhorter was on CNN. So I don't want to post it because I'll probably get my whole video taken down. It was on CNN. John McWhorter's comments on on Jussie Smollett. But what's the carrying cost of tyranny? Back to Verbeke and Peterson. I'm running out of time. I got to keep moving. So Piaget had a proposition and the proposition was this. You're the bully at the moment. Victor and I are having tea and you want us to play a different game. You want us to play, I don't know, what do you want us to play? Pull the cat's tail. You're a bully after all. And so we don't want to play pull the cat's tail. And so what do you have to do? Well, you have to expend a lot of time and energy enforcing the game. And the reason you have to do that is because we don't want to play the damn game. So we're going to do everything we can to stop you to subvert it. So now the moral game that is currently being played by critical theory is requiring a lot of overhead. Then you have to ask the question, which gets right back down to the Jordan Peterson stuff of what games are we bent towards playing biologically? Very old games that have no carrying costs because they're all built into us. So what that means is that you're going to and we're going to expend a tremendous amount of energy in a pursuit where we could have picked a pursuit where there was virtually no energy spent or resources. So Piaget's idea was that an equilibrated game, which is a game that everyone will play voluntarily, if you put that in an open competition, we could say a Darwinian competition against a disequilibrated game that requires force to maintain your basic totalitarian state, if you put those in a one to one competition or your totalitarian personality, if you put them in a one to one competition in relationship to the attainment of virtually any goal across multiple contexts, the equilibrated game will win and that's why it's better. And there's other reasons too. It's better because it isn't only a solution to a problem that's posed in one place. It's a meta solution to a meta problem that's posed in many places. I'll just give one example of this. No, keep going. Okay, so you all tell your kids, be a good sport. And your kids, being intelligent kids, think, well, don't we want to win this game? It's like, of course you want to win the game. Okay, so why can't I bash the guy next to me over the head with my hockey stick as long as I don't get caught? That's a Canadian example, right? So I'll tell you a story. I went to this hockey game once and my son was playing and there was a kid on his team. It was all him playing with the team. Team lost. A lot of you have heard this story before. He was up to him, cursing me. He was, truly, an idiot and a pathological one at that. And he was really destroying his child's soul. And this is not funny. It's true. That is what he was doing. I saw it happen over a long span of time. That was just a microcosm of their relationship. See, what Peterson is doing here is attempting to base the morality in the biology. When he says he's destroying his child's soul, he's saying he won't be able to be invited into future games. ...his attitude towards the world. Now, why was that wrong? It's like the kid wanted to win. It's like, yay, go man, went to win. He was a really good hockey player. So what was wrong with what the father did? Okay, so then we step back and we say, it's not important whether you win or lose, it's how you play the game. So what does that mean? Well, it doesn't actually mean what it says because it actually is important whether you win or lose. You should be trying to win. But then the question is, what are you trying to win? Now, then that gets complicated. It's like, well, you're trying to win being the best hockey player on your team? Are you trying to win that hockey game? Or are you trying to win the opportunity to be invited to play as many games as you can possibly play with as many people in as many contexts as you possibly can across the entire course of your life? And beyond. That's the question with R. Kelly and Michael Jordan. Why critical theory is doing well? Grievance. R. Kelly says it's easy to figure out why all these disconnected women have the same story about him. He's a rich celebrity and social media makes it easy to attack him. And there's value in attacking him. You can gain reputational status. You can gain status as a victim. This is true. We see the opportunity. We see opportunity when we look around. We say, oh, there's a chance for me to get attention. There's a chance for me to make money. There's a chance for me to gain a lawsuit. R. Kelly makes a good point. But Gail also has a good point. It also doesn't mean her assertion that there's a common history behind all these women also isn't true. Truth isn't singular like that. It maps out in many different ways. Game that can't be won. Critical theory community can come together in a negative community. We're against him. Once they have to do something positive, they simply fracture and they will keep fracturing. There must be a unifying story. Postmodernity can't win amongst human beings because it isn't simply how human beings are wired. It is, in fact, a product of grievance. This is how individuals. This is how individuals create or manifest a principality and how not just individuals. This is how we actually achieve to small degree what the overall desire is, which is unity and commonality and stop fighting. We create a unifying story. We create a principality. Why do we look back and see religion everywhere in the past? Have we ever asked that question? Well, many people have. Why do we look back and always see religion? Why has religion been so successful? It took religious stories to enable anyone to build anything that lasts. Without individuals, nothing changes. Without institutions, nothing lasts. And now we're faced with the obvious dilemma. Will your civilization last without a religion? Will your civilization last without a communal story? Will your civilization last without the practices and liturgies and rituals that go into it? Now, nationalism is a religion of sorts. Ethnicities are religions of sorts. All of those things have staying power because they can be storified and they play naturally in the story verse. Now, in many ways, Jonathan Haidt has been the adult in the room for all of this stuff. He has gone on crazy Joe Rogan with his, you know, when, when, when Elon Musk is on with Joe Rogan and when, when Alex Jones is on Joe Rogan, it's the crazy show. When Jonathan Haidt is on Joe Rogan, they're going to have a nice, calm, measured conversation. Jonathan Haidt, he's the adult in the room. There's no movement. There's no movement starting behind him. Why not? Why not? He doesn't have that thing that suspender at my meetup in Southern California, you know, suspender Peterson, somebody said it was like bang right away. Archetypes, this is built in and bang. I knew exactly what he was saying. Peterson and his suspenders. Peterson created a moment. Why? Well, look it. He mobilized that stuff. Will he create a movement? That's a much bigger and different question. One that one that Ron Dard and I were talking about. Nothing changes without critique. Jonathan Haidt is doing a lot of about critique, but nothing lasts without institutions. That's going to be the question. The question of Western civilization is, will it survive without religion? Because that's how we're wired. Objective morality. It'll never be a science. It's not how people work. And generally speaking, when you try to objectify it, you kill its viral ability to actually move through people to attain. Playing all the games to attain. All the people embracing it. Jonathan Haidt has the formula down. He just doesn't do it. I think I'm going to call this one over. Thanks for watching. I got to talk to some folks.