https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Px75eNzHBIg

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to read some of a book, Severe Mercy, which we'll get to in a little bit, because to me it illustrated the scalability issue with respect to religion. This morning, in fact, I had a conversation with someone who worked in the Canadian correctional system, and we talked a lot about the kinds of people that we deal with. And this morning, in fact, there was a homeless guy that I had never met before, and he was sleeping outside my door. And he woke up in the morning, and well, at first I came in through another way because the gate was open, and then I kept hearing someone cough, and it's like, okay, there must be somebody out there. And at one point I decided, well, I better see who it is, see if I know them, see what's going on. So I opened the door, and it was a new guy, and he apologized for being there. And so I was going, I had to get up anyway, okay, and I'll clean up my stuff, okay. And then he started talking to himself, and he started talking about how this world is horrible, and he hates this world, and he hates his life, and he doesn't want to live. And I've heard this kind of thing through my door from homeless people that seem, it seems that the best place to sleep is right exactly against my door. There's 40 feet of wall, but it's right here that they have to sleep. And so I hear their monologues, they don't intend to share them, and it was about five or six minutes of hating this world and hating his life, and then he thought he lost his hat. And Golem was less upset than this guy was about losing his hat. And then he sort of flipped over into how he's the Archangel Gabriel, and I just had a kind of a, well, I guess entertaining angels unawares. But yeah, the Archangel Gabriel I thought would be a little more powerful and optimistic about the fate of humanity. But there we have it. And yeah, as a pastor, I deal with people at real ends of the spectrum. And the question and answer that happened last week on Friday, I do question and answers on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server on Friday mornings, 10 p.m. Friday time. This week, it's sort of a special session because a couple of weeks ago someone asked, can atheists ask questions? And I felt badly because a lot of Christians were asking questions and the Christians sort of swamped the thing sometimes. So this week, it's just a special Q&A set aside. So if you're a Christian, hold back. And non-Christians, atheists or whatever can can ask questions this week. But I talked about a profession of faith made by a Down syndrome man at this church that, you know, years and years and years later, people still talking about his testimony. What does it mean that a man with Down syndrome can profess his faith and have people with Ph.D.s and advanced degrees talking about the beauty of that profession of faith from someone who's pretty significantly disabled? That's what I mean by scalability. And so often, you know, one of the real benefits of YouTube is that I've met so many smart people, but not everybody on the Internet is smart. I know it comes as a surprise to some of you, but those people get a chance at life, too. And those people get a chance to live. And in many ways, they have it a lot harder. I did a video last week. Was Jordan Peterson's meaning strategy insufficient to save himself? Sort of commenting on David Wilson and Tim Lott's conversation at Rebel Wisdom and David Fuller's son, David Wilson, David Fuller. And, you know, a lot of interesting comments on that. A lot of people jumped in. Yes, he's still alive, isn't he? And I thought, fair enough. That's a that's a good answer. And his, you know, if you listen to Peterson in that transcript and that conversation that he's having with the people at the Sunday Times, you know, he mentioned it was his sense of responsibility that got him through his responsibility to his wife and to his children and to his audience. And he certainly did suffer through that. And so, you know, fair enough. He didn't any. And also in that Sunday Times, how he had to fight very hard against bitterness. And I thought that was quite impressive, too, because I talked to people for whom bitterness has taken them. And, well, hell starts early for a lot of those people. And you have to ask the question, is anything in life sufficient? And in this world, at least, and I think of Carl Reiner's great quote, in the torrent, in the torment of insufficiency of everything attainable, we come to understand that here in this life, all symphonies remain unfinished. And that's a that's a quote that I think about a lot and and I see living a lot. What should the expectation or standard of salvation mean? And some of the people in the in the comments kind of, you know, poked me with what I often pull. What do you mean by salvation, VanderKlay? What do you mean by salvation, preacher? And that really brought me back to the video I made earlier of Babylon and the emergence from the fiery furnace. And I've been thinking about this theme a lot, too, where and again, I talked about that with the with the prison guard. We'll see if he you know he has good reasons to not share that video if he if he doesn't want to. But I thought it was a good conversation and I think he might share it or at least agree that I share it. But we live in the midst of this this idolatrous imaginary that billions of dollars of the best storytellers and image makers put before our eyes daily, hourly. We are we are emerged in these images and and they all I loved where Mark Manson made the comment about, yes, self help. We just sort of you know, this is your assumption. You know, a better you know, more beautiful is better than less beautiful, more wealthy is better than poorer, more healthy, you know, longer life is better than less health and shorter life. And in many ways, a lot of these go into the quest of, OK, what do we mean by the good? And you can sort of approximate and dead reckon the good via those matrices. And it's and it's a fair enough thing. And so what we what we have placed before us are these these images of you see this in marketing all the time. You know, how do you how do you convey that you should long ago, the marketers gave up, you know, Jeep lasts longer or Toyotas are more reliable. No, it's it's all image based there. They're all peddling a Babylonian idol about what the good life is. And and again, it's not it's never wholly wrong, but these things shape us and mold us. And but they also leave us at some point wondering and asking, is this all there is sort of sort of like Tom Brady? And that that made me think of this quite powerful book, A Severe Mercy. A Severe Mercy is a book that I read a number of years ago at a pretty difficult time in my life. It is a powerful book if you've never read it. And it's it's powerful for men and women. Sheldon Van Auken falls in love with a young woman that her nickname is Davey, and they share a really remarkable romance and they pursue it with incredible discipline and desire. And he writes well and the book is the book is powerful. And now I'm rereading it now and thinking how a lot of a lot of the audience of my videos would probably profit from this book because the book deals with questions of the good life. And yeah, Sheldon Van Auken was born to a degree of privilege, grew up in a rather idyllic place. Now, again, talking to the the young prison guard, he grew up in a sort of idyllic place. And I talked to many people, Canadians who you've got all that land up there and you've got cold, horrible winters. But but many who grow up in a rural area, it's sort of idyllic and good for children to be raised in a in a very natural environment. And then Van Auken had that. Now, the book's claim to fame is that there it contains 18 letters from C.S. Lewis that he printed with permission. Now, you can tell by the title that it's and by what I've said about it, it's not an easy read because what these two managed to construct is as nearly an ideal romantic relationship as I've ever seen represented in in history, never mind fiction. This isn't fiction. This is they tell their story. He tells their story and it's just breathtaking. Now, he wasn't raised a Christian, but when they they sail across the Atlantic and they they visit Oxford in the middle of the 20th century, they start bumping into Christians. And that begins to raise some some questions in there on their minds. Now, both of these individuals, Davey and Sheldon Van Auken in their in their shining barrier, as they call it, which is love, they decide to to basically never be apart. So they arrange their entire lives so that they can be together and share everything. So they don't read a book without the other one reading it. They almost don't do anything without the other one participating in it. They they they make sure that they avoid careers that will separate them living situations that will separate them. They decide to live simply. They even when they buy a brand new car, they take a hammer to it. So that so the love of the car won't in any way won't in any way detract from the possibility of of splitting them and their their holy huddle, their shining barrier of love that kept them together. Again, if you're struggling with a relationship, this might not be the time to read this book because a psychologist could go through this book and talk about enmeshment and a whole bunch of other things. But it's a it's a quite remarkable love affair. They became married and decided not to have the children thing they'll talk about. But but how they negotiate the stuff I hear I hear so much of so much resonance between so many of you as you're trying to figure out what's rational. And if you want to construct your absolute best life, what will these two certainly seem to do it? But then Christianity comes in and and they start reading and they read all of C.S. Lewis's books and they discuss it with each other because they both have to read if one reads the book they have the other has to read the book. And they start to wrestle with this question of Christianity and its exclusivity and they try to figure out well really can this can this really make can this really make any sense? So I'm going to read I'm going to read some a section from it with a few of the C.S. Lewis letters because as I read through them I thought about many of my conversations with with many of you. If minds like St. Augustine and Newman and Lewis's could wrestle with Christianity and become fortresses of that faith, it had to be taken seriously. I arrived a bit at the thought of my easy no nothing contempt for other of other years. Most of the people who reject Christianity know almost nothing of what they are rejecting. And that's in all fairness true of just about everything. We're short lived creatures. I mean I don't know enough about Buddhism or Islam or living as an agnostic or an atheist. I mean that's just a that's just a question of the limitations of life. Thank God if there is a God we said that there are at least most people who reject Christianity know nothing of what they are rejecting. Those who condemn what they do not understand are surely little men. Thank God if there is a God we said that we are at least looking seriously and honestly at this thing. If our Christian friends nuclear physicists historians and able scholars and other fields can believe in Christ if C.S. Lewis who they had met can believe in Christ. We must at least weigh it very seriously. I don't know if he had met him actually. I have to take that back. Davy and I we decided were immeasurably helped in our serious look at Christianity by where we considered ourselves to be. We did not at all suppose that we were Christians. And again a lot of the conversation around Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson and many of you my conversation with Poe. Who exactly is a Christian and how does this work? We did not at all suppose that we were Christians just because we were more or less nice people who vaguely believe there might be some sort of God and had been inside a church. We were right outside of the fold. Thus we were perfectly aware that the central claims of Christianity was and always has been that the same God who made the world had lived in the world had been killed by the world and that the claimed proof of this was his resurrection from the dead. This in fact was precisely what we so far at least did not believe. But we knew that it was we knew that it was what had to be believed if we were to call ourselves Christians. Consequently consequently we did not call ourselves Christian. Later we met we were to meet people who no more believed in this central claim than in the Easter Bunny. Yet they called themselves Christians on the basis apparently of going to church being nice and respectable and accepting some sorts of bits of the Sermon on the Mount. I wrote sardonically that such now here's the thing for these two to construct the kind of romantic relationship they had their idealists you know pretty far along in their idealism not not their technical philosophical ideal. They just they just strive hard to live by their ideals. I wrote sardonically that such people are proof that there can be smoke without fire. But Davey and I were too close to Christianity to see it. We didn't mistake the foothills for the mountains. We saw there only too clearly solitary vast icecapped and apparently unscalable at least for us for we knew we had to believe Christianity was a faith. And again I think about how many conversations I've had with with many of you. And by now we knew that it was impossible if true and we admitted to each other the possibility that it was it was very simply the only really important truth in the world. And if untrue it was false no halfway house first or nothing. I wrote it is not possible to be incidentally a Christian. The fact of Christianity must be overwhelmingly first or nothing. This suggests a reason for the dislike of Christians by nominal or non Christians. Their lives contain no overwhelming firsts but many balances. One December night after Davey and I had been talking about the fact that Christianity claimed to be an answer to all eternal questions a consistent answer. Our physicist friends kept murmuring. We admitted to each other that we did quite desperately want an answer. The only trouble I added was that we couldn't believe the Christian one. I suggested that we go out for a walk but she said she had she was a bit headachy and wanted to go to bed. I told her to go on then and I should walk up to the corner and back. While I was walking I thought that I should ask C.S. Lewis if only he were there. When I returned to the flat I sat down on an impulse and wrote to Lewis a busy man whom I had never so much as seen. See I was wrong the first time. He replied straight to the point immediately and I wrote again. The correspondence two letters apiece now follows with only salutations and closings omitted. Now C.S. Lewis was famous for trying to reply to all correspondences something that he puts me to shame with. And often he had his brother Warney helping him and I was had the privilege of being in the Kellers flat once and Kathy Keller then a little girl after reading the Narnia series had written C.S. Lewis. And he wrote her back and she had framed those letters from C.S. Lewis of course to Keller's big C.S. Lewis fan. She had framed those letters on the wall and had them from from Lewis. I write on an impulse which in the morning may appear so immodest and presumptuously that I shall destroy this. But a few moments ago I felt that I was embarked on a voyage that would someday lead me to God. Even now five minutes later I'm inclined to add a qualifying maybe. There's a leap I cannot make. It occurs to me that you having made it having linked certainty with Christianity might not do it for might not do it for me but might give me a hint of how it how it's to be done. Having felt the aesthetic and historical appeal of Christianity having begun to study it I have come to awareness of the strength and possibleness of the Christian answer. I should like to believe it. I want to know God if he is knowable but I cannot pray with any conviction that someone hears. I can't believe. Very simply it seems to me that some intelligent power made this universe and that all men must know it axiomatically and must feel awe at the powers infiniteness. It seems to me natural that men knowing and feeling so should attempt to elaborate on that simplicity. The prophets the Prince Buddha the Lord Jesus Mohammed and the Brahmins and so arose the world's religions. But how can just one of them be singled out as true to an intelligent visitor from Mars would not Christianity appear to be merely one of a host of religions. I said at starting that I felt I was treading on a long road that would one day lead me to Christianity. I must then believe after a fashion that it is the truth or is it only that I want to believe it. But at the same time something else in me says wanting to believe is the way to self deception. Honesty is better than any easy comfort. Have the courage to face the fact that all men may know to the mall than may all men may know nothing to the power that made the sons. And yet I would like to believe that the Lord Jesus is in truth my merciful God for the apostles could talk to Jesus. It must have been easy. But I live in a real world of red buses and nylon stockings and atomic bombs. I have only the record. I have only the record of other claimed experiences with deity no angels no voices nothing or yes one thing living Christians. Somehow you in this very same world with the same data as I are more meaningful to me than the bishops of the faithful past. You accomplished the leap from agnosticism to faith. How? I don't quite know how I dare write this to you a busy Oxford Don not a priest. Yet I do know you serve God not yourself. You must do if you're a Christian. Perhaps if I had the wit to see it my answer lies in the fact that I did write. And this is the letter that Lewis writes back to him. My own position at the threshold of Christianity was exactly the opposite of yours. You wish it to be true. I strongly hoped it was not. At least that was my conscious wish. You had you had you may suspect that I had unconscious wishes to quite a different sort and that it was these which finally shoved me in. True. But then I may equally suspect that you under your conscious wish that it were true. There looks a strong unconscious wish that it were not. What this works out is that all that modern stuff about concealed wishes and wishful thinking. However useful it may be for explaining the origins of an error which you already know to be an error is perfectly useless in deciding which one of two beliefs is the error and which is the truth. For a one never knows if one's wishes and B in a very big question such as this even one's conscious wishes are nearly always engaged in both sides. What I think one can say with certainty is this the notion that everyone would like Christianity to be true and that therefore all atheists are brave men who have accepted the defeat of all their deepest desires is simply imprudent nonsense. Do you think people like Stalin Hitler Haldane Stapledon Stapledon was a science fiction writer. That's Lewis goes on to say a corking good writer by the way would be pleased on waking up one morning to find that they were not their own masters that they had a master and judge that there was nothing even in the deepest recesses of their thoughts about which they could say to him. Keep out private. This is my business. Do you rats. Their first reaction would be as mine was rage and terror and I think I've said this with respect to that quote from Eric Weinstein about the problem with believing in a God is that well now you have to worry about what's on his mind. Yeah, that's a really big deal. And I think Lewis's point is, is, is right on. Isn't the truth this that it would gratify some of our desires, once we feel in fact pretty seldom and outrage a great many others. So let's wash out all the wish business. It never helped anyone solve any problem yet. I don't agree with your picture of the history of religion. Christ Buddha Mohammed and others elaborating on original simplicity. I believe Buddhism to be a simplification of Hinduism and Islam to be a simplification of Christianity. Clear, lucid, transparent, simple religion. Tao Tao plus a shadowy ethical ethical God in the background. And if you read Lewis's abolition of man, the the appendix he deals with the Dow, which is this this moral code which you can almost find university, universally throughout 10 commandments and many other places in the world is a late development, usually rising among highly educated people in great cities. What you really start with is ritual myth and mystery in the death and return of Balder or Osiris. The dances, the initiations, the sacrifices, the divine kings over against that. There are the philosophers, Aristotle or Confucius, hardly religious at all. The two systems in which the mysteries and philosophies come together are Hinduism and Christianity. There you get both metaphysics and cult continuous with the primeval cults. That is why my first step was to be sure that one or the other of these had to be the answer. In other words, so he looks at it and he says, well, religion seemed to have arisen. Of course, this is Lewis in the middle of the 20th century looking at anthropology and the like ritual myth and mystery. And I think if you listen to Jordan Peterson's first episode of the biblical series, you have all of that now in some ways updated. It's practices and and myth and mystery, things we don't know. And then later the Tao and an ethical God in the background are sort of sort of added to it. And so Lewis says, I want a religion that has both of these things, because that would seem to be what a religion should be. For the reality can't be one that appeals either to the savages or only to the highbrows. Now, now this is where I get into my scalability thing, because, well, people understand ritual and myth and mystery. And they might not have any have any aptitude for philosophy or theology or for a lot of the enormous abstractions that we tend to be dealing with in this little corner of the Internet. But they do understand this is my body given for you. Do this in remembrance of me. They do understand. And even again, in my story, the Down syndrome man can understand and relate in terms of a personal relationship. And I just made a video where I had a little bit of comments on how I guess I've I've ordered my videos a little bit of comment about how all of that machinery is is built into us and it's extremely powerful machinery. Well, that doesn't mean that we're connecting up to real things. But this is where C.S. Lewis goes. For the reality can't be one that appeals either to the savages or only to the highbrows. Reality is different from that. Real things aren't like that. For example, matter is the first most obvious thing you meet. Milk, chocolates, apples, and also the object of quantum physics. There is no question of just a crowd of disconnected religions. The choices between A. The materialist worldview, which I can't believe, says Lewis, B. The real archaic primitive religions, which are not moral enough, and C. The claimed fulfillment of these in Hinduism or D. The claimed fulfillment of these in Christianity. But the weakness of Hinduism is that it doesn't really join the two strands. Irredeemably savage religion goes on in the village. The hermit philosophies in the forest and neither really interferes with the other. It is only Christianity which compels a highbrow like me to partake in a ritual blood feast. And also compels a central African convert to attempt an enlightened universal code of ethics. So what he says is that in Christianity these two strands come together. And that's what compelled him to believe that Christianity was true. Have you tried Chesterton's The Everlasting Man? The best popular apologetics I know. Meanwhile, the attempt to practice the Tao is certainly the right line. Have you read the Analects of Confucius? He ends up saying, this is the Tao. I do not know if anyone has ever kept it. That's significant. No one can go directly from there to the Epistle to the Romans. I don't know if any of this is of the least use. Be sure to write again or call if you think I can be of any help. This is astounding coming from Lewis. To C.S. Lewis. So this is a second letter to him. My fundamental dilemma is this. I can't believe in Christ unless I have faith. But I can't have faith unless I believe in Christ. This is the leap. If to be a Christian is to have faith, and it clearly is, is to live into Christ in terms of our imagination, our exaptation, to run into his arms when we're not running anywhere and to trust in him more than we trust ourselves. What does it mean to trust in someone that I can't see? It's all this parabolic participatory knowing that we're that we're involved in. I can put it thus. I must accept Christ to become a Christian, but I must be a Christian to accept him. I don't have faith and I don't at least believe. But everyone seems to say you must have faith to believe. Where do I get it? Where do I get it? Where do I get it? Or will it tell me something different? Is there a proof? Can reason carry me over the gulf without faith? Why does God expect so much of us? Why does he require this effort to believe? If he made it clear that he is as clear as a sunrise or a rock or a baby's cry, very real things, wouldn't we be right, joyous to choose him and his law? Why should the right exercise of our free will contain this fear of intellectual dishonesty? And it's a legitimate fear. I must write further on the subject of wishing it were true. Although I do agree that I probably have wishes on both sides, and my wish does not help me to solve any problem. Your point that Hitler and Stalin and I would be horrified to discover a master, a master, capital M, from whom nothing could be withheld is very strong indeed. Indeed, there is nothing in Christianity which is so repugnant to me as humility, the bent knee. If I knew beyond hope or despair that Christianity were true, my fight forever after would have been against the pride of the spine may break, but it will never bend. And yet, sir, would not I and even Stalin accept the humbling of the master to escape the horror of ceasing to be, of nothingness at death? Moreover, the knowledge that Jesus was in truth Lord would not be merely pleasant news gratifying some of our rare desires. It would mean overwhelmingly, A, that materialism was an error as well as ugliness, B, that the several beastly futures predicted by Marxists and Freudians and the sociologists manipulators would not be real even if they came about, C, that one's growth towards wisdom, soul building, was not to be lost, and D, above all, that the good and beautiful would survive. And so I wish it were true, and I would accept any humbling, I think, for it to be true. Now, as I mentioned before, this book is a tragedy, and this man and his girlfriend and then eventually wife pursues with serious determination the kind of romantic love that is probably the deepest, most satisfying, most available to us in this world. Spoiler alert. I won't say it. It's a powerful book. And he writes this. The bad part of wishing it were true is that any impulse I feel towards belief is regarded with suspicion as stemming from the wish. The good part is that the wish leads on. And I shall go on. I must go on as far as I can go. And again, that's who Sheldon Van Auken is, and that's who Davey is. These are two serious idealists that are very Petersonian in that they're going to employ their ego and their will to pursue what they think is good and right. C.S. Lewis writes back. The contradiction, we must have faith to believe and must believe to have faith, belongs in the same class as those by which the Iliadic philosophers proved that all motion was impossible. And there are many others. You can't swim unless you can support yourself in water, and you can't support yourself in water unless you can swim. Or again, now we're getting into some participatory knowing perhaps, our procedural. Or again, in an act of volition, example, getting up in the morning is the very beginning of the act itself voluntary or involuntary. If voluntary, then you must have willed it. You were already. You were willing already. It was not really the beginning. If involuntary, then the continuation of the act being determined by the first moment is involuntary, too. But in spite of this, we do swim and we do get out of bed. I do not think there is a demonstrative proof like Euclid of Christianity, nor of the existence of matter, nor of nor of the goodwill and honesty of my best and oldest friend. I think all three are, except perhaps the second, far more probable than the alternatives. The case for Christianity in general is well given by Chesterton. And I tried to do something in my broadcast talks. Those are the talks that would become mere Christianity. As to why God doesn't make it demonstrably clear, are we sure that he is even interested in the kind of theism which would be a compelling logical ascent to a conclusive argument? Are we interested in it in personal matters? I demand from my friend a trust in my good faith, which is certain without demonstrative proof. If I wouldn't be confident at all if he waited for rigorous proof, it wouldn't be confidence at all if he waited for rigorous proof. Hang it all. The very fairy tale embodies the truth. A fellow believes in Desdemona's innocence when it is proved, but that was too late. Lear believed in Cordelia's love when it was proved, but it was too late. His praise is lost who stays till all commend. The magnimity, the generosity with which trust on a reasonable probability is required of us. But suppose one believed and was wrong after all. Why? Then you would have paid the universe a compliment it doesn't deserve. Your error would even so be more interesting and important than the reality. And yet how could that be? How could an idiotic universe, the kind that this homeless man was cursing this morning, how could an idiotic universe have produced creatures whose mere dreams are so much stronger, better, and subtler than itself? Note that life after death, which still seems to you the essential thing, was itself a late revelation. God trained the Hebrews for centuries to believe in him without promising them an afterlife. And blessings on him, he trained me in the same way for about a year. It is like the disguised prince in the fairy tale who wins the heroine's love before she knows he is anything more than a woodcutter. What would be a bribe if it came first had better come last? It is quite clear from what you would say that you have conscious wishes on both sides. And now another point about wishes. A wish may lead to false beliefs, granted. But what does the existence of the wish suggest? At one time, I was much impressed by Arnold's line, Nor does the hungry prove that we have bread. But surely, though, it doesn't prove that one particular man will get food. It does prove that there is such a thing as food. For example, if we were a species that didn't eat, weren't designed to eat, would we feel hungry? You say the materialist universe is ugly. I wonder how you discovered that. If you really, if you are really the product of a materialist universe, how is it you don't feel at home here? Do fish complain of the sea for being wet? Or if they did, would that in fact itself not strongly suggest that they had not always been, or would not always be, purely aquatic creatures? Notice how we are perpetually surprised at time, capital T. How time flies, fancy John being grown up and married, I can hardly believe it. In heaven's name, why, unless indeed there is something in us which is not temporal? Total humility is not in the Tao, because the Tao, as such, says nothing about the object to which it would be the right response. Just as there is no law about railways in the Acts of Queen Elizabeth. Or at least, the first Queen Elizabeth. Just as there is no law about, but from the degree of respect with which the Tao demands for ancestors, parents, elders, and teachers, it is quite clear that the Tao would prescribe towards an object such as God. But I think you are already in the meshes of the net. The Holy Spirit is after you. I doubt you'll get away. Yours, C.S. Lewis. So, that's as far as I'll read. So, I can very much commend the book to you. And, again, re-reading the book now, especially in the light of how many conversations and how many comments, I think this is a book for those of you that are, would maybe like to believe, or are interested in what the march to believe might mean, and perhaps would be quite interested in whether such a belief could, in fact, satisfy over and against a lot of the really wonderful things that can be had in this world. Again, one of the most wonderful things that can be had in this world is a satisfying and powerful romantic love affair, which Sheldon, Vinokan, and Davy certainly had. So, again, to me, this whole, I started looking at this passage when I was looking for the scalability thing, because that little quote about apples is one of my go-to places about scalability. But as I read it and as I read the context within it, I saw there's so much here that many of you might be able to find helpful in terms of your sorting things out. So I hope this is helpful, and sorry, I'm not the best reader in the world, and it is available at audible.com, it is available in Kindle version, it is available in paperback, it's been out quite a long time, and yeah, it's a powerful book, some of you are always asking for book recommendations, well, here's one, and I think you will, whatever way you take it and decide to go with it, you'll find it to be really quite a powerful book. So thanks for watching.