https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bOY-HQkx7A8

 There we go. It's it's fun to get interviewed sometimes instead of being the 1 asking all the questions. So, yeah, I do look forward to these. Do you have any questions for me before we start? I watched the I watched the. I watched the video that was interesting. Yeah. So, no, let's go. Sure, I guess 1st of all, if you talk a bit about your father being administered. Oh, well, I'm 3rd generation, so my grandfather was 2. What would you like to know about my father? I think he. Impacted me a lot more than I knew. While it was happening, which the older I get, the better I realize. That so much of who I am pastorally. Does come from my father, because I watched him in this role. In an analogous setting for so many years. I wasn't actively taking notes or paying attention. I just absorbed it. And so there are many times when I do things that I think, wow. A lot of dad and me and some of my mom too. He, he was he again, he grew up in a ministerial household. My grandfather. Had churches in the Midwest and then in Canada and on the then on the East coast. And my father grew up during the depression and then during the 2nd, world war. And went off to college in the early 50s and then started ministry in Patterson in 1960. So, it's pretty amazing thing. That he, when I'm getting hot, the term, the heater on. It's pretty amazing thing that he took a job amongst African Americans when. I imagine by virtue of growing up in Wisconsin and Minnesota. And Iowa that he had 0 personal experience with them. So, I had to learn all of it when he moved to Patterson. What things that you do as a pastor, like remind you, like you think that that's like, do you have a lot of your dad in you? I don't know if it's so much things I do because. Ministry has changed a lot since my father's pastorate, but it's much more the. That a lot of the temperamental. Aspects that I think people pick up on, especially in person, of course, but also on YouTube. The high and openness, the patients, the. The warmth, the ability to love difficult to love people. I think those are some because and also just. My father attracted to himself. I mean, people, sometimes people look at this little corner of the Internet, and it's kind of the island of misfit toys. And that was very true of my father's ministries, especially his ministry in Patterson. A lot of people struggling with mental illness, but also a lot of people who were. Salt of the Earth Christians who knew how to love difficult people, and that created a really special environment where. That was never tremendously popular because difficult people are difficult to deal with, but for those who really have a heart for. I'm. Unusual people and and an appetite for. Frankness and honesty, it's a lot of fun and I I absorbed all that from him. What do you. I don't know if there's one key, but what do you think. Is a key to loving difficult to love people. I think one of the things and again I did get this from my father to you have to know yourself and be comfortable with yourself and you have to have a degree of security with yourself and your convictions part of why. People run away from difficult and annoying people is that they get triggered and. It's not so much what other people are saying or doing it's how that's destabilizing you at a deep level that makes people run away. Same thing goes with pain, you know now we talk about mirror neurons people don't like being around other people who are in pain because it makes them feel pain and. It makes them feel pain and. Such a foundational part of ministry at just about every level is an ability to live with pain. And I think that's so central to Christianity that you know the the the central symbol of Christianity is a man enduring pain. And the pains of the world on a cross that's the central symbol and that's what it takes to love difficult to love people. You have to deal with your pain and their pain and you have to stay in the pain. Is that something you thought about before you became a pastor yourself? No. Okay. This is all stuff that I began to realize as. I before I became a pastor I never intended to pastor a church like this. Partly because I watched my father do it and for. You know stupid reasons of my own I didn't want to live my father's life after him and I haven't but in other ways, I have and it wasn't until. And it wasn't until really years into local ministry when I began to realize these things and really a lot of these things my father died in 2013 of a of a sudden heart attack and. A lot of this realization came after his death. Where I could sort of see him with different eyes. What ultimately made you want to be a pastor? I didn't want to be a pastor. Okay. I started my career as a foreign missionary and I very much intended to stay a foreign missionary, but. I very much intended to stay a foreign missionary, but. Some things happened in my life that brought us back to North America and then I actually spent a year. Helping a rehab outfit in Grand Rapids, Michigan teach therapists how to work on PCs and repairing PCs because I had a I picked up a lot of computer skills when I was in the Dominican Republic. And then after about a year of doing that, I realized. I could get back into the ministry and then I had a couple of job offers and. One the one offer in Chicago was a staff position at a very nice church. And then I came out here and found a church actually this church found me because they were first interested in calling my father and my mother said I'm not moving to the West Coast. We're going to stay on the East Coast. And then my father said to the church, well, I guess I can't come, but you can ask my son. And so I came out here and. You know, I had as is common for pastoral search teams. I had a variety of meetings with. Members of the congregation and. They just the people and the place just kind of warmed my heart, probably partly because it was similar to what I grew up with and then. So, I was the 1st day I came to work here. There was a homeless woman sitting in the parking lot and that sort of, you know, taught me a lot about the neighborhood and. I think a lot of people in the church were wary because of past ministers that, you know, protect the minister from all of these homeless and mentally ill people. But to me, that was the that was part of what drew me here. And so, whereas I never wanted to really be a local pastor after a few years of doing it, I discovered I really enjoyed it and I remember. I remember even as my father was in his last years of ministry, I had met some clergy who were in their last years of ministry and they were bitter. And, you know, telling me things like they told their kids never to go into pastoral ministry because of all of the. All of the issues and my father said, I've never loved it more and he did. He always loved the church and he always loved the people and, you know, he would have. He would have been pastoring a church to the day he died if my mother had let him. What do you love about it so much day to day? I should say that I don't know that I would love pastoring. Churches with I don't know that I'd love pastoring churches that aren't like this one and what I mean by that is there is. There is a reality to this church that and an honesty to it that is. That is just so healthy so this morning I posted on Twitter the. A link to my Freddie and Paul show 2016 Christmas extravaganza where Freddie and I go out to McDonald's and. You know, every Sunday and many Sundays we do the Freddie and Paul show with Freddie and Nancy and Phil and sometimes some other people and. People people here are not they're playing their own games, but they're not playing the kinds of games that a lot of churches with. Well, a lot of churches who have people in it that have something to lose play there. There's something liberating about doing ministry among people who have either nothing left to lose or very little to lose. Because there's just sort of an honesty and a freshness that that helps us laugh at ourselves. I mean, I have, I mean, I have a good time doing the show with Freddie and Nancy and and others in the church because. When we take ourselves too seriously when you have very little to lose. We are are pretense and are full of ourselves, and this just gets exposed and and then suddenly and to me that's so central to what you're doing. And to me that's so central to what Jesus talks about in terms of being being like the little children. That that you know, one of the one of the most beautiful things I picked up from Eugene Peterson is you know. Part of part of what coming to Christ means and how we do it best is when we come to him realizing. You know, we have we have we have no one else and nothing else and then to our delight we discover he's more than enough. And and doing ministry in a place like this. Keeps you there. I think if I did ministry in a. In a church with a lot of well put together people. And we're keeping up appearances. So you kind of talked with us with honesty and stuff, but what do you think a more you know, quote unquote nice church could learn from the kind of church that you pastor to. That some of the disasters that terrify us. Can bring us closer to Christ and the gospel. Because the kinds of disasters that a lot of people are living with and the truth is these come to everyone. It doesn't matter how wealthy you are or how. How good your health insurance is it just delays the inevitable. But hold that the best Christians are the ones who have. Like I said, like I just said, had everything taken away from them and discovered that. In Christ, they have more than they need and certainly more than they deserve. And you'll find those kinds of people in many different churches, but. When you have a when you have a significant population of them in a church that's what really makes the church. A really. Good place to be, at least in my opinion. So I don't mean this in like a. Manipulative way, but do you think that when because the people around you tend to have. Less do you think that that enriches the church? So I don't mean this in like a. Manipulative way, but do you think that when because the people around you tend to have. Less do you think that that enriches the the faith that they do have you think that builds a community more. Yes. No question about it same same thing that I saw I mentioned again when I was overseas. I worked with very poor people. And most of those people went to church every day. That was their life. And they they had joy they had community they had sorrows even that mean they. I mean don't get me wrong they if they could make their way to the United States and have a better life they take it in a New York minute but. That you know. Everything that Christ says in the gospels is true. What do you think people that have a word luxurious or affluent like what do you think they could learn from people who don't that they're so faithful. I. The challenging part of that question is the word learning. Okay, well, you can answer it however you'd like to change the word if you'd like. Well, because I it's very difficult and you find this in Jesus parables about wealth everything Jesus says about wealth. Doesn't mean that you can't change the word. And the Old Testament perspective on wealth is it's a gift from God God blessed Abraham and Job and David and he blessed them with he blessed them with wealth. But wealth. Tempts us into self sufficiency and it tempts us into trusting in our wealth and i've known some very wealthy people who also knew their wealth was a gift from God. And they found a joy in using it that way and so. There was a guy in the Dominican Republic who came down and. He was a rich man and he was a rich man. And he was a rich man and he was a rich man. And he was a rich man and he was a rich man. And he was a rich man and he was a rich man. And so. There was a guy in the Dominican Republic who came down and. He built a house for his family and then he had this plan for helping poor Dominicans and invasion area that's what it means when people basically have a big land grab. And they put up little huts and they basically they don't have any money, but that's how they get a little bit of land and how they build a house and basically a mobility upward mobility strategy and. The the people so his plan was he had made money in the United States and he quit his job and he moved to the Dominican Republic and he was kind of a contractor, so we knew how to do stuff and his plan was. I'm going to put cement floors in the houses of poor people and then because they don't have the money for that, but that's super helpful for them. They can keep the house cleaner. It's a big deal for if you're really poor to get a cement floor in your house. And then they'll pay me back bit by bit and then I'll use that money that gets paid back to put more cement cement floors and other people's houses and. I had been down there long enough that I said I it's a wonderful plan, but it's going to fail because you're a wealthy gringo. And every Dominican knows you don't need this money to live and so and there's no way in this political economic environment, you could force them to pay. You back even if you wanted to so you're never going to get any of this money back and he said to tell you the truth, I really don't care. And then he said once you've made a million dollars and lost a million dollars it's just money. And so he he did that for a few years ran out of money had to go back to North America and get a job again to support his family once more. But there was there was nothing but joy in it for him. And you know, and this kind of Christian life is available to anyone, it really is, but all of the things that are standing in our way are in us and and so it's so often. I've never seen a Christian saint. That hasn't suffered. It's it's part of the package Christ uses suffering to make us saintly. Um, could you kind of explain the idea of like denying yourself every day and taking up a cross. I don't need to know it needs a lot of explanation. Yeah, I guess. How would you suggest someone does that who is like from a more affluent background like I've been thinking about CS Lewis talking about like your real self is like a Christ self. I guess maybe that's a better way into this like. I guess maybe that's a better way into this like. Can you explain what that means? Like what aspects of yourself you're trying to get rid of what the Christ self would be? Of myself. Oh, it's not even necessarily your. It's all the usual suspects for most of us. It's security, it's wealth, it's indulgence, it's. Self sufficiency. It's all of the it's all of the things that we know we need. And so I would, you know, if someone asked for advice, I'd say, well, take a Jordan Peterson approach and start small. And maybe there's something in your life that you think. This would be a good thing to deny yourself. It's not a bad thing. It's it's something you're entitled to. It's maybe something everyone else is indulging in, but pick this one little thing and start denying yourself this thing. And that will probably begin to strengthen your ability to deny yourself in other ways. That's it's basic Christian formation. That the church, you know, I, you know, I'm a Protestant, so I don't come from a fasting tradition. But if you're orthodox or Roman Catholic. I mean, all of those fasting practices are. Are if done properly, there are dangers. There are dangers and. So Dallas Willard, a number of years ago, really sort of brought the whole spiritual formation thing to Protestants as did Richard Foster and. And they brought all of this, all of these riches of the Catholic and orthodox monastic traditions to Protestants and Protestants began, you know, began doing them and using them, et cetera, et cetera. And there are dangers to all of them, but, you know, of of of self pride and self righteousness and all of those things. But but all of that stuff is basically there to do exactly that to begin to train us to deny ourselves and and in that self denial and that space that self denial gives us. Christ forms us and and actually makes us able to. To enjoy this this joy of of loving difficult people. I'm going to ask you, can you talk about what CS Lewis's book miracles means to you? So so part of my YouTube channel is journal slash confessional. Journal slash confessional. We live in a culture. That is so deeply. The assumptions of of secular materialism and naturalism are just so pervasive. And so so part of what I'm always trying to do is not lose the Christian faith. I've seen many people I love around me. And many more who are, you know, used to I've seen so many people lose their Christian faith and. And. I believe a lot of this is just sort of the. The pervasive acid of. Of of secular materialism and all of the all of these assumptions sort of just impacting us and, you know, a lot of this, you know, came to the fore with the new atheists and I. I got to the point where I knew I needed to do something to not lose my faith in this way, like I've seen so many do. And so I I was, you know, I've read CS a lot of CS Lewis, but for some reason I picked up his book miracles and I started. I started reading it and things just began to click for me and then I. I've been listening to Peter creeped. Who whose work I really like and Peter's also from North Jersey and also he grew up RCA, but went to my high school and my college for he went Roman Catholic. And so I was I was reading creep that he talked about he had some lectures on CS Lewis online and I listened to those and he. He talked about rereading CS Lewis and so I started doing that with miracles and so I was reading the book two or three times a year. And then when Jordan Peterson sort of broke out onto the scene. I thought, oh, I'd love for Jordan Peterson to read this book and so I was ready to pull up Amazon and, you know, find out where I could I'd mail this to University of Toronto and. And then another part of me thought that wait a minute. People give me books all the time that I never read. What makes me think he's going to read this thing. So then I decided that a a much more subtle form of colonization was appropriate. There was actually he came to San Francisco to do an event. It's like one of these small events until you know before he got really big and and I also noticed that the event that he was doing was. People came to the event with these books they were going to give him and I thought oh yeah I thought I thought about this so then I thought. If I want to actually colonize Jordan Peterson. I'm probably going to have to colonize a few more people along the way and that wouldn't be a bad thing and I'd like to have some conversations so. Miracles was of course a big part of that and I've talked about the book a lot and. Maybe I should you know some people have said well you should really do just a whole series on miracles and. And I probably should but i'm so ADHD that I. I just had a conversation yesterday with Jordan B Cooper and. I was looking at the book and I was like oh my gosh I'm going to do this book and I was like. I had a conversation yesterday with Jordan B Cooper and. I was looking at his channel he's managed to do all of those series about philosophy and everything I look at that say wow that's amazing I wish I could do that and people like of course you could. I like doing what i'm doing now so maybe I will do it someday but miracles. Lewis. Lewis had a way of just cutting through. He had a way of exposing. The insufficiencies. Of sort of the prevailing assumptions of modernity. Because he you know for making talks about a meeting crisis, but Lewis and Tolkien they had their meeting crisis at the beginning of the 20th century, along with all of Europe in the battlefields of World War one and. You know, he came back he survived he and Tolkien survived the war Tolkien was a Christian Lewis wasn't. Tolkien of course became a Roman Catholic Lewis I don't think Lewis could ever do that, having been raised in Northern Ireland and the politics that were so he became an Anglican but Lewis Lewis could not stay an atheist. He can't do it and and so the the way that the Internet and our culture is. Is is. Is basically spreading the meaning crisis means that we're going to continue to see exactly what we've been seeing is that people are going to flee to the church for refuge and they're going to keep doing it. And and even you know really. Embedded people like Jordan Peterson. So that's what's happening. What does pull the end of clay doubting his faith, what does it look like what are the. Are there specific things that kind of play through your mind questions or lack of questions, I guess. If I lost my faith, I definitely want to quit my job. Just to have some shreds of integrity. I don't have. I don't have a lot of admiration for ministers who don't believe anymore, but stand up on Sunday and mouth words because. I think I would become a hedonist. It would be alcohol isn't my thing, but I think I I think I'd wreck my family life, I think I. I think I indulge myself. That's what leads me to believe that. I think I'd wreck my family life, I think I. I think I indulge myself. That's what losing my faith would look like. And. Sir, no. Um when you're questioning it, what kind of questions do you have? You know. You know. Just listen to Sam Harris or cosmic skeptic. Rationality rules they you know they articulate the they articulate the you know is this. Can you know this prayer make any sense, can you actually believe the Bible did Jesus rise from the dead and even if he did so what. Um is there is there anything beyond the grave besides the big sleep I mean all of that stuff is in me. And it's it's you know it's like how many of these. Pandemic movies where you know it's like the walking dead where you know everybody's got the zombie virus in them and when they die they turn. And so we're all we've all got this this virus in us of from modernity and so. You know the the the new atheist they're just they're just letting different members of my consciousness congress out to talk in public and. And people are you know you know things get tipped and people like yeah i'm going to leave the church but. When you really begin to look but their their day is their day is ending too now and but that doesn't mean that we're just going to break out into a time when churches are wonderful and full and no we. You know Lewis pegged it exactly right we are we don't lack information we don't need just a little bit of improvement we're rebels who have to lay down our arms and that's exactly what self denial looks like. So what are when you're in that period of doubt what gets you I mean obviously CS Lewis is a miracles book but what are the thoughts that get you out of that kind of new atheist mindset. Basically, I get to a point and rave Kelly really noticed this and what I do I get to a point that I say. You know what let's say you're right there is no God we're all simply the product of emergent chaos and in some it for some reason we got us. To have all of the cosmic constants dialed up right and I I wound up in one of the best centuries and one of the place best places to live etc etc etc it's if it's all the product of chaos and physics. Why not believe because. What I also discover in my faith is that. Believing believing that. What Christ has in store for me to reign with him in a new heavens and a new earth is true it actually affords me to be the kind of neighbor that I am. If a new atheist moves into a house next door to me he really wants me to keep my Christian faith. He really wants me to tell the truth and at least don't lie he really wants me to do what's meaningful and not what's expedient he really wants me to do all sorts of things. To be a good person in his words and I know that part of me thinks and it you know but and he'll say no but if you gave up the faith you wouldn't have to be a good person and i'm like but you're the rationality people why. If in fact I decide for some reason that it pleases whatever side of my nature to. I don't know sleep with your wife or you rob your house when you're gone if I decide that this pleases me I'm going to be the good person. I don't know sleep with your wife or you rob your house when you're gone if I decide that this pleases me and I can get away with it isn't it rational for me to do this really. And so what I find is that yes the Christian life involves self denial. Yes, it involves sometimes a strenuous commitment to keep it, but it also for me when I really believe it and believe into it. Is a source of real joy and a source of real generosity in the way that the world says is really good. But seldom really achieves. So when I get to that point it's like all right well maybe you're okay i'm still going to be a Christian. And in fact, I want my neighbors to be Christian too, so if it's the biggest lie ever told on one hand the apostle Paul as a point on the other hand the apostle Paul is a point of the apostle Paul. The biggest lie ever told on one hand the apostle Paul as a point on the other hand let's keep the lie going and I know that there are a number of agnostics and atheists out there that have taken up that idea too. But I think actually for me to really believe it and really live into it is is all the more blessed and happy. Because if in the back of my mind I didn't believe it. Well, then then suddenly i'm sort of larping and I you couldn't really pull it off and and it's actually those people who are at the point of that i've met a lot of them those people are at the point of. They want to believe it, but they they don't have the certainty they the plausibility isn't like deeply rooted. So those people that I really have a heart for and really pray for because. And then, then my advice for them is go to church the I think the only way you can maintain this belief just from a basic human. Psychological perspective is to live embedded in a community that also believe it, because the truth is we don't believe things as individuals we believe things as bodies and collectives and communities and so, if you really want to believe. You gotta join and participate and you know, keep pursuing a community around you that believes what you desire to believe. Can you define faith. Faith is leaning into. Christian faith is leaning into everything that Jesus teaches and promises for us. And what do you mean by leaning into. That's that's that's what's difficult in terms of a verbal. A verbal thing, and this is what sorry get to the verve keys for peas it's participatory it's perspectival it's procedural there is there is definitely the. You know there is definitely the part where it's an is we get that it's probably the most important part of the process. We get that it's propositional but. Faith and the reason why faith is so procedural it's so perspectival it's so participatory. That we're always trying to like we have part of modernity is the belief. That it's before modernity to it'll live long that if you can put it in a sentence then somehow you've captured it. And and I think deep in the Christian worldview says that the sentence will point to it. And that's why the word of God is both. A book but that book points to the man the logos who is the word of God and Jesus is that the Bible is the word of God, because Jesus is the word of God. Do you think that the kind of two questions here, but I guess first like, do you think that the participatory aspect of it and just how like when you're talking about the Christian neighbor you think the way the Christian neighbor lives is evidence for the truth of the Christian neighbors believe. It can be. This. So I have a Protestant that I remain a Protestant but. Protestants part of the weakness of Protestantism is sometimes the same weakness of modernity which is that's an over prioritization of the psychological. And, and this is sort of what Jordan Peterson gets at when he basically says to Sam Harris yeah but you're kind of a Christian to. Even if your neighbor is kind of. Even if your neighbor is kind of. Even if your neighbor doesn't go to church, even if your neighbor can't recite the apostles creed, even if your neighbor isn't identifying as a Christian. There's a lot of Christianity in your neighbor that's been built up in him or her and that they're living out and is in many ways in our culture sort of masquerading under the guise of being a good person. And so. I think, yes, if my neighbor became a better Christian, in other words, began to live into it better with all four peas, they would become even a better neighbor. But I praise God for the amount of Christianity that's in my neighbor and and I don't say that to. To to to somehow diminish my Jewish neighbor or even depending on what branch my Muslim neighbor, you know, atheist neighbors in America. My Hindu neighbor that person right next door to church here is actually a Hindu and he's a wonderful neighbor. So, so a lot of this goodness is, you know, by common grace, you know, into the world. But I think the way that Christ began remapping our moral imaginations and that that this even spread around the world via via secularism, which is sort of a weak crypto Christianity. You know, it's still it's still good, but yeah, turn it up and it also doesn't mean that my Jewish neighbor can't morally outperform my Christian neighbor. Sometimes the apostle Paul, I think, is very clear about that in the first part of the book of Romans. Do you think the insistence on. Like the sentence itself, like the rationalistic and everything, do you think that is the main issue in modernity that prevents people from having a more. Like develop Christian faith is that. They don't do the participative so much. Do you understand what I mean? Yeah, I think. I think our affluence is probably more to blame. We're so rich. We're so secure. Yeah, I was just I was just preaching at Habakkuk last week and there's this great line in Habakkuk where. He or Habakkuk points out that he makes this analogy that the Babylonians and you know Babylonians in that moment stand in for empire Egypt Babylon Persia Greece Rome Britain America and the rest of the world. He makes this point that to the Babylonians the people of the world are just fish in the ocean there. They're nothing and then he makes it and then he says that they they sacrifice to their nets and they burn incense to their hooks. In other words, their tools of war are their gods. That's where their faith is. It's a it's an astounding thing that Habakkuk says. And yeah, it doesn't change and and Habakkuk and the Lord says to Habakkuk that yeah the Babylonians they're going to come down and they're going to you know destroy you and your people, but they are also going to destroy themselves on wine and luxury and affluence and so. It's this you know. The Christians have long noted that Christianity and it's Christianity and it's self denial can make you wealthy. But be careful of that wealth because that wealth and affluence can set you back down to the bottom and and that's where we're at. What do you think the way forward is then? Well, you'd have to ask the way forward to what and Christianity does have an eschatology and you know I'm so I'm Dutch Reformed. So we're mostly Amel and we're not a part of the You know I'm so I'm Dutch Reformed. So we're mostly Amel as are the Catholics and the Lutherans and the Orthodox. It's a lot of the the late modernist dispensationalists that came up with you know the pre-mel and the post-mel. You know it's we Eschatology is a really interesting business because on one hand Christ has brought us so much and given us so much you know I sometimes hear Orthodox and some Roman Catholics sort of you know cursing the Enlightenment and it's like But I don't see you living without electricity or running water or sanitation or modern medicine so don't complain too much while we all bear the blessings of it and so those blessings are blessings of Christ and in many ways the Enlightenment was a blessing of Christ too. It was very much a mixed blessing but I don't for a minute I should be enormously grateful for the money that I have the affluence that I live within. You know I live in one of the most amazing places at one of the most amazing times that a human being has ever lived and I should I should thank God for that because it is a gift from him. So forward you know I hope that we continue to learn more with medical technology I hope that we continue to learn more with science and technology. I hope that we, as we did during the Cold War, we don't destroy ourselves with all of this power that we are increasingly accumulating. But the This cycle of you know it's the cycle of empire that Habakkuk is talking about but that that cycle scales all the way down too and it happens in our lives and it happens in families. And so the challenge the challenge is always how can how can we reduce the amount of money that we have in our lives? The challenge is always how can how can we receive Christ and all of his benefits on one hand. While still maintaining the posture of empty handedness coming to him. That that's sort of the the virtuous cycle of the Christian life that we come to Christ with empty hands and he fills them beyond what we can ask or imagine. But then we and the answer is keep giving it away you know that's the answer. The rich young ruler comes to Christ and says what must I do to inherit eternal life and Jesus says. Well keep the law and he says all these things i've done since the youth and he says okay then go sell everything you have and follow me. But he doesn't step up to that challenge. And and you know. What he let's say he sells everything he has and follows Jesus and becomes one of his inner ring who. Had to watch their master die on a cross because they absolutely couldn't comprehend everything Jesus was telling them beforehand that it would happen. And none of them show up on Sunday morning at the grave site because they certainly weren't. Understanding what he was saying and then he comes back and acts chapter one now will you restore the kingdom to Israel. You don't get what i'm doing yet. i'm going to leave and my father's going to send his spirit and that spirit and that spirit has been doing it, but the disciples did what. Did what. Did any of them maybe John die of natural causes I don't know they went to foreign lands they preach the gospel they lived in poverty, but yet. They didn't exchange it for. You know what that rich young man young ruler was unwilling to give up. So. What. What advantages and disadvantages do you think Protestantism has over say Catholicism and orthodoxy. I think that the disadvantages are. Protestants have. Protestants are are are fairly clueless when it comes to the deep power of symbolism and ritual. The deep power of symbolism and ritual and we're seeing that right now in this whole space around Jordan Peterson and John Verbecky and Jonathan Peugeot. There are riches and depths of riches to in orthodoxy and Catholicism and some brands of Protestants Protestantism has kept kept some of it, there are riches there that Protestants. don't benefit from because of. What we've done historically. I think some of the advantages of Protestantism are that we. You know people look at people leaving Protestant churches but. Catholics have had way more to lose as have orthodox and have lost than Protestants. You know, Rod Dreher has you know, made some observations because he sort of went, you know, raised a Methodist you know sort of a nominal Methodist. went into Catholicism wanting it, you know to really lean in discovered the hierarchy. The hierarchy wasn't taking it as seriously as he was so eventually went to orthodoxy and found more of what he was looking for, but. He noted yeah, but you know, at least those Protestants know their Bible at least those Protestants are are showing a degree of communal discipline. At least those Protestants so in some ways Protestants have adapted to the changes in the world and those adaptations offer them some advantages. But there are also some disadvantages so. I see Protestantism as sort of the the skunk works the experimental wing of the church and I think you know that certainly was true of the Protestant Reformation where. The whole in many ways, the Protestant Reformation was a disaster and that was lewis's perspective on it yeah there were real things that needed to be addressed but boy we all went at it the bad way. plunging Europe into blood. You know, still having the church just terribly divided. Okay well that with that didn't go well, but at the same time. In many ways, the Protestant Reformation helped save the Catholic Church from itself in many different areas and the Catholic Church when you when you read. You know what was going on in Catholicism and in the late medieval period. I mean the buying and selling of ecclesiastical office the. The you know the abuse, you know clergy abuse all of this stuff I mean sometimes if you pull out that history and you read it it's like yeah so the church needed really strong medicine and the Protestant Reformation gave it. And you know I. I think as modernity wanes. Protestantism will continue to morph, but we're I think we're beginning to see the great traditions of the church. Do better together. And I hope that continues exactly what unity will look like I don't know. Exactly what unity will look like I don't know. Does it all have to be structural hierarchical. You know and there's lots of different ways of going about that, and I think I think you know the Catholics have had their own experimentations and that sort of thing so. We're continuing I think to have a vivid in real life experimentation of what unity means and Protestants are part of that. With this little corner of the Internet, what do you think the most important issue is right now. What this little corner of the Internet is to me. Is our ability to create an ecosystem. Where people can number one more responsibly use the Internet, meaning it's not going away it's sort of like. At the beginning of the 16th century saying man I wish that printing press had never been invented look at the mess it's going to cause with the Protestant Reformation. The Internet isn't going away so we're going to have to learn to live with it. What's clear is that what how we need to live with it is we need to find ways for the Internet to enhance internet access. What's clear is that what how we need to live with it is we need to find ways for the Internet to enhance in real life community not become a substitute for it. And what this little corner of the Internet is is on one hand an experiment and collective relevance realization we are all thinking together about things. And if there's you know the printing press had that same function it's just sped up a lot with the Internet and much more enriched so we're doing that together we're thinking together because together we're a lot smarter than we are alone. And in order to continue to do that at scale what that means is we're going to continue to make a lot of smaller interconnected communities that are. That thing together and what that means is we're going to have to continue to play around with tools and find out what tools are good for what so we've learned something about discord we've learned about YouTube we're learning about all kinds of other tools. But but the key of this is the personal relationships between the people. So I knew we were on the right track when you know some of the meetups in Chicago were organizing a little conference and someone said to me yeah I was thinking to go to Chicago because you were going to be there but then when I heard Chad the alcoholic was going to be there I knew I had to go. And as a pastor what I knew was that's a sign of health because if it's a fandom or if it's a cult of personality around me or verveky or Peugeot or Peterson that's not what we need. We need what churches do which are networks of relationships of valued relationships where yeah you can know the priest you can know the pastor and maybe the priest knows you and maybe the pastor knows you. But all of that individual personal growth is going to is going to come because your friends with Chad the alcoholic and your friends with Jacob and your friends with Jeff and your friends with Joe. So having having its scale and new people can come in and find their niche and they can say yeah I used to watch VanderKlay but he doesn't I don't watch me much anymore but I've got all these new friends now. That's what I want. Well I feel like that's a good place to end it and I've taken up an hour of your time. I was an hour already this went fast. All right. So thank you. No thank you so much. And yeah I hope you have a good rest of the day. All right. I hope this was worthwhile for you. Definitely a super engaging. Okay. All right. We'll talk to you later. Yeah see you. Bye bye.