https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=v9voT6ICh1I

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday, for the last Sunday in November, and I'll be finishing up my series on the book of Daniel. And I'm going to be basically zipping through the last bit of the book, just as it is, chapters 7 through 12. Lent start, not Lent, but Advent starts the following week. Why do we love the book of Daniel? Well, we love the book of Daniel. Many of us love it because we learn stories from it in Sunday School about Daniel and the lion's den and Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the fiery furnace. And Daniel refuses the king's food and is vindicated. Daniel interprets the king's dream and is exalted. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refuse to bow to the image and are saved from the fiery furnace. And the lesson we gather as Sunday School children is that radical obedience pays off in this life. Dare to be a Daniel. Well, but even in the ancient world, Christians were burned at the stake and Christians were fed to lions for the sport of the Roman people. And I don't know what those Christians thought about the book of Daniel. I don't know if some of those Christians left the faith because they saw others being eaten by lions or burned at the stake and were not in fact saved by God. But today, these ideas are very common amongst us. And many people don't believe, can't believe because they read the Bible and they read these amazing stories and they say, huh, you know, this is a nice story, but it's just a story. People die all the time and brutal tyrants kill people all the time. And there's a reason we call things miracles because they hardly ever happen. And there's a reason people don't believe in miracles because they don't see them with their own eyes. And so these stories are just giving false hopes, hope to dupes. Christians get sick and die like everyone else. People extend themselves in obedience and are disappointed, unfulfilled, frustrated, and afraid. Some then set out and look for religion or spirituality. That works. And we are the consummate religious consumers. Well, I don't know, consummate, I think people have been religious consumers right from the start. We look for supernatural solutions to very common physical problems. Now in Daniel chapter one through six, Daniel seems to know everything. God always gets him out of a scrape and God reveals amazing things to him. And this is in fact why so often we love the book and we want the book to be real and we want the book to, we want the book to give us promises that if we just do the right thing then God will wade in supernaturally and bail us out. That's what we want. And so often when we see it doesn't happen, we throw away the faith and we look for some other bailout that will help. A physical bailout or an economic bailout or a medical bailout or a scientific bailout. One bailout or another because God can't be trusted because maybe Daniel was delivered in all these times but the vast majority of people don't seem to be. But in Daniel chapter seven through twelve the mood changes and this Daniel that we seem to, that seems to have, this Daniel who seemed to have all the answers in chapter one through six, chapter one through six seemed to be the public presentation of Daniel. Daniel was large and in charge. He would step in, he would save the day, miracles would happen, he would have the right answers and we would imagine that a guy like this has everything buttoned down. But in Daniel chapter seven we find a very different picture of Daniel. He's anxious, he's troubled, he's afraid. God sends him amazing dreams and revelations but his fears and anxieties persist. In fact as is often common in the Bible when God shows these amazing revelations Daniel falls on his face and realizes his own insufficiency, his own sinfulness and he's deeply bothered. In a sense chapters one through six are the public face of Daniel but chapter seven through twelve are his private emotional world and this is where for some of us this is a Daniel we can more easily relate to. In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel had a dream and visions passed through his mind as he was lying in bed. He wrote down the substance of his dream. Daniel said, in my night, in my vision at night I looked and there before me were four winds of heaven churning up the great sea. Four great beasts, each different from the other, came out of the sea and the vision that follows in Daniel, in Daniel chapter seven is like something from a, from a modern movie. These sea monsters come out and there are these terrible composite creatures and he knows that these are the empires of the world and so now Daniel seems to be wrestling with now in symbolic form the history and the facts on the ground and they're almost all bad news. I, Daniel, was troubled in spirit and visions that passed through my mind disturbed me. I approached one of those standing there and asked him for the meaning of all this so he told me and gave me the interpretation of these things. The four great beasts are four kings that will rise from the earth but the holy people of the most high will receive the kingdom, will receive the kingdom and will possess it forever. Yes, forever and ever. So, so here even with a happy ending Daniel is troubled and we're going to see this throughout Daniel seven and Daniel 12. He is not the guy who is right there with all of the answers, the guy who knows everything and gets out of every scrape. He's the guy who's living in the real world where the strong take the weak, where empires rise up and, and for years tyrants crush other people. This is the real world, this is the world Daniel is living in and this is the world of his dreams. Now you say, well Daniel was told what would happen, shouldn't that make him feel better? Well, you've got what he had, does it make you feel better? You still have lots of questions and doubts and wonderings and questions of interpretation. In fact, I find information to not be a terribly great comfort for many people and many times. It doesn't seem to offer a clean roadmap or even if it did would it make a difference? If you knew the day of your death would it really make a difference? When we'd probably try, what we'd probably try to do is to game the system, to, to work out some selfish scheme so that somehow we as individuals could land up on top. And remember Daniel's situation, he's taken as a high value slave slash hostage and possibly castrated. He's handed from tyrant to tyrant, his life is only as secure as their perception of his value to them. That is his life. Israel, God's great project to restore the world from rebellion, lies in shambles. The temple is destroyed, his people are in exile, they are at the bottom of the heap and in fact they will no longer get anywhere close, near close to the top of the heap. That brief interlude that they had with David and Solomon, that's all gone and Israel will just be another strange nation and in fact because of Israel's God and Israel's religion they will be maligned and persecuted, it is not a happy story. In the first year of Darius, of Darius son of Xerxes, a mead by descent who was made ruler over the Babylonian kingdom, in the first year of his reign, I Daniel understood from the scriptures according to the word of the Lord given to Jeremiah the prophet that the desolation of Jerusalem would last 70 years, probably in an age where the average lifespan was 30 or 40. So I turned to the Lord and pleaded with him in prayer and repentance, in fasting, in sackcloth and ashes because the desolation of Jerusalem, you have to understand that this isn't just his personal connection to his hometown, this isn't just nostalgia or just his own particular tribalism. In Daniel's mind the temple in Jerusalem is the key to the restoration and the renovation and the unification of heaven and earth and it's destroyed so it will be gone for 70 years and in fact once it is rebuilt after the death of Daniel, well those who remember the first temple cry when they see the foundations laid of the second and in fact as we know the Persians will rule them, the Greeks will rule them, the Romans will rule them, Herod will pretend to be a Messiah and rebuild the temple, his people will scorn him because he's a bloodthirsty tyrant just like all the rest and this is what they're facing. Lord you are righteous but this day we are covered with shame, the people of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem and all Israel both near and far and all countries where you have scattered us because of our unfaithfulness to you. We and our kings, our princes and our ancestors are covered with shame, Lord because we have sinned against you. The Lord our God is merciful and forgiving even though we have rebelled against him. We have not obeyed the Lord our God or kept his laws he gave us through his servants the prophets. All Israel has transgressed your law and turned away refusing to obey you. Therefore the curses and sworn judgments written in the law of Moses, the servant of God have been poured out on us because we have sinned against you. This is the message Daniel is not a modern who pretends to be the victim and says why does God let these things happen to me. Daniel says we brought these things on ourselves Lord and the sufferings that we have experienced have been justly given to you because of all we have been given and because all of the ways that we have failed you and Daniel carries all this stuff. This is the same Daniel okay this is the same Daniel that dared to believe God could save him from the lions then. This is the same relationship that Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego had in terms of yeah we may burn in that fiery furnace but our God is able to save. How can these two things come together and this is what I think is the mystery and mastery of the book of Daniel that we don't just have chapters one through six where Daniel seems to be the Sunday school know-it-all who always wins almost a cartoon character but in seven through twelve we see the rest of Daniel the fuller picture and we see that in certain glimmering moments God does run in and save the day but over the long haul faith is developed in the context of loss in the context of suffering in the context of disappointment that in this area God strengthens and refines and purifies his people to not be triumphalistic imagining that somehow we are excluded and special and God loves us and we does God loves us for who we are and we deserve all these bailouts that he gives us but Daniel sees us as constantly in need of God's mercy whether we live or die whether we have good times or bad times whether things seem to work out for us in the long run or we suffer. Now our God hear the prayers and petitions of your servant for your sake Lord look with favor on your desolate sanctuary give ear our God and hear open your eyes and see the desolation of the city that bears your name we do not make requests of you because we are righteous but because of your great mercy Lord listen Lord forgive Lord hear and act for your sake my God do not delay because your city and your people bear your name and so he appeals to God not on the basis of our righteousness but on the basis of God's project on the basis of God's program on the basis of God's mercy by which he seeks to take this this world of pain and suffering of tyranny and death and unite it with heaven where thy will thy kingdom come thy will be will be done on earth as it is in heaven this is God's plan and this is God's mission that Daniel holds on to even though for those few moments he seems to be the hero he knows how tentative and sharp and he knows how tentative and short this life is how small he is and how much God needs to do and how rebellious we are at heart now Daniel has promised that one will come to do for Israel and the world what we couldn't do for ourselves and this comes through in the middle of Daniel chapter 7 in my vision at night I looked and there before me was one like a son of man coming with the clouds of heaven he approached the ancient of days and was led into his presence he was given authority glory and sovereign power all nations and peoples of every language worshiped him his dominion is an everlasting dominion that will not pass away and his kingdom is one that will never be destroyed this is Daniel's hope in the son of man and for those of you who know the gospel writings know that this is exactly the term that Jesus appropriates for himself which the Romans and those outside his people would not understand as being anything special well sure he's a man but he's the son of man he is the one being given this eternal kingdom and every time you read the gospels pay attention to how Jesus uses this term but what about Daniel and his friends Jesus doesn't come in Daniel's life they would die in bondage suffering the normal short lives short-lived joys and sufferings common to us all most of us despite the life our life in the most prosperous most advanced nation in human history will all suffer death and loss as well as anxiety and want of one kind or another but isn't just a communal deliverance it is also an individual deliverance at that time Michael the great prince who protects your people will arise there will be a time of distress such as not happened from the beginning of the nations until then but at that time your people everyone whose name is found written in the book will be delivered multitudes who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake some to everlasting life others to shame and everlasting contempt those who are wise will shine like the brightness of the heavens and those who lead many to righteousness like the stars forever and ever and Daniel too as for you go your way until the end you will rest and then at the end of the days you will rise to receive your allotted inheritance this is good news for the God's great project and it's good news for individuals as well and it comes to all of us as as you know it's come to me recently in the death of my sister the picture here is actually from the death of my father in the graveside five years ago and I just look amongst those who were gathered there and my aunt over on the left in the red coat carrying the carrying the red ribbon she passed a year ago and my uncle who's standing next to my mother was unable to make it to my sister's funeral it comes to us all and the question we have is is there deliverance can we be saved does God listen in a sense in the book of Daniel we see Daniel 1 and Daniel 2 Daniel 1 is in chapters 1 through 6 and Daniel 2 is in chapter 7 through 12 we live these split lives we we trust in the power of God but we continue to endure the suffering common to this world Jesus lived this life he possessed power to heal the sick and raise the dead but he didn't use his power to exclude himself from the sufferings common to us all and some of you will will remember the eulogy that I preached at my sister's funeral where Jesus tarries so that Lazarus would die Jesus is a strange friend in that way but we need to learn to trust him Jesus is the hero who does for us what we can't do for ourselves he is also the model of living in this world we hold on to faith in Christ in God's deliverance I'd better change that because doesn't quite do the doubt thing like we do it even in the garden he asks if there might be another way than the cup of suffering so how Daniel and Jesus show us how we can suffer in hope how we can start to live in the new while suffering from the old you will believe it and experience it to the degree that you live into it reinforce it practice it be surrounded by it in community and it is the church that is supposed to be that community the church which stumbles the church which fails the church which is filled with with broken people who get it wrong more often than they get it right yet it's in the context of the church where Christ feeds us through his body from each other gives us the ability to believe that what is happening now is more than just the inevitable march of the age of decay