https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uxOlycEa5M8

 It's good. Yeah, that's nice. Well, it's a pleasure to meet you. Yeah, you too. You too. I have a nephew. I have a nephew with that name Lars. Okay. Yeah. It's quite a common Danish name. Well, at least in my age. So, yeah, it's a little old name. But not so much used in the last generations, I think. Oh, really? But yeah, that's quite a bit. I always have classmates named Lars always, so you always like three of us. Well, tell me a little bit about yourself, Lars. Yeah, let's start. I try to write a bit down. Yeah, I think, yeah, my background. Maybe I should start with where I come from with my church background, I think. Yeah. Yeah. I've always been a Christian. And I come from something called Apostolic Church of Denmark. Okay. And I think it relates. It's a Pentecostal movement. It relates some, I don't know if you know what it's like, but it's basically a charismatic church. Yeah. In Denmark, it's quite normal. You have, of course, the state church in Denmark, and then you have all these denominations also that are close to the state church. Or it's like the people's church. And then you have all the other independent churches. And in Denmark, it's called Frikjager, like free churches. And they are also organized in networks. Yeah, and where I'm from, I've been connected with also a lot of international churches also in that, I can't say it. It's quite common to be organized in some way. And anyway, the reason I'm saying this is that the church I'm from was not a member of the Apostolic Church of Denmark, but was from a member of another international apostolic church network. Okay. Where I kind of grew up in and learned a lot from. And then I moved to the city for work. And then I was, yeah, still being connected and everything. Yeah, I used to be a youth leader also. Okay. And also, yeah, and also doing different volunteering in churches. And yeah, currently I'm also leading a small group in the city I'm living, like a men's group from between 30 and 40. And we are like six, eight people, depending on, you know, people have some, like some of the guys have families and small kids and you know how it goes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But anyway. So were your parents Christians? Did you grow up in the church? Yeah, I grew up and a lot of my family is Christian also. Like my grandfather was a pastor. Okay. He died like half a year ago, but he was a pastor on my mother's side. And yeah, both my parents were Christian. Okay. So they met each other in church and you know how it works. Yeah. Wonderful. Yeah. And yeah, but what I was going to like one main part of my whole path is like four years ago, I was in a traffic accident. And so that's like a quite a distinct before and after. I don't know if you saw the some the message I wrote a little bit, talked a little about it. If you remember. Which I sent you a YouTube link to a video I recorded. Maybe it passed you. Did you send it on Facebook or? Or email or email client. Email. I tried to send it. But anyway, it's like five minutes long. But anyway, okay. You didn't read it. Never the mind. I will. Sorry about that. I get a lot of email and sometimes I sometimes things slip through the cracks. Yeah, it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter. But anyway, it's actually one of the reasonings. Why I would talk to you is actually like this four years ago, I had a traffic accident and it kind of flipped everything around. So I had a had a concussion at the time. And at the time when it happened, I didn't thought it was a very big deal, but it turned out to be quite a big deal. So, sorry, I don't know if I can tell you a little about that and how it turned around. I found your I found your email and I'm I did right back to you. So I did process it. But whether I remember this flurry of stuff I have thrown at me today. So go ahead and tell me about it again. Yeah. Okay. So basically it was it was my bicycle got into a crash with a car and hit my head. And and then, you know, I don't know how much you know about these things. And maybe the viewers also don't know. But what basically happens is you hit your head and then that's just the start of it. And then like the concussion unfolds like the next couple of days and what's happening. So like your brain is your brain have taken a hit. And basically you're not breathing, but you're breathing like signal molecules and hormones in your brains. Like things are have taken damage and like all kinds of crazy things happen. The short story is that there's a lot of different symptoms. And for me, it was a lot of headache, nausea and a lot of what you call it fake signals from your body like, you know, a lot of strange neurologic neurological symptoms. So anyway, so it's like this side. Okay. You're trying to move on and get to it. So I crashed on my way to work one day and then you were like sick for a couple of days and tried to get back to work and then you get sick again and go back. And then you try to go to work again and then I got really, really sick. And then I was just like, yeah, cutting. You had to stop just being at home and laying in bed for like a month or something. Yeah. And, and you know, there are these things is like, though I realized that point, like the only thing I had was my mind. Like everything else was in chaos. And I realized pretty quick that I needed to get my head under control and and, you know, how to deal with it. Yeah, I was in a lot of pain in the beginning, especially the first three months was was very bad. And then, yeah, like after six months, there was actually a moment where I didn't like I could actually forget I had a headache. Like it was like all the time, but after like six months, it was. Yeah. So that was that is brutal. Wow. Not gonna lie. So, so yeah, things are well, things are better now. When did the accident happen? How long ago? Yeah, that's four years, four years. Four years. Okay. Yeah. So I've had people in my church who have been in serious car accidents or serious physical trauma like that. And some of them, they never fully recover. Yeah. It's it's the professionals say like this. It's a it's a temporary damage. What do we call it? It's temporary. But the problem is if the temporary part is like the rest of your life, then you're out of luck. So it doesn't sound like the proper use of the word temporary. No. But the thing is, you know, people get the word like technically it takes like three days to get over a concussion because it's like some maybe three years, some say 24 hours, some say like two weeks. But it's something something like that because the brain goes into some emergency repair, repair the damage. So what I'm left with is the scars from the repair and how the scars turns out turn out. That's what you have to live with. And, you know, the brain can never repair the scars, but it can find other ways. And and depending on the damage you took, it's like, you know, the brain is like so many different things. So it's never exactly the same because all different parts of the brains are different for different people. And anyway, it gets a little technical. But yeah, I'm a mechanical engineer also. So that explains some of the technical things. Yeah, the technical way to look at it. But four years ago, you had this accident. How did that change your life? What did that set into motion for you? Yeah, it's well, actually, it was not the first accident. I would just get back to the first thing. The first thing I tried actually was when I was doing my master's degree. I had a different kind of accident. It was not an accident. I had a stress induced depression. So basically, I was working. I was working double full time for a year and then I crashed. I was up for that. Maybe not exactly double, but you know, I had full time study and full time work more or less on top of each other. So and like after a year, I kind of like I was out of power. And then I had like some sort of short break where I need to do things on my own for the studies. And then I had to return to school and these things. But the point was the thing I had to do on my own. I just collapsed and, you know, playing video games and watching television. You know, I was just drained and I couldn't keep up. And then because I was I don't know, I was 25 at the time and didn't know how to deal with them. What can you call it? You know, I was like this. I was this person, you know, I can do this. I have to I can do this. I just have to get over this. I just have to work hard. But the battery is just totally drained. And I tried to keep up appearances everywhere and everything just collapsed. So I ended in a black hole and I go to this depressed, depressive state where, you know, the front of the brain doesn't work. And and I spent like one year in a black hole and totally like took me three years to go through all of this. Wow. So, you know, on that, it was very painful in another way. But the way I want to talk about it, like I kind of knew what I was getting into when the concussion hit. It was different because when you're depressed, you can do everything, but you don't want like, you know, things are broken with a concussion. It's like a neurological illness. You want to do a lot of things, but you can't do anything. Your body is just, you know, it's like the reverse. It's the opposite, if you can imagine. But it's the same same thing in some ways. So I kind of knew how to like I knew how to deal with having zero days, you know, the kind of day where you do exactly nothing. You just get up, eat some food from the fridge and just sleep the whole day or like doing something like totally nonproductive day. Wow. And how to deal with this mentally is like, yeah. Yeah. So so I kind of knew like that, you know, I kept my sanity through this thing because I had the prior experience from this, I would say, because I also like between the time where I had the stress period, I actually had some very good years where, you know, I really understood like I connected a lot a lot more to my father's like in my life. You can say it was my own father, my pastor. I connected with also the my supervisor at the school. Like, what is it called? Not the president, but that's like a leader of my degree, what is called the faculty leader. Like, they kind of took me in. And, you know, I came from from thinking I failed everything, you know, like, at that time, you know, I kind of failed my degree as engineer, you know, I took it cost me a lot. It was very hard for me at the time. But then I when I reached out, I just discovered that everybody just want to see me succeed. Everyone above me wants to see me succeed. And I really learned a lot for that. And I really, you know, I learned to tap into that and really pull from it. So that was so I really came out of that stronger and got a good degree even like I burned out. I was connected with the company at the time where I had my meltdown. And, you know, I basically just lied to them. And suddenly I was not there anymore. You know, I kept lying, lying, lying. And I was I was gone. You know, that was from their perspective. Yeah. But even then, actually, when I was done with all this thing, I finished my degree, I called up my old boss and we reconnected and I actually worked from them. I actually still work from them for them part time now. So, you know, it's just this crazy thing that that's actually fathers in your life, you can call it that. I just wish you the best. Yeah. And and that was great to know. And that was great to know. That's wonderful. That's wonderful. So so the reason I'm saying this, it gets a little long. But, you know, this kind of ties into my experience when I had this accident. You know, I had a lot of experience with this. You can call it dark side. I've seen that. Yeah. So I knew how to cope better. Yeah. But still, when you put like physical pain in in great amounts on top of that, then it's that's another that's another thing. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's that's all true. That's all true. Yeah. That's very true. So. So, but how did you find your way to me? Yeah, yeah, that's that's probably the next part of the story. I've written some notes. Okay. So basically what happened was, like, after this period, like after the first like, two weeks a month was just like totally confusing to me. This was back in 2015, early, early spring. And, and what I was basically doing was, yeah, I was just laying on my, like had a mattress in front of my computer. And I was listening to, like, documentaries on the internet. Like, actually, just that haven't chosen cronies event like one month before I hit my head, I actually started studying philosophy, just, you know, basic logic lessons, finding things on YouTube, you know, getting smarter. I also besides being a mechanic in the eye will always prioritize like having like since I was 25, I started, you know, reading literature also like instead of all the numbers and models and you know, all the engineering stuff. I also wanted the literature part and also, yeah, I've been always read the Bible a lot and studying theology and all these kind of things to balance out. But anyway, so I was just laying on a bed and listening to philosophy lectures and I was listening to cosmology lectures and quantum mechanics. And then at one point I stumbled on World War Two documentary and I remember just laying on my, my, my mattress and hearing the drop, the bombs drop on Dresden or you know, whatever episode was, was running. And I was just realizing that I'm only alive because of mercy, like in the state I was, if I lived in Cold War, I would be dead. So there was a kind of a strange revelation. And then, you know, what happens watching all these things, YouTube does this thing and suddenly a lecture on existentialism by Jordan B. Peterson pops up. And yeah, and it was, I think Nietzsche and Kierkegaard and what Dostoevsky. And I knew who Nietzsche was, Dostoevsky I knew by name. And then at the time Kierkegaard was the Danish philosopher and I read him a bit. So I tried them and that was it. And then I just remember very clearly, you know, hearing his voice for the first time. And I could hear that, you know, his voice have this passion in it. And it also had the suffering in it. You can, you can hear the way he speak and how he speaks and what it is and the change. And I couldn't figure out if he was Christian or not at that time. And I think that's exactly the right description. You cannot figure out if he's Christian or not. And I really like, I'm a very open person so I can easily understand this, like, things can be two things at once. And, and, and looking back at it, you know, I see him as like it was a message, messenger from God, you know, in this way. I'm not equalizing with him with the Messiah and crazy like that. But, but you know what I mean, he's, it was a synchronous event. Let us call it that. Yeah. Yeah. So basically, I saw like, every single Jordan Peterson video here on YouTube over the next couple of months, like every single one. I listened to it. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep. So that was it. So what did you, what did you get? So, so that was about the time of your head injury. Did you listen to him while you were recovering from the head injury or was that? It was when I had the head injury, like the whole, I did, I, before the head injury, I was just like starting a little bit philosophy, but I was very busy. I can tell you what I did before. I was like strength training twice a week. I was running twice a week. I led a small group in church. I was still youth leader in my old church and they had, I kind of planted a youth group in another city where I also, like it was kind of the same group. So I was traveling to two other cities, like what is 60 miles apart each. And it was like a triangle where I lived like 60 miles, 60 miles, 60 miles. So I was doing that. And I was doing webmaster in my old church. And I was helping, you know, you can, yeah. So what full time, what do you think? What do you think listening to Jordan Peterson when you were recovering from your injury did for you? Because obviously there was something inside of you that was telling you, listen to this. I mean, interest was pointing you there. Do you have any clue about why, what you're getting from it? How, how it was impacting you? Yeah, and that's another part. This is like kind of my journey. And it's also some of the things I want to talk about is like, yeah, where where I was, it's like, I will always been a scientific person also. And so it was this finding out what is faith? What is science? How do they combine? Do we have one or the other? Because from the background I'm from is like, you could say more or less fundamentalists, you know, it's not like the people are, you know, they have a very, very strong, they have a very strong sense of what I'm doing. So I can't say that I have a very strong sense of what I'm doing. closing their eyes for everything, but it's just like science doesn't play any part of anything. It's like full theology in this side. And I always wanted to combine the two and find out the way, you know. And this was the thing when I heard him the first time, I could feel that this was the same thing he was doing, like trying to combine the worlds. And also like going to our conception of God and our faith for my natural scientific way. And that was what I was really enjoying, this very scientific approach to everything also. And so that was kind of the thing that connected me. But also like when he was talking about, you know, especially I remember the Pinocchio story, when he talked about that in one of his lectures, it was really something that affected me very strongly because of the, you know, going to the underworld and rescue your dead father or resurrect your dead father, you know, like this kind of theme is like, you know, it spoke a lot to me. So like it's not only science, but also the knowledge of the archetypes. And actually before I read Freud, like before I hit my head just for curiosity. And so I never came around to Jung. But anyway, the ideas, like I could easily absorb the ideas of Jung and all this and have read Jung since. But like this way to look at the world is also something that interested me a lot. Like this, we live in this scientific world. But on the other hand, it's like everything comes up from the bottom, you just need to listen to it. And like, that's a lot more in the world that we know that it's just and it's there. And we just need to look for it and be what is called, pay attention, pay attention to it. So like this kind of way of thinking about the world of sleep, really, like that hits very close to me with John Peters. And the other part before, like also before I hit my head, I used to do this, like part of prayer and meditation, you know, just listening, try to figure out like, what is your body telling you, telling you what's like, what's out there, you know, I can frame it, like, I think you can frame it as both a believer and non-believer. But what I do is, you know, you're asking God basically asking the Holy Spirit, what is it? Right. What should I do now? What's happening now? What's like this? It's kind of meditative practice, I think. Right, right, right. So yeah. And you know, but that's the thing, you know, after my action, you know, I have this way to live in like, more like a narrow framework. And then I hit my head. And then, you know, you go to the first thing you do, you know, you go to church, you get prayed for, you pray to God that you may be healed or something like that. And then that doesn't happen. And then what? And then you need to figure out that. And that's also the like the drive to understand what's up and down and everything. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So what did you have on your list? We have about a half hour. So yeah. Yeah. Let's start knocking things down. Yeah, I don't expect we can talk about everything. But I just think it's good. I just think it's good to talk about. So absolutely. Yeah. But anyway, now you have like a basic framework where I'm from. So I think now it's easier to talk about the things on my list. Yeah. Yeah. And basically, we talked about a little about something, you know, I've always been absolutely fascinated about finding out what the world is made of. Like, what is the world made of? And one thing is what is the atoms? What about the quantum states? What about, you know, the physical bodies, everything? Like, how does that work? But also, like, what is like this conversation we're having? Like, it's crazy when you think you just have to think about it like for five seconds and you're down the rabbit hole. Yeah. It's like, you know, I'm here in Denmark. It's like half past 11. And you are in the United States and we are talking to each other. And it's and what it's like and what is this conversation? Where is that? Like, what? Yes. What kind of world is that in? It's like, we're both speaking English, which is very gracious of you. Yeah, you're welcome. But to think about that is like, in physical, of course, we are embedded in the physical world. But like, what is this? That's some kind of meaning, you know, it's not, it's not of the physical world, because a physical world is like Mars or Saturn. It's like a dead planet. So, you know, this is something completely different. And this belongs to some kind of world also, like, and I think that's the great mystery of consciousness, is, you know, it's something else. And I, that's why also I, even though I'm a very materialist in a lot of ways, I'm still like a dualist on the very bottom, because I just think this is just too strange. And there's just too much of it. And even if you're full materialist, you need, you still have to contend with this other world, that if you want to describe it as precise as you can, you will have to describe it in a dualistic way, or else your terms will just become meaningless. Like, if you say there's, there's one box where everything is in, that's all fine and good, but then you lose the usage of the boxes you make, like, then your boxes have no meaning if there's only one big box. So, so that's what I also like a lot about John Peterson in his way of explaining these kinds of things. Yeah, and you can say, I'm, you, I used to say that, you know, that's a lot of thing I can't do, but I can think, I can think a lot. That's what I spent my time doing, many hours a day. So, yeah. Oh, that's true. I've been thinking a lot about the, you know, maybe this whole Jordan Peterson thing for me has been just one long journey, two of learning, one long learning journey and all these different stations that I hit on the way. And, and lately it's been a lot of ontology, a lot of, a lot of, okay, what is, what is that bottom? Yeah. And even, even the, I mean, one of the things that I, you just have to use all these metaphors and these metaphors are obviously all embedded in an entire history, but, yeah, no, it's, yeah, it keeps you busy all day long thinking about, yeah, it does. You know, you're driving, you're talking or whatever, it's always in the back of your head, just running back there. Yeah. And I think that this, yeah, about the history thing is like, you know, of course there's traces of history in the, like, that's why we know history, because we have written down books, but, you know, like the complete history, it is something and where is it, is the data somewhere, it, yeah, it's just, it's strange. It is strange. And that's why I'm like, even though, well, I don't really care much about, you know, you can't push me into a corner and say that's only this physical realm and that's everything there is, but okay, now I've said that, but, you know, does it make sense to, whenever we analyze the world and we have to take action, does it make sense to say the world is like one physical thing? And I mean, we lose a lot of resolution if we say that. Yeah. That's the least I have other arguments for dualism, but no, this was the first of them. Well, maybe we default into dualisms because I think it's just perhaps kind of obvious we default into dualisms because our armonisms don't work. And if you reduce everything, you're exactly right. If you reduce everything down to materiality, well, there's so much you can't explain. And so you wind up just explaining that just everything goes away and it becomes flat and meaningless. So yet the power of the material, the power of the material layer, layers probably not even the right word, but the power of the material layer is so strong that we can't get away from it either, which is part of the reason why I think in Christianity, unlike a lot of Gnosticized versions of it floating around out there in Christianity, we await the resurrection of the body. And we say that the apostles believe in apostles creed, I believe in the resurrection of the body. It's right there in the apostles creed. So if you go to a church that says the apostles creed, there it is. And so that's an interesting facet about Christianity that a number of other religions just kind of, well, when you die, your spirit goes and it's like, all right, but I've just spent three Sunday school classes pestering my poor beloved Sunday school class about what do you mean when you say spirit? Every week I come back to remember what we talked about last week? No, and we run through it again. One of these weeks, they'll be so sick of it. They'll say, we're not going to talk about that anymore. I'll say, no, that's right. Yeah. Yeah. But I think, but also maybe I want to be a little more hard on Christians. Yeah, I don't understand this the right way, but it's like, we are fully incarnated bodies. And many times, even you can say that there's these attempts somewhere, fasting is a lot of things, but that's also this kind of abstaining from everything. So you are fully spiritual. There are some people who attempt to live like that, and they can live like that for some time and then things collapse because you are a physical body. You need to maintain yourself both like you need to earn money. You need to fit into a world where you live and that's the systems. And just beside the simple thing that you need to eat food, of course, you can, I get many reasons for fasting and I'm not saying that's wrong at all, but it's like, you still need to live in the world we're living in. It's like, you can't escape it. And people who attempt to escape it, they don't make it. We have no respect for it. When we do these dystopian films about the future and we imagine people in vats, you know, we look at the movie, The Matrix, people are in vats, you know, like infants. And we look at that and say, that's not what bodies are for, even though they're having this phenomenological experience that looks like the world that you and I participate in. But somehow we, at a deep level, say we are made to be embodied. And again, I think the Christian faith is right there with that. Jesus rises from the tomb and he is touched and embraced. He's not just, you know, his ghost doesn't show up and give them some pearls of wisdom. It's deep in the Christian faith. Yeah. Yeah. And then also, yeah, I agree. And you know, that's also why, you know, to come back to the earlier question, why I found you. And I mean, the first time I saw you was pretty much the first video you commented on, Jordan Peterson. But what I really enjoy a constant is also this, you know, you look looking at these things for a Christian lens. And, you know, I think it's very interesting also. It's very, I'm very interested in this open discussion about, you know, everything Christianity and that probably other thing we can talk about is like, at least where I'm from, there's a, people are afraid to talk about, you know, evolutionary theory. I think it's because they fear that they might lose their faith in some way. In your church, you mean? Not only my church, but you know, the people around me. It's like, it's like never said like this through the pulpit, pulpit, you know, like, it's never said like this, but there's this, you know, sometimes I have some friends, you know, talking with people. And then I just mentioned a few things and it's like, it's people are uncomfortable talking about hard science. And I think I will tell you a reason why I think because when the young people leave the church, it's basically like two camps, or I will maybe say one camp is like, people want to go drink and party and you know, and so they leave the leave the church. But the other part, and but all of them say, it's because they couldn't make sense of, you know, the science and religion and this kind of part, they couldn't, they couldn't make sense of it. And you can say many of the people who choose to stay in church, like, they still have degrees and you know, they're smart people. But they just say that, you know, the question about the origin of humanity or Genesis, the questions about Genesis is like, it's not interesting, you know, it's not, it doesn't have value in ordinary Christian life. And it doesn't affect Christian life. But I'm like, you know, yes, I hear what you're saying. But no, it's just say it's not important because it is important. Well, it's important to me, then you can live your life like you are. But I'm like, I really want to understand things. I don't want to. I don't want to live something I don't fully believe. And I would rather be a heretic than, you know, admit something to fit in or something. And it's fine. But nobody has excommunicated me yet, even though I say what I say. So that's good. And that's something a lot of people outside the church can't appreciate that within the church, there really is a tremendous amount of diversity of beliefs and discussions in many churches on these subjects. And I think you're exactly right. I think you framed it very well. Many people in the church, well, there's, there's all that science Bible stuff, we'll just put that over there. But for the most part, I see my doctor, I get gasoline from my car, from geologists that have models, my doctor has biological models, I'll leave that over there with them. But I have to live my life over here. And the church is sure a big part of helping me live my life over here. So I'm not going to worry about those two things. I'll just let them live side by side. And as long as you know, they behave, they behave themselves, everything will be fine. But people like you and me and others begin to say, we should look at that. We should talk about that. Others like, no, don't go there. Because a lot of people who go there go off the edge. Yeah, exactly. Stop being with us in church. I think you I think you phrased that really well. Yeah. So. So yeah, that's exactly. And also, but you know, I also think when I just mentioned my grandfather died, he was old, so it was fine. But you know, you have to die sometime. I don't I don't I don't take it. You know, that's also I understand. You know, also, you know, like I have spent a lot of time to think about death. And I've come to understand that, you know, there are things that are worse than dying, you know, so. So it's like, it's also from this death, I can say this was maybe it's too relaxed. I don't know. But I don't. You know, when people have lived their life 100%, you know, to the full with all they could, then what can like, you know, it's it's okay. It's like it's a part of life. It's like it doesn't matter. It's it's good. Everything is as it should be, you know. So I don't I don't know what you call it. You know, the grief was short, you can say it like that. Yeah. Yeah. But anyway, but he the reason I want to mention him is like that he, you know, he lived his life like this, like, God is my provider, you know, from, you know, it's it's in one of the gospels. I don't know. Yeah, I read the Bible in Danish, but it's something like God provides for the birds, then how much more does he not provide for you? I don't remember the I don't know the English saying. But that's the and he lived his life like that fully, like 100%. And you could say there was a lot of people, you know, around him that kind of, you know, made sure things was working because when he made, you know, he sold what he had and went preaching, you know, all over the world. Yeah, he was like in India and Poland, especially like until he was, yeah, 80. He was still traveling to Poland and preaching in churches. Yeah, he was fascinating. Yeah, he, he, he pretty much, yeah, preached until he, he died in it, like it was, it was very close. So yeah, and of course, he lived his life like had a huge and especially at the funeral, because we of course, see the side where we see the sides where, you know, maybe he's a little irresponsible with money. And you know, how can he do that and not thinking to himself and his children, like my parents, they kind of need to take care of them a bit, but still, they don't want to take care because it's like, he should, he should, you know, know how to spend the money. But in that, you know, at his funeral, it was like, just hours of people talking about how they were led to Christ, you know, from his his life and his example. So, you know, maybe he was right all along, you know. So it's like, we should not be quick to judge how people live their lives. And that's, I think that's a very valuable lesson there. Yeah. So that's very true. That's very true. What a blessing. What a blessing to have a grandfather like that. And yeah, yeah, a blessing, I'm sure sometimes, but at the same time, especially at the grandfather level, because again, your parents buffered because usually people swing away and the kids kind of swing back the other way and compensate. Yeah. But and that's also, you know, like our family, you know, is doing well, you know, I have my health problems and you know, everybody have problems, you know, but anyway, I can say that a lot of our life is like having faith in Christ, you know, having faith in God is like, I don't have this. I never had this, you know, like desire to be an atheist, you know, because I could see there was so many blessings that came from having this set of beliefs and this is why, and then you can say, well, everything is not factually correct. And then you, but I can't just reject all the other things I've experienced and I've seen just because everything is not factually correct, a little really correct. And you know, then you will have to throw away the little interpretation of the Bible along the way, but you know, I believe it. I think that's, and that's, yeah, I really love the Bible for this. And I think that's also why I really loved the biblical series by John B. Peterson is like this. There's just this layer and layer and layer and layer and layer and you can just keep, it's like, it's so archetypically all the way down. Like it just, yeah. And he also really taught me some ways to analyze the Bible in this kind of way. I didn't do that before. Like I, of course I still analyze the Bible in some way, but it, yeah. And that's probably the last point. I don't know how much time we have, but then we're doing okay. We've got another 15 minutes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm speaking as fast as possible. I'm just kidding. No, but this, this natural, like let's call it natural law, natural theology, you know, like you sit down, let's try to examine how did this law emerge, you know, and see where it comes from and understand how like spending time understanding why the Bible is true, you know, from a purely scientific or psychological analysis. I think it was very beneficial to me to see that exercise. And I think you can, yeah, that's at least one thing that was very valuable to me. Well, you know, I don't even know, you know, it's interesting because one of the things I, there's a million things I want to run back to, but part of me keeps thinking, I should probably go back to the biblical series and listen to those again, because now after figuring out Peterson, all that I have, it'd be good to re-listen to those because of course he had himself figured out when he was talking and I didn't have himself figured out, so I didn't understand. But the, you know, in the biblical series, he doesn't really so much say that the Bible, he says it's true, but it's, but there's still mystery in the truth of it. And he frames that in a very interesting way and a very compelling and I think a very attractive way. And that he sets up the Bible to be both at the same time something we should aspire to, something we should aspire to know and yet something that's mysterious and we won't grasp it, but there's a desire to grasp it in there. And, you know, and I think that's a big part of why that those 15 lessons in Genesis have changed so many people. Yeah, yeah. And I think, and you know, I just want to, I think this is the right time to tell it, because there was actually, before, you know, my, yeah, the old church I was connected to, like it's my parents' church, it's, there was actually some very, there was a leader of this network and we were, went to youth camps, like it was in Malaysia, actually, the main, what do you call it, the headquarters of the organization was in Malaysia, so we were in Malaysia too, like a youth camp and also been in Switzerland sometimes. And what was really amazing is like the leader, actually, he was like, his name is Dr Jonathan David, just to mention it, but it, after all this Peterson's thing, I come to look back and like his message was actually pretty much the same as the Jordan P. Peterson message. But the thing is, you know, it was fully derived from a theological, like theological method, like no science at all, like the complete different. So anyway, what I'm lived with, like something was very important in my formative years, like from when I was early twenties was this, you know, I just written it down, it's like these two lessons, you know, don't be a cheat, you know, don't cheat in life, like this is what will protect you from corruption, you know, and especially in Southeast Asia, that's like a lot of corruption everywhere, like the churches are, the most of the churches in network was in Malaysia and Philippines and South Africa and China and Mongolia, you know, these kinds of countries. So like the lesson he put into the young people is like, don't be a cheat. And I look at Jordan Peterson, don't lie, you know, like they're very important about doing the right thing. And then the other lesson he that also hit home with me is like this, if there's one person, whoever left, you should follow, then it should be Jesus Christ. Or like this, this is the highest example you can choose to follow. And, and, and John Peterson said, again, again, you know, turn to the light, turn to the top of the pyramid, you know, like, take, take on you the highest goal you can imagine, like, yeah. So, so you can say these two lessons, like I just, it is the meta analysis, you know, you go to the house, this is what I'm left with, you know, if there's only a few things I remember of each person, you can see that's very big overlap in these two. Yeah. Even though the method of getting that was like, absolutely completely different. So, so I think that was very interesting. So that is very interesting. That's very interesting. You know, it's interesting when you say when you, when you look at it, okay, so Jesus is the ideal human being. And you think about that, and to, to sit down and say why that is, and let's say Jesus and not, you know, pick up, pick up a cartoon character or superhero character, Jesus and not Batman, Jesus and not Thor, Jesus and not Superman. It's how we know this, and how, why we think about this is not exactly obvious. No, and I mean, even the rational mind of me does not accept that claim. Yeah. Like, if you know, because when I read the Bible, you know, there's some so many things that Jesus says also, where it's like, he's really provoking, like, like, I think it's like, many of the things he's saying, you know, it's like, oh, man, I don't really don't like what he's saying there. But in the end, it's kind of, you have this in the back of your mind. Well, that's, it's probably true, you know, that's, yeah, yeah. And this is strange thing, actually, very strange, very strange. Yeah, you're right. So I know ministers shouldn't say that minister should be a good lying pastor and say, Oh, no, it's obvious. And of course, you know, a lot of this is also, and that's another thing I really is important to me is like doubting, like doubting is, I have understand that is super important to me, at least, and I must accept that I'm doubting, and I must accept this. You can't really escape it. But it's okay, you know, it's, you know, dive. And I think I think there's different kinds of doubt. And we have one English word for them. But yeah, if we had time, you could pull it apart and say, well, there's this kind of doubt, because Jesus does say, you know, stop doubting and believe. And that's true. That's right. But at the same time, there's there's kind of a there's kind of a a be honest with yourself about your doubts. Yeah, because cover papering them over. Another amazingly interesting metaphor, papering them over doesn't help you. So so be honest. Yeah. And if your honesty leads you to recognize some doubt in your heart, then face it. Yeah, exactly. And engage it. No, that's right. That's right. And I think also and and and in the end, you know, it's also strange, like, whenever I think about this stuff, I think that's always something I always return to. And you know, it's, it's like what Paul says is, you know, it's all about love, you know, and what really needs, like what you really need to believe when you believe in Jesus, I think, like, I think, if you take the first step, the first leap of faith, you can call it it is you have to believe this will lead you on a wrong along a path along the right path. That is what you have to have faith in. You have to have faith that love is the greatest of all. Like that thing. And yeah, whenever I read Paul, like especially lately, is, yeah, it's, it becomes emotional very quickly for me, because you can, yeah, he just talked about love, like everything else will disappear. But love is like, and I don't know the English word, it says, it's indestructible or something like that. It's like, it will not, it will never decay. Yeah, I don't know, you have to say the English verses if you if you know it. No, I think you said it well, it won't decay it. And it's, well, love never fails. And so Paul says, in First Corinthians 13, it's a Corinthian font. It's like, yeah, it is from First Corinthians. Yeah, it's that passage. I just don't have the English. But then, but then, so I'm, you know, this is, so my wife and I are watching this, this Korean, we've been lately watching Korea dramas, Korean drama on, on Netflix, Mr. Sunshine, and they, the, the female lead says, you know, love, she's learning English, she's like love, and, and will you do love with me? And the guy's like, a guy knows English, like, okay, and what are the steps? Of course, it's Korean drama. So it's very, you know, it's, it's very prim and proper. And, you know, first shake, first introduce, say your name, and then shake hands, and then hug, and then longing. And she's love is hard. Yeah, love is hard. But it's also the best faith, hope, and love. But the greatest of these is love. Yeah, yeah. That's, that's exactly the passage. Yeah. And you know, it's, it's like, and I, and I think when you come with faith, like, that's the first part you have to have faith in, you know, it's love, the greatest of all, like, that's the first step, and then you will have to see where it takes you. You know, and the same with the Jesus says, this is the way and the truth and the life, you know, that's another thing. You just need to have faith in that, at least and see what goes. And that's the first, that's the first thing you do, even if you're full of doubt. And what is it? And it is with Thomas, he says this thing, some pretty sure it's, or at least it's a very, he talked with Thomas in the same passage from what is all these English names, the fourth gospel. John. John. Yeah, John. Yeah, from the middle of John somewhere. Yeah. Yeah. And we're just about out of time. Any last minute things you really want to get in before we have to skedaddle? There's an English word for you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's just one thing I'll maybe return to about the Bible. And you can see what when we talk about this, you can say, when I look at the Bible, I say it's like, it's full of theological claims. And when I, and what we mean with that is like, the Bible is full with maxims, it's full with proverbs, it's full of stories. And this is the kind of, this is the kind of thing where you can, it's like evidence of a natural world, you know, this is like it is, and now we have to discover why it's true. It's very from the bottom. And then on the other side, we have this, the laws and the dogmas and the doctrines that kind of comes in on top. Like some people sit with these strange stories and strange experience and they try to make sense of it. And then they arrive at something, you know, and they write, and that's the good thing about the Bible. They write, actually write down, you know, the stories like in raw form, all the craziness, all the hidden messages that needs to be unraveled later, you know, and then there's also the part that, you know, path of her always tried to make sense of it. And, and it has been into law some of it. And, and I think what I, what I like to enjoy doing is like kinda, you know, the first part is always the thing that's been most interesting to me, like understanding, like try to unravel the mystery, you know, the maxims and the providence and all these things. And, and I think many times, I don't know, it's, I understand this need to, you know, this chaos have to take form in some dogma and some doctrines, you know, to kind of have a shape. But, but on the other hand, it's also, it's so difficult to do that because we have this very, very complex systems and we make one derivation, two derivation, three, and suddenly uncertainty creeps in and we get a mess and we need to go back to square one. And that's like, yeah. No, good girl. Yeah. And that's kind of this like kind of way things work. It's like something I think a lot about. And I think actually this kind of thing is also like founded in, you know, natural law. And now you have all this, the Tao and all these things that John Peterson talks about also. And, you know, it's everything ties together. And when you think about it that way. Yeah. Well, it's so interesting because, you know, what is it we want? We want to see and we want to grasp. And, and there's the, that, that relationship in the Bible is a very interesting one because, you know, Moses sees the burning bush. He doesn't grasp it. And in fact, he's got to take off his shoes because he's on holy ground. Yeah. You know, since there are stories where people are grabbing at Jesus, the woman who was looking for healing, she grabs his cloak, Mary, Mary Magdalene of the Gospel of John after the resurrection clings on to him. And Jesus says, don't cling on to me because I haven't yet ascended to my father. It's like, what's, it's always part, part of us, we want to see and we want to grasp, but the moral value of seeing and grasping is not identical. And so, so, oh, this is the world of stuff. And that's, and that's probably the greatest cliffhanger we'll have to do is, and also think that, you know, when we talk about fundamental reality, just to return to that, I think one of the big ones is like evolutionary theory, but actually it's not evolutionary theory. It's natural selection. Evolution of theory is on top of natural selection. The natural selection is on the bottom or just selection, we can call it. Yes. And the other huge one is quantum mechanics. And it's not quantum mechanics because at the bottom of quantum mechanics is like probability. Everything have a chance. That's, that's uncertainty everywhere. And I think that's the same thing. It's just like, especially the last point you made about grasping and seeing, it's like, it's the uncertainty part. That's the one that just goes all the way to the top. And I think it's very interesting to think about it like that. And that is why uncertainty is not a bad thing. No, well, especially for us, because we're too small or we're too dumb or too limited. If you can actually see uncertainty, well, you're paying attention. Yeah. And also, you know, that's the thing that when there's uncertainties, there's also probability. And when we get wiser, maybe we don't know everything, but we can make good bets at least. And you know, the one who get the good odds on top of each other will hopefully you'll win. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Well, Lars, I've got to run, but this was, this was a delight. It's so nice to meet you. And you know, like you said earlier, I mean, there's this, there's this, I mean, it's a miracle. You're in Denmark, I'm in California, and we've never met each other. And you know, we had a little email conversation that I had forgotten. And but, but here, and I did, now I do remember your video, but I didn't have to jog my memory. But you know, but again, one of the differences between let's say, email or messaging or comments on YouTube, I mean, to actually just have a back and forth talk over video. And we can't even explain why that's so special, but it is. Yeah, it's crazy. So I really appreciate this. And thanks for thanks for signing up and, and giving me an hour of your time. And this was this was a delight. And I, I pray that God, well, God's clearly working with you. And I think he's, I think you've got some of your grandfather's spirit in you. And, and, you know, I love your devotion to the church, and your thirst for truth, even when that brings you into things that some in the church are not comfortable with. So I just want to affirm you and encourage you in that and keep and, you know, and even your, you know, even your challenges of the of the depression, and the then the head injury, you know, I can see how God uses those. So, you know, good, good for you. Good for you. That's a, that is the conundrum, you know, it's like, it would certainly like, it's not fun. I can, I can say that it's like, it's something you really, really want to be without. And like, just want to mention shortly, you know, being in church, you know, I can't go to church services. I've not been to maybe I was five times a year, I'm at a church service, because it's just three things that trigger me is like large, loud noise. Many people, many, like many faces. Yeah, many, all the many faces and all the talking it goes. It just drains the battery like, yeah, so, so the big, I can't do that. So, so that's something I really miss. I miss running so much. And I miss being in church so much. But wow, what can you do? Well, what can you do? We can pray for healing. That's what we can do. Yeah. And I will say, yeah, I always say yes to that. But that's a complicated story also. Okay. Yeah, but I would like to talk with you another time. Okay, you can sign up again. And my schedule is crazy during March. And so people are okay, people are saying, oh, there's no more slots. And well, I have patience. So that's not a problem. Well, that's a good thing. Well, thank you so much, Lars. Yeah, delight delight meeting you. And I will send I will send you this video. Yeah, thank you. Okay. Bye bye.