https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sZnyegR0pwM

 Hi, this is Paul. Justin Brierley asked me to write a piece on the conversation between Dave Rubin and John Lennox, and I just spent the last couple of days working on that. It got longer and longer. It might be too long for Justin, but I really had quite a few thoughts about this, and especially about Dave Rubin, as I dug into his life a little bit more. Now, sort of when I saw this thing develop, I thought this is going to be like Irish Kung Fu Panda versus Happy Puppy, because Dave Rubin, I kind of categorize him as the Rodney Dangerfield of the IDW. He doesn't get any respect. A lot of people think that he's too soft an interviewer, he's too agreeable, he's just really happy to go along with the show, with anybody who sits across the room from him. So there are a lot of critics of Dave, a lot of other people really like him. And I call John Lennox the Irish Kung Fu Panda, because of course he's Irish, and if you look at him, he's just kind of, and when he's sitting there in a chair, he kind of looks like the shape of a panda. And he's so nice and jolly and kind that you think, oh, I just like talking to grandpa. But this guy has a, this guy is a lecturer of mathematics and philosophy of science at Oxford. And once he's, if you're going to sit across the table from this guy and debate religion and Christianity, you had better have your stuff together, because he's not only smart and knowledgeable and well-read, he's also very witty and can turn things very quickly. And so I thought, boy, if Rubin's talking to him, by the end of this thing, Rubin will be singing love songs to Jesus. Well, the conversation didn't go quite how I expected. It was quite good. I really enjoyed listening to it. I've listened to it four or five times by now, probably. And in some ways, what's there in the front is Dave Rubin's political conversion, which is something that Dave talks about all the time, but sort of penetrated, you know, where he's been at in terms of his religion. And that's been quite interesting, too. Now, many of you know that Dave was the opener, the warm-up act, as it were, for Jordan Peterson's book tour slash Evan, roaming Evan, you know, Petersonian evangelistic crusade. And, you know, I went to a number of those things. And actually in Sacramento, the first one I went to, Dave Rubin, I saw Dave Rubin walking around outside, nobody talking to him. I thought, ah, poor Dave, there's 3,000 people here to see Peterson, and, you know, nobody wants to talk to poor Dave Rubin. But so his political conversion is quite well known. He went from a pre-woke liberal to a classical liberal libertarian. And Dave is more than happy to share that story with whoever will listen. But the religious aspect of him is quite a bit less known. He talked about having sort of defaulted into atheism, but more and more been interested in religion. He grew up in a secularish, observantish household, born in Brooklyn, grew up on Long Island, born in 1976. So he would have been about five years old when I went to college, so quite a bit younger than I am. We'll get into the generation thing a little bit later in this video. But, you know, his family practiced, you know, observed the Sabbath and practiced the religion, but along with many other people sort of drifted atheistically, went to public colleges, public school, public colleges. And he mentioned, you know, he's very much moved by the Dennis Prager service. Now, Dennis Prager, for me, is an interesting guy. He's sort of a holdover from the days of the Cold War and Cold War civil religion. I'm going to talk a lot about civil religion in this video. Now, that term really came into the American vocabulary from an essay in 1967 by a sociologist named Robert Bellah. If you haven't heard about Robert Bellah, he, I think he ended his career teaching at Berkeley. He's actually an immensely important scholar of sociology of religion in America. I've been digging into a little bit of Durkheim lately, and Bella, I really have to dig more into, more into Bella. And Bella wrote a book on Durkheim, which I just ordered on Amazon, and we'll get here soon. But Bellah's a very, very interesting guy. Read his book Habits of the Heart when I was at seminary in the late 80s. But you can find his essay, Civil Religion in America, just free on the internet on the Robert Bellah site. And it's a very interesting, it's a very interesting article. It comes, 1967 is before, you know, really everything sort of lets loose in 1968. People are getting increasingly nervous about the Vietnam War, but of course as we, as we feel in society today, both sides tend to, well if you have a conflict like that, both sides tend to power up and keep powering until, you know, someone finally wins. And this is such an interesting piece because he notes that in America, many people were sort of, to be Christian and American was sort of the same thing. And what you find in Bella's article here is sort of an incipient globalism. You know, one of the big conflicts today is nationalism versus globalism. There's sort of an incipient globalism and a discomfort with, okay, what is, what is the civil religion doing to Christianity? And in 1967, remember that church attendance in the United States was at its peak. To be, to be a loyal American would mean that you would, you know, be a loyal Christian or at least go to synagogue as a Jew. And this was, to be religious and American was really the same thing. We recruited God to fight the Cold War and it was sort of like the Avengers recruiting Thor. You know, we put, in God we trust got put on the coins during the Cold War. If you read David Brooks, The Road to Character, read the chapter on Dwight D. Eisenhower. Fascinating. Eisenhower, not really a religious man, but when he got into the White House became kind of the high priest or Washington pope of civil religion for America. America took a very strong religious turn in the 1950s as it geared up to face the threat of communism around the world. Of course, 1950 you had the Korean Civil War. Korea in the 20th century was having a deep Christian revival that would completely reshape religion on the Korean peninsula. But, but this, this article, Civil Religion in America was, was sort of saying, is it, is it really right that, that we do this? Of course, Kennedy, the first Roman Catholic American president, you know, came and, and God talk was very comfortable in the public sphere. Of course, this was, and, and if we, if you listen to, you'd still hear people today say things like, God bless you. But, but now mentioning God in the political sphere is a partisan thing. In the 1960s, everyone did it and, and everyone did it far more profusely than we would be comfortable hearing people do it today. And so Bella talks about, you know, the phrase civil religion comes from Rousseau and he talks about the social contract. If you've never read this, this essay, it's really well worth reading. I'll put the, I'll put the comments, I'll put the, the link to it down below. Now, this is a lot of stuff I've just said, you know, 1967 was the apex of a certain America before the loss of faith that would happen via the Vietnam War and Watergate. Nationalism as religion. And, and I shouldn't say that this is, you know, uniquely American. Nearly every nation did it because remember America was this experiment in, in sort of secularity where the word God is not found in the American constitution and, and ideas that certain small places in the world like Amsterdam in the Netherlands and Roger Williams in Rhode Island began to take stage in a very big way where there was freedom of religion. Of course, freedom of religion was, was something that happened in America and Europe eventually adopted it. America was this great experimentation in the separation of church and state while European countries all had state churches and many of them continue to have them today. And so what sort of happened though in America was that, that nationalism and religion sort of came together in a, in an interesting way. It was very waspy white Anglo-Saxon Protestant but that's sort of what Bella is poking at and, and are poking around and trying to figure out is, is this really a good thing? National figures function as religious feature figures. The state functions as the kingdom of God. America as God's chosen nation. Now a lot of this stuff really got started back in the days of the Puritans and I posted earlier this week a conversation about New Haven, Connecticut as you know, they were, the Puritans really set about trying to build cities in America that would be the realization of the kingdom of God and they, they went about these tasks with, with great urgency and seriousness. Now of course the, the colonies would grow far beyond the, the individual, the individual colonies and the religious experimentation that the Puritans and others would do. The southern colonies with the, the boom of first tobacco and later cotton would be, you know, have a different element. It's, it's rather ironic that today Massachusetts is far more secular than a place like, like Virginia or Georgia or the Carolinas which are, you know, part of the Bible belt. It's very interesting how these things, how these things move over time but, but in the USA nationalism sort of mapped over Christian history. Now when you get into the 20th century, you know, I really appreciated John Vervecki's treatment of, of some of this too where, and Peterson talks about it as well, ideology, I like Jordan's phrase, ideology is sort of a crippled religion and these, these political ideologies attempt now in a secular realm to sort of replace religion and communism imagines that the state is going to completely displace and get rid of traditional religions so communist countries are overtly atheist. Nazism, and I know Carl had a problem with, has a problem with Timothy Snyder's interpretation of, of Nazis. I'll have to meet, read more about it. Reading about Nazis is not my favorite thing to do so I don't, there's so many other books to read but, but, but Timothy Snyder's take on, on the Nazis is that sort of like the communist because technically many communists think that the state is an intermediate state which will lead to some utopia, some workers utopia which of course never arrives. For the Nazis, they very much wanted to get rid of states and they believed that if we could go to our, our utterly natural state then states themselves would, would be gone. Now, now Western democracies sort of tried to, to have a middle path in terms of states and the role of states and in eschatology. Western democracies sort of, sort of let markets decide, let market, let the religious market decide the religious question, let the economic market decide the business and economic questions and, and in fact democracy itself with, with the idea of popular opinion and polling and voting, you know, the whole, the whole ethos of, of democracy tends to be towards market. Let groups of people decide and let those things sort of create stability and the, the other issues will be decided by the consent of the governed and the, and the will of the masses. So I'm just going to pause it here I think. Now, now when I listen to Dave Rubin, I hear a lot of the kinds of things that we call civil religion in the 70s and 80s, especially in the Cold War context and so his, his appreciation of, of Dennis Prager didn't really surprise me. When I talked to, to Jeff, you know, he took issue with the Judeo-Christian tag, which is pretty popular, used by a lot of people and I, I haven't done the research on it but I suspect that Judeo-Christian really got popular in the, in the wake of World War II where, you know, WASP and, and just Christian felt a little insensitive to the Jewish population that obviously just suffered the Holocaust and so the, the desire to include the, recognize the Old Testament's contribution to Christianity and include the, the Jews in, in the nation, you know, in the middle of the century a very famous book was written Protestant Catholic Jew, you know, the Jews were, were always a part of, of this, although often obviously suffered from discrimination. So, so when Dave Rubin, I hear a lot of echoes of, of Cold War civil religious language, religion in the service of realizing our ambitions and, and the main sphere is political and if you listen to Dave Rubin, he'll, you know, his main thing is liberty and he says that over and over in the, in the Rubin-Lennox conversation, liberty, liberty is what we're at and of course these are, these are very old themes and they really do hearken back to the Founding Fathers and Dave Rubin makes some very appreciative comments about the, the documents of the Founding Fathers and, you know, this, and again when I listen to this, it reminds me of, of stuff in the, you know, during the, especially the Cold War years before the counterculture really got going. Now in terms of the IDW, Ben Shapiro is interesting in that because he's more religious observant, you know, more observant, the most religious observant of all the, let's say the named members of the core IDW that, that really I think were included in the New York Times or have the New York Times determine the members of the IDW is something a little bit ironic and Peterson of course sort of stands outside of that because he's Canadian and, and so it's less American focused and the you know Canada was part of the, the British Empire and then the British Commonwealth, they didn't go through revolution like the United States, they won the War of 1812, well Britain really did and Canada being part of Britain and so, you know, Canada and Australia have a bit of a central, you know, different take than, than the United States and so, you know, Peterson is very much, there's little echoes of sort of American civil religion in Peterson now and then but, but nothing like you'd hear in, in Dave Rubin. Now what happens in the, in the, in the counterculture and in the 1960s and 70s and, and on through into the 80s especially is sort of a Protestant reformation of American civil religion and, and what happens is expressive individualism really takes over. Now Robert Bell is important here too where he, you know, this is the epics of the heart that I read in seminary and, and it's still well worth reading today because American civil religion also has this aspect of expressive individualism that by no means has waned. In fact, if you get then into the 90s you get to another sociologist Christian Smith who wrote a book that I've mentioned many, many times, Soul Searching, where he surveys the moral ideas of American youth and, and figures out, you know, what, what makes them tick and he discovers that American youth across the religious landscape, whether they're Baptist or Presbyterian or Roman Catholic or, or, or Mormon or Muslim or, or don't go to church at all or whatever, that they all sort of had a combined moral religious matrix that, that he coined moralistic therapeutic deism and you'll hear Rod Dreher talk about that, that quite a bit. Stuff gets expressed in what, what Robert Bell calls Sheilaism where, you know, it's moralistic therapeutic deism is sort of later stage Sheilaism where, you know, we're all having our individual relationship with God and it's not mediated by an institution and if you read someone like Mark Knoll, he has a great essay on the BioLogos blog about American society and the frontier. This, this all got going in the frontier because American expansionism into the West went more quickly than the European churches, which the churches in the Eastern colonial states tended to be transplants of European churches and so when the, when, when America goes westward quickly, illegally often, the, the people brought their Bibles with them and then the Bible became sort of the basis of American Protestant Christian religion and so you have the development of these frontier churches and these, these frontier traditions and so when expressive individualism in the wake of the culture, counterculture really hits the religious space, you have Chuck Colson who had been going to an Episcopalian church all of his life and comes home and you can read about this in his book Born Again, comes home and tells his wife that he's become a Christian and his wife is a little confused because, well, what have we been doing going to the Presby, going to the Episcopalian church all of these years? I thought we were Christian. No, I'm really a Christian because I have a personal relationship with Jesus and Jesus is in my heart and you know this with the, so American church attendance reaches its peak in the 1960s and, and then goes down from there but Americans don't really become not Christian, they just become, as the church lingo would have it, unchurched and, and so they stop going to church but if you knock on their door and ask them they're, they're a Christian and then churches had all sorts of ways of sort of re-energizing these, these latent Christians and getting them back into church, back into church for the sake of their kids, back into church for this fun program, back into church because they got a divorce and they're trying to sort out their life, back into church because alcohol became a problem, back into church to sort of do all this stuff and that back into church, you know, lasted in the the 70s, 80s, 90s aughts and, and you could in those years sort of bring people back into church especially and that's, that still is true for, for many places in the country where church attendance is not so far away. Jimmy Carter of course on the top, on the cover of Time magazine which was a very big deal in the 70s, you know, he was the first born again president and so you have this moment sort of like with Chuck Colson's life where I thought we were Christians but now we're really Christians and if you follow my videos that's sort of the, the, the expansion of God number two at the expense of God number one and, and you get to the 80s and you have Ronald Reagan of course, Ronald Reagan, former governor of the state of California, you know, the, the, the, as the edges of the country tend to be, tend to be the bleeding edges culturally and so Ronald Reagan divorced is, you know, second wife Nancy Reagan and Ronald Reagan not a churchgoer but Ronald Reagan very big on the, the God and country talk and sort of a revival of that. Jimmy, Jimmy Carter's Christianity very evangelical but also very serious and, and so Jimmy Carter told America to put on a sweater in the middle of the oil crisis and talked about malaise, that's very much part of, of Protestant evangelical Christianity where we own our sin and we own our guilt and so in that way Jimmy Carter was sort of the, the head of the evangelicals in the country but, but many people didn't quite like that mood and so Ronald Reagan comes out and he doesn't go to church or anything like that but you know God, yeah, God's okay and God and country and God bless you and God with us and, and of course a lot of Christians especially in, in places like, you know, if, if they were, if they didn't tend to be sort of on Ronald Reagan's page politically they would hear that stuff and kind of grade it, oh that's civil religion, that's civil religion and, and then of course Nancy, uh, Reagan, you know, when Ronnie's health was going down and they were going to have these important meetings with Gorbachev and Gorbachev in, in Iceland, you know, Nancy's checking the, with the astrologer because she had an astrologer that she was consulting with and you know when news got that out Michael Reagan, or Reagan, you know, the chief of staff, you know, really put a lid on that thing fast because well America was still quite Christian and so astrology, not so much and, and so this, you know, continued into the 80s, you had the, you had the rise of the moral majority which really tried to bring back some of the stuff from the 50s in terms of the civil religion and God and country and, but of course this was, this was the portion of the country that, that was still going to church or hadn't gone, hadn't left church too long and the people of the coast were very quickly becoming much more unchurched, playing around with Eastern religions, meditation, very much getting post-Christian much more quickly and, and if for example you were gay or had a, had an issue with a church or, or wanted to get away you would move to the big cities and you would move to the coast from the, the middle of the flyover country where everyone sort of went to church and so a lot of that stuff is happening in the 80s and the 90s and the beginning of the aughts. Now, Scott Alexander, whose blog I, I very much, very much appreciate for many things wrote, wrote a really interesting piece, let's see, dated October 30 called New Atheism, colon, The Godlessness That Failed and basically saying, yeah, New Atheism basically 2006 to 2016 and I think that's probably the date because 2016 is the rise of, of Jordan Peterson and I think Jordan Peterson bookends the, the decline of New Atheism. Now, it's not like it just goes away and people stop listening to Sam Harris but, but it pretty much notes I think the decline and the reason for the decline and so Jordan, the role that Jordan Peterson has played in Dave Rubin's life makes, simply makes a world of sense. Now, New Atheism had always been sort of a thinly veiled political initiative and, and, and yeah, there's a lot of talk about religion but if you listen to Richard Dawkins, I've mentioned this quite a bit, Richard Dawkins' appearance in 2013 on Unbelieveable where he's talking with a Christian and a, and a Jewish rabbi, the, you know, Dawkins basically says, well, you're, you're, you're nice smart Christians, you're not the kinds of Christians that, that I'm really up against. I'm looking for these people that are trying to keep evolution out of textbooks in Oklahoma and Texas and I'm looking for these Christians that don't believe in evolution and a little bit later, Christians who, who don't believe in climate change, the kind of Christians who vote Republican and, and, and so New Atheism was really designed to, to change politics by putting away religion. That was really the, the, the force of it and it was responding to 9-11 but Scott Alexander has some ideas which, which go a little bit deeper into this and, and so basically what the New Atheists tried doing was to, was to make political progress by mocking and bullying and, and science shaming religious people and, and he begins by, by noting that, you know, early on, early on, New Atheism was all over the map. In 2005, a college student made a website called the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster and, and that thing took off and, you know, so it was a, it was a really big deal beginning in 2005 and, and lasting for about 10 years and now Scott Alexander says basically that party's over. Well, why is it over? Well, I didn't know much about this. I had my conversation, which you can find in my channel, with, with James Lindsay and he starts talking about this split. I hadn't heard anything about what Atheism Plus was and Scott Alexander writes about it there. Well, you've got Elevator Gate and you've got Atheism Plus Feminism, Atheism Plus Anti-Racism, Atheism Plus Anti-Homophobia and, and Transphobia and whereas if you listen to the celebrity atheist, it's always, you know, being mean to gays is one of the great cardinal Christian sins and, but what sort of happens is that the, the movement goes beyond it and, and the movement splits. You know, Sam Harris and others continue to attack Islam and attacking Islam just seemed, seemed sort of racist because most of those, those Muslims are, are people of color. So I'll read a little bit of, of, of Scott's article. Aside from Farangula, I don't know, that's probably, I didn't read a lot of, I, you know, I was out of the, out of the country until to 1997. A lot of the old atheist blogs had ended up as atheist blogging, mega nexus sites, The Orbit. When I read its about page, it didn't even seem to describe itself as an atheist blogging site at all. The Orbit is a diverse collective of atheist and non-religious bloggers committed to social justice within and outside the secular community. Scott Alexander's main thesis is basically that the social justice group took over the church of atheism. We provide a platform for writing, discussion, activism, collaboration, and community. It's not blogs on atheism anymore. It's blogs by atheists about social justice. The whole atheist movement is like this, Scott Alexander asserts. As for where it went, I asked that question last year and got various responses. The most popular was that in, at 9-11, that 9-11 made religion bashing segue into Islam bashing, which started to look pretty racist. But 9-11 happened in 2001. The God Delusion wasn't popular, wasn't published until 2006, and new atheism didn't peak until the early 2010s. Why? So Scott has some ideas. In order to answer these questions, I'll start by presenting some data confirming the picture I paint above and try to pinpoint exactly when the peak and the beginning of the end happened. I'll move on to some of the intellectual sub-trends in new atheism that might explain the picture a little better. And finally, I'll present my theory explaining the mysteries above atheism as a failed homarteology. Well, what's homarteology? My solution to both these questions is new atheism as failed homarteology. Homarteology is a subfield of theology dealing with the study of sin, in particular how sin enters the universe. Orthodox Christian homarteology says that we all have original sin because Adam and Eve ate the apple or the fruit. Gnostic homarteology say we sin because we are ignorant of our true nature as celestial beings, and you'll hear that amongst new age communities. Some heretical homarteology say that all of this is irrelevant and we sin because we choose to. So we ask ourselves, what the hell is wrong with these people? And new atheism provides an answer. The answer is religion. That was it. It was beautiful. It was simple. It was perfect. We were the reality-based community. They were ignoring religion basing all their opinions on 3,000-year-old fairy tales because people told them they would burn in hell forever if they didn't. Ever hear that before? There's nothing confusing or unsettling at all about the situation, and we did not need to answer any of these beliefs. It was just that some people had been brainwashed by their church, mosque, synagogue to believe transparently wrong things. So did they. And this is where, well, Buddhism and Hinduism, well, they're the nice religions, but it's all these Abrahamic religions. So Judeo-Christian becomes the Abrahamic religions. Sin begins with the apple tree in Eden. Conservatism begins with the Bible in Jerusalem. Language separates us from the apes. Not being blinded by science separates us from the Republicans. This was a socially momentous proposal. The Democratic Party is centuries old, but the Blue Tribe, the Democratic Party as social phenomenon with strong demographic and ideological implications, can be said to have started in 2004. As it took its first baby steps, the Blue Tribe started asking itself, who am I? What defines me? Trying to figure out how to conceive of itself. New atheism had an answer. You are people who aren't blinded by fundamentalism. For a while, the Blue Tribe toyed with accepting it. During the Bush administration, with all of its struggles over radical Islam and intellectual design and faith-based charity, this seemed like it might be a reasonable answer. The atheist movement and the network of journalists, academics, pundits, operatives who made up the tribe's core started drifting closer together. Gradually, the Blue Tribe got a little bit more self-aware and realized this was not a great idea. Their coalition contained too many Catholic Latinos, too many Muslim Arabs, too many Baptist African Americans. Remember that 2008, what if all the Hispanic people end up going Republican, was considered a major plausible concern. It became somewhat less amenable to New Atheism's answer to its identity question. But absent a better one, New Atheists continued to wield some social power. And as I said before, New Atheism had always been, this is me talking, not the piece, New Atheism had always been primarily a political effort that tried to move the needle politically by way of moving the needle in terms of religion. Between 2008 and 2016, two things happened. First, Barack Obama replaced George W. Bush as President. Second, Ferguson. The Blue Tribe kept posing its same identity question. Who am I? What defines me? But now Black Lives Matter gave them the answer. They liked better. You are people who aren't blinded by sexism and racism. Now you can watch Benjamin Voices channel and realize that, no, it becomes very Calvinistic in that we too are blinded by sexism and racism and drive a whole lot of pride and ego and self-respect by feeling very guilty about this. And when I began foreseeing this, I thought, I know what this looks like. This looks like Calvinism. I've known this. This is what Calvinists do. I've watched Calvinists do this forever. Now, I haven't been around forever. I've watched Calvinists do this my whole life. But I had thought through a lot of those things as a Calvinist and settled my mind, but I had noticed the trend and then I start seeing that the Blue Tribe is looking just like Calvinists, the sort of the revenge of the Puritans. Again, it was beautiful, simple, and perfect. We were the reality-based community. They were ignoring reason and basing all their opinions on blind hatred and prejudice. Now the problem was that once you get up in status like Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins, it's hard to change gears. Status binds in blind. So some of the top layer of the new of the new atheists, they didn't make the jump. It's a lot of the people down below who make the jump over to social justice. There's nothing confusing or unsettling about any of this situation. We did not need to answer any of their, and we did not need to question any of our own beliefs. It was just that some people had been brainwashed by white supremacy and an all-consuming desire to protect their own privilege, and so they did. Now, what happens again in this is very interesting because actually social justice was a much more effective tool at penetrating churches because if you can take over a church, you can leverage the church's communitarian nature and use that politically. For years, atheists were complaining about pastors telling their church, the people in church, how to vote because religious people were in clumps. They had communities, and atheist people could never really do the community thing. So there's always a certain amount of envy towards these religious people who could clump and they could vote together and they could have an identity block because religion does that, you know. Read Emile Durkheim, read Jonathan Haidt. So, you know, religious people could do that, but what if you could use your social justice stuff and penetrate churches and wield churches? Ah, now you've got something. Forget this atheism stuff. Why tick people off about an imaginary god when you can infiltrate their church and wield the power through their guilt, through white guilt or guilt over racism or guilt over gays or any of this guilt? Churches like being wielded by guilt. You know, it's like they didn't understand the power of religion. They never got it. The political power of religion. Now they're waking up to it and they're like, wow, if you want to do politics, get down with religion because politics is downstream of religion. Political movements might last decades. Religious movements last centuries or even millennia. Religion is way more powerful than politics, boys and girls. You don't think that because politics is now, but religion is always and we all live in the now, but the always never goes away. So sin began with the apple tree in Eden. Conservatism began with the cotton plant in Jamestown, or really the tobacco plantation. Language separates us from the apes. Not being blinded by bigotry separates us from Republicans. Since I started writing this essay, I've noticed a surprising number of people just saying this outright. That's right, you can find it. It's just right out there. If you go to any thread in our politics about Trump, aka any thread on our politics, you see people saying things like, Trump voters know they're being lied to. Well, most of them, but look at the increased hatred in America. That is what they are voting on. Hatred. Ironically, the Republicans are a large reason why their lives are so shitty and full of hatred, but hatred nevertheless. I guarantee you, you debate any of these people long enough, you back them into a corner and they will say things like, we're winning. We won the election. Racism is good. Hatred is good. Now here's the thing, their reality-based community does not seem to be very real because I was one of few Democrats in a very Republican denomination. I didn't hear a lot of these Christians talking about hatred and racism. Now that is not to diminish racism that is still in the culture, both implicit racism and overt racism, which is still very alive and well in this world, but the vast majority of Republicans are not really going to be down with hate or racism and to keep painting them that way, actually, if you want a reality-based community, is going to do you harm because as people actually get to know real Republicans, real people on the other side of the political divide, they'll learn they're not necessarily full of hate. They're not necessarily full of racism. So then what you have to do is keep changing the definition of racism so that you can paint your adversary as racist because the civil rights movement became the gold standard of secular morality in American mythology at the end of the 20th century. Now we go all the way back to Dave Rubin. Dave Rubin should have been the poster child for new atheism, but actually what he is is the indicator of the split. Jordan Peterson's number one American civil religion disciple. In fact, it was Jordan Peterson, a Canadian, that sort of sprung him in some ways from his atheism into being religious, religion curious, along with how many other tens, hundreds of thousands of people in America. Hasn't Jordan Peterson done this number on? Dave Rubin should be what the old new atheism is about, a successful, rational, married gay man. Now he's flirting with religion, going to the church of Dennis Prager. This is an absolute disaster if you're on the other side of it, and I'm sure contributes to a good amount of the hate that certain people have for Dave Rubin. And Dave Rubin sort of eats it up. That's his shtick. That's where he gets his audience from, and that's how he can play the victim in his own way. And so he goes on stage at the Unbelievable Thing and says, I don't get invited to places, but Christians keep bringing me in. And it looks like I thought the Christians were supposed to be all bigotty and homophobic. They don't scream in fear of Dave Rubin, and he is bona fide gay, as is, there's many in this movement. So you get Andrew Sullivan out there, and you've got, I can't think of his name right now, Esther would kill me. But you know, and Jordan Peterson did this, and he really did. Now I want to talk about another Jewish David from New York City from a generation before, David Brooks. And I've been a, I've read David Brooks with appreciation for a long time. Like Dave Rubin, David Brooks was raised in a secularish Jewish household in the New York area. But a little bit older than Dave Rubin, he remembers the Cold War, as do I. Dave Rubin was born in 1976, David Brooks was born in 1961, Jordan Peterson was born in 1962, I was born in 1963. We're all in that, just the end of the baby boom, beginning of the busters. And so we're sort of at the cusp there. And if you go onto websites that are people born about our age, they're like, I didn't, I'm not a baby boomer. I didn't, I don't, I didn't know this 1960s America. My, I came into consciousness really in the late, in the, in the mid to late 60s when everything was coming apart in terms of American civil religion. Now Brooks watches politics and, and morals and moral sociology. That's sort of his beat at the New York Times. Now in the last few years, David Brooks divorced his wife, his long-term wife of quite a few years. And there've been rumors about his conversion to Christianity. He, he sort of, you know, did the bucko thing before Jordan Peterson came along, it seems. And he's had a fascination with St. Augustine. You know, he's been writing these, these books that are sort of religion-ish and, and you know, sort of Jew-y and Jewish stuff and Christian stuff. And, you know, again, I've been reading his books, I haven't read his last one, but he's come into quite a bit of fire for divorcing his wife. And then who does he marry? But he marries his assistant who was a graduate of Wheaton College and quite a bit younger than, than wife number one. And so if you look at the comment section in his latest book on Amazon, you'll get an eyeful of women who are not happy with David Brooks over these kinds of things. Now, one of the things that David Brooks is really good at is noting what I'll call narrative nationalism. This is not ethno-nationalism, nationalism based on ethnicity or race or skin color, but narrative nationalism, nationalism based on a shared common story, a mythology. Now, it's obvious how this is going to come together with civil religion because religion is based on mythology and nations are based on mythology. So these two things are going to come together and they're not going to be terribly separable in people's minds. And so to have your religious mythology and your national mythology come together, it's, it's pretty much unavoidable. So, so obviously employs the same psychological methods that I've been talking about in a lot of my videos as Christianity, which creates a new people from a story. This was, this was world-changing stuff back in the first century where people from different ethnic groups, they weren't the Jewish religion or the Babylonian religion or the, the Roman state religion or all their different tribal religions, all of these people from different ethnic groups became Christians. So in other words, in many ways, Christianity was the first massive narrative nationality. Well, when it became a nationality, first, it was just a religion. But again, these things are not far away from each other. And this is why civil religion is again, as I said, inevitable in the, in the New Testament, baptism, not bloodline. God can raise children of Abraham from the stones. And so you didn't even have to undergo the bloody ceremony of circumcision. If you were a man, you could via baptism because become part of the body of Christ. But now this all gets going with Christianity and American comes and America comes and says, well, we're not going to have a state church, but it was awfully waspy and was awfully Christiany. But America keeps changing its story because the, the narrative nationalism for it to work, you need a mythology that continues to grip people's hearts. And, and really what we're in the midst of says David Brooks, and I think he's right on this is a change in the story. Now you can see this in projects like the 1619 project. This is the woke church, the new brand of civil religion that's trying to, that's trying to capture the nation. But well, what's coming up is the older brand of civil religion. We are in the throes of mythmaking. This is again, a piece posted by Rod Rear noting that, well, the left has problems with their 1619 narrative because there's a lot of historians who are plenty leftist who read it and say, well, it's not really true to the facts. Those pesky facts, the appealing to the facts is all over these science types and IDW types. What a pain in the neck they are. What is America's story? Is America's story a story of patriarchy and white supremacy? I'm sure it is, but is that the central story? Is that really what the country is about? Which is exactly what a lot of these, these, these scholars and intellectuals are saying your 1619 project is really all washed up. But, but that begs the question, what is humanity's story? Is it, is it reason? Is it evolution of the state? That's communism. Is it evolution of the race? That's Nazism. Is it evolution of consciousness? Is it evolution of markets? What is our story? And of course, well, the Bible is sort of the original way of framing this narrative Christianity or narrative nationalism or narrative religion. And this is where the Irish Kung Fu Panda wades in because John Lennox born in 1943 in Northern Ireland, same place C.S. Lewis and Alastair McGrath are born. Why is it in these war-torn transitional liminal spaces that such astute scholars come from? Retired mathematician and a philosophy of science scholar from Oxford. No small credentials, similar to McGrath and Lewis. Christianity and the sword, these issues have been with us and Dave and John Lennox grew up right in the midst of two warring civil religions and it was not a cold war, it was a hot war. And there were bombings and shootings and people were killed. And, and perhaps it was, it was, it was Ireland coming late to the secular game. Now they just recently voted to allow abortion in Ireland and that's a very big deal in their, in their political religious context. And, and so Northern Ireland is the front lines of all of these changes and it's two civil religions warring against each other. Now the atheists would say, ah, the problem is religion. Really? Atheists have just figured out the usefulness of religion if you want to fight a war. Lennox's father, however, his Christian story begins with his father who was not a scholar by any means and it's, again, Lennox is just fun to listen to. His father would hire Protestants and Catholics and, and he would say to him, dad, this is, this is not good. In a culture war you stick with your tribe because if you don't stick with your tribe you get bombed or killed. But his father had conviction as a Christian and said, no, these are all image bearers of God. I will hire from both sides and that's part of my Christian witness. That made a deep impression on young John Lennox and he hasn't left it now and in some ways reminds me of growing up in Patterson and the decisions that my parents made in terms of racial politics in America. No, you're going to grow up in a, in a black community and, and, and because black folks are white folks, we're all children of God. This is back to, you know, a presiding humanism. Now where does this stuff come from? Oh, son of a gun, it comes from the Bible and, and actually these issues are dealt with a lot in the Bible. In fact, they're some of the central themes of the Bible but we tend not to read them very clearly, I think, because they're too close to us. Israel, of course, is the original kingdom of God and, and it's called out of empire. Abraham was a wandering Aramean called out of the, the place of the Northern empires in Mesopotamia. Israel is rescued from empire Egypt by the power of God. Religious political issues are all throughout the, the books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1st and 2nd Samuel, 1st and 2nd Kings, 1st and 2nd Chronicles, a Baal worship in Israel and the temple and can you worship on high places and all the kinds of stuff I talk about in my adult Sunday school class. These are all the issues and you get to Daniel 7, you have this vision of monsters coming out of the sea. Now we're into the mythology and the symbolism that we talk about with Peterson and Peugeot and these sea monsters come out of the sea and these sea monsters are empires and they grind up the little family kingdoms of the world and Reed Harari, Homo theosapien in terms of empires are wonderful things in many ways. They, they bring peace because the little nations are always fighting but they destroy the little nations and languages come together and, and it's, it's genocide on a massive perpetual scale throughout the history of the world and everybody is sucked into these imperial, these great imperial systems and empires of course fight each other and it's something out of Pacific Rim. Permanent subjugation after the Babylonians of, of God's people beneath empires and, and what will God do? So Daniel 1 through 6 are these series of ordeals in which God's people come out on top but Daniel 7 we have kind of the inside anxiety of Daniel and how can God save his people from empires? So you've got the Babylonians and then the Persians and then the Greeks and then of course the Romans will come. Well the Maccabean model where the, the Maccabees were able to, to kick out the, the Greeks and, and establish some degree of, of autonomy and liberation from the overall empire, well that was sort of the model that everyone had on their minds when you know you get to the time of Jesus in at the beginning of the, the first century in Judea and Galilee and Samaria. So the Maccabees were able to overthrow the Greeks and so everybody's looking for a new David because it's essentially what David did. The Israelites had a Philistin problem and, and they, they you know everybody else had kings so let's get a, let's get a principality, let's get a king and who do we need as a king? Someone big and tall and a warrior so let's get Saul but when Goliath the, the warrior of the, of the Philistin shows up, Saul is in his tents but who comes out but little David the boy and he stands up to Saul and he trades words with Saul and he fells Saul. This is all the story and, and of course David will be the David. He will be the Messiah, the anointed one. Samuel will anoint David on the sly because Saul has become a tyrant. You know all this stuff is just waiting for Jordan Peterson's biblical series to get going again because it's all there and you know this is the story and so the Maccabees well they're the ones to kick out the, the Greeks and Antiochus Epiphanes and putting up a statue of Zeus in the temple. Well the Jews had over my dead body and they were serious and they kicked out the Greeks and so the Romans are a little more savvy. It's like eh you know Pompey rolls into, into Jerusalem in 63 BC to settle a domesticist dispute and the Romans stay but they're not, they're much more pragmatic than the Greeks. They're not principled and religious like the Greeks. They're not going to force their religion on the, on the Jews. They'll say okay we'll leave the temple alone and Herod let the, let the local client you know redo the temple and try to posture himself as Messiah but, but it didn't sit well. Nobody bought Herod wasn't really a Jew. He was an Edomite and you know he married Jews but it was better to be Herod's pig than Herod's wife or Herod's son because he'd kill his son and his, and, and his wives but you know he'd leave the pigs alone because he's trying to pass for a Messiah but nobody really bought it and so the continued contamination and presence of the Romans and, and the Holy Land you know not very different from the presence of American troops that motivated Osama bin Laden to attack America. Remember Osama bin Laden was an American ally in the struggle against the Soviets in Afghanistan. So but all again it's all this question about how to square religion and politics and again politics is the now and religion is the always or the ultimate and so you'll find this in my sermons, you'll find this in my Sunday school class, you'll find this in some of my other videos. Jesus was born into a culture war and it's a constant state of unrest and everybody knew the thing was going to boil over at some point and, and it did you know about 30 years after Jesus but, but there were a menu of options as there usually are in situations like this assimilate that's what certain people did like the aristocracy you know the Romans and the Greeks they're the cutting edge they're the, they're the, they're the ones who are on top of the world they have the favor of the gods who would stand against them adopt the Roman way, adopt Hellenistic culture, put up, put up theaters and things like that in your city and enjoy Greek culture and then there's violent resistance like the zealots the only good Roman is a dead Roman and then there's the, the, the purity tribe which goes out into the desert and live in a cave and wait for God to nuke them and then there's the symbolic realist resistance tribe which is the Pharisees and these are the people that in some ways are closest to Jesus but these are the people that will square off often quite a bit against Jesus because often your greatest adversary is the one closest to you but in a culture war you can't pick a side and if you don't pick a side you wind up dead you learn this in prison you learn this in culture wars because if you're not on their side they're gonna paint you on the other side don't you see that now unless you're down with our particularly woke anti-racism then you're a bigot that's how culture wars work it's a zero sum game it's complete polarization unless you're out there denouncing Trump and talking against Trump all the time you love Trump and and you know it just back and forth back and forth it's polarization this is what happens you can't not pick a side which is exactly what Jesus does well not picking a side will get you dead which is exactly what it got Jesus Jesus defies the logic and he seeks to transcend the political now now he was killed because he upset everyone because these warring factions couldn't agree on anything except that life would be better if Jesus were gone so they killed him and and and he won't take the kind of stand against the occupation that the the liberationist factions want and that means well he's soft on romanism he's soft on the jewish girl sex trade when he when he's kind to prostitutes and tax collectors he won't assimilate or recognize roman authority you see that in his conversation with pilot Peter and Paul wind up the same line and and Paul still gets in a lot of hot water saying obey the obey the civic officials and Peter does the same thing and of course the enormous irony about both of them is that they both wind up dead killed by the romans as did Jesus in other words again in a culture war you can't not pick a side and all of them try to and they all wind up dead but this is actually straight from the old testament prophets which Jesus is himself because the old testament prophets refused to pick a side and you know they're not going to side with the Babylonians and they weren't going to side fully with the with the hebrew monarchs when they were around and they wound up dead it's fun story in the book of kings where where you know the the the the king of the of the southern kingdom comes up to talk to the king of the northern kingdom and says don't you have Elijah around this guy does miracles this guy he's the best prophet around we've all heard of Elijah they said i don't like talking to Elijah he never gives me the news i want read the book of proverbs people will always tell you what you want to hear setting yourself up for a fall now part of what's really cool i'm not through the book of dominion um tom holland's book dominion yeah but really enjoying it it's it's it's basically tom hollandish long you know breezy fun easy to read history that's what he does with all of his books that's what he's doing with dominion but he's going through in some ways the the history of the church and he's it's it's quite a bit different from your standard church history text jesus takes the old testament testament prophets and applies it to his life and jesus says this all the time people keep trying to split the testaments well they don't know either of them very well because most of the new testament is really quotations from the old testament and it's a modulation it's an interpretation it's a particular take on that testament of course after jesus and 70 ad and the temple is gone that's where you have this split that begins before 70 ad between jesus interpretation and his followers interpretation of the old covenant and the rabbinic interpretation that's where you have this split between judaism and rabbinic judaism and christianity jesus so thoroughly colonizes his followers that the history of his followership works through his ideas in an enormous process of trial and error and you see this because what does it mean to be a christian here and now well here and now keeps changing and so people have to keep figuring this out and trying to get it right and and what's really difficult is it's a little easier to do if you don't have any power which is christianity for the first two three hundred years once you get power it all gets different and and so rome east and west the roman empire two sides the eastern empire and the western empire the greek speaking empire and the latin speaking empire they get colonized by christians and when the state collapses the church is often the last institution standing and so basically the bishop in the town is the only one with sort of united authority and people listen to him and but he's and and so all of this stuff and a top highland deals with that you know not not thoroughly but but he touches on it all of this stuff happens and suddenly the church has power well the church has the sword and how will christians navigate power and violence when they have the sword well peter in the garden pulls out the sword and cuts off the the high priest's ear the servant of the high priest's ear and jesus puts it back on well christians are going to have to work this through and christians have been working this through and some of the big contrasts that are set up between islam and and christianity is that one of the things that christians learned after hundreds of years of bloody war between protestants and catholics is it's not a good way to actually resolve these disputes we're better off talking than killing that's a lesson i hope we don't forget now as i said before civil religions are unavoidable if you took someone from the ancient world put them in a time machine and sent them to washington dc they would see temples and idols because that's what the thing looks like that's where all of our cues come from where do obelisks come from where do grand pillar domes building buildings come from someone walking into the lincoln memorial would see abraham lincoln and say is that zeus look at ancient pictures of the temple of zeus there's the lincoln memorial why did it take until 1967 for robert bell to say ah civil religion yeah because again the religious stream and the political stream they're all close together but then there's jesus and jesus says nope kingdom of heaven and and again what you see throughout the history of the church is they're working through these issues and the the next jordan peterson commentary on the biblical series gets to jordan peterson making this is one of the things that caught my attention right away from him when he said you know the christian emperors didn't divinize their themselves which was a break in the roman process why because they had the old testament and they had david who gets caught by nathan with the whole bathsheba incident and that nathan wades and you are that man and our whole idea in this nation that no president is above the law that's a direct application from christianity in some ways it's a civil religion application these things aren't separated but you can't really put the streams together or you get stuff that we have and so i agree with what dave rubin says about the wisdom of the founding fathers they these were classicists and they looked at the ancient world and they said let's not establish a state church okay it's not good for the state and it's not good for the church but we can't but always keep these things together because in many ways they're always sort of together in our heads and that's why you're not supposed to talk about religion and politics and polite company our power to collaborate is dependent upon our capacity to relate to principalities and the atheists are just waking up to the power of religion they're like wow well i can see why y'all do this not all of them but that's what the woke side realized because all those churches they vote together what if you take over the church puzzle paul says we battle not against flesh and blood but principalities and powers well i don't believe in any of that spooky stuff well is santa claus real is uncle sam real uncle sam is real enough to make you pay your taxes democracy in fact many have argued is just protestantism applied to the state political history in the in the west follows church history and theology we we don't have popes or rulers of protestant churches we have congresses and and general secretaries and things like this it's people will notice church life and political life well these institutions they they don't differ in christianity is this weird mix of sometimes see this in roman catholic history count church councils and leaders because christianity if you understand and you read jesus it's always hierarchy doesn't go away but equality comes into the scene and christianity is always working these two things back and forth back and forth hierarchy equality hierarchy quality jesus goes to the top then goes to the bottom philippians chapter 2 luther's priesthood of all believers sets up modern democracies all men are created equal jesus strange working of hierarchy inequality you'll have no masters among you like the gentiles yet you have the kingdom of god which is a monarchy and you have all of this these councils where it's the body of christ and back and forth and back and forth and jordan peterson comes along and says you know they didn't divinize the emperor it's like yeah that's because of jesus i don't think tom holland touches on that but and now we're at this point where everything's getting interesting because the church of atheism split and atheism sort of his late stage dism now you have kind of the people who wanted to not change the church of the church of atheism like like james lindsey and peter begosian and their meeting i i couldn't believe it when a critic posted on twitter that the aquila report now i know what the aquila report is because i'm a moderate conservative reform dutch calvinist the aquila report this is a this is a blog of complementarians they when when the when the the big fight happened in the church over whether or not women can be pastors a lot of these kinds of churches stopped sunday school lessons for boys over 13 with with women and didn't let women want run certain ministries without their husbands and so on and so forth and peter begosian has a piece on their blog mind blown i i couldn't believe it and these are the conversations that are happening what are we seeing we're seeing sort of a resurgence of cold war civil religion but now new woke civil religion and this is what's competing for supremacy as the dominant american civil religion remember in the 50s you had the basically the domination of the eisenhower civil religion starts to get eaten away in the 1960s and the counterculture continues to eat it away and then at the old end of the cold war once we no longer needed the god of israel to fight communism the slide of church attendance what was just a creeping out becomes a slide but again people don't become less religious they just take crappier religions and scott alexander writes new atheism the godlessness that failed new atheism is dead put up the stone the idw comes along what is the idw in many ways the idw is deeply connected with this the idw is mostly not all refugees from the political left that want to be classical liberals and they and they you know a bunch of them voted for bernie in the primaries before and some of them are in the yang gang now but but they're somehow well ben shapiro isn't on this picture either um you know what's going on well dave rubin very much a part of this the rodney dangerfield of the um of the idw he's the comedian who doesn't get any respect joe rogan gets a little bit more respect because i don't think you want to necessarily fight with joe rogan peterson isn't in that picture but in my opinion peterson is sort of the central figure because he sort of broke it open and he broke it open with c16 and he kind of marks the end of new atheism and i mentioned mouthy buddha's video about sam harris losing to to jordan peterson the mouthy buddha whoever makes those youtube videos you know right there with dave rubin in a sense because well maybe he hasn't gone as far as dave rubin but jordan peterson has a biblical series why on earth talk about the bible but if you see it in this context it makes perfect sense we're all trying to figure it out and that doesn't end and now we have our little corner of the universe as civilla noted it where we got peugeot and vervecky had a had a very interesting conversation that was posted yesterday and mary and the randos and the discord server guys and the meetups i had a conversation with the with a couple of the guys from the chicago meetup that's that's getting going and a religion that isn't a religion now what's the definition of religion we are in my opinion just like i was taught when i was a little boy in little dutch calvinist day school all of life is religious we're religious whatever we do we we will have civil religions we will have regular religions even when we're in denial about religions we do religious things we are incurably religious and jordan peterson comes along and sort of breaks open the field right at the time that we're having this big fight what's going to be the civil religion of the west christians jesus says should be wise as serpents you know it doesn't get anywhere near as much attention as it should wise as serpents innocent as doves these are archetypes we never stop working the problem and we try to get jesus right we try to do like jesus and i would recommend reading the bible reading the prophets reading jesus reading peter reading paul try to figure out how to it's really hard to navigate the always in the now we're always in the now but the always is always with us and so that's that's how we're trying to deal with this politics and religion thing and again as i tell people in church if you live like jesus you might die like jesus and then you'll be raised like jesus that's the christian story