https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=jS7Pu5tsOxg

 Oh, that's a much better camera. Sometimes it chooses the random. The other camera went randomly. Don't know why. Yes, that, that is exactly what zoom does. Well, let's, let's begin with you. Why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? I'll try to give you the briefest summary and we can explore a little bit more. Okay. I'm in Austin, uh, uh, been in Texas my whole life and, um, let's see. Um, I am a very curious soul have been paying attention to this corner of the internet before this corner was this corner. Okay. Yeah. Um, back in around 2005, I, I, I became very curious about collective intelligence and, um, spirituality and personal development and, um, a lot of aspects and went on a kind of a tour, um, around and studied with Ken Wilber for a little bit. And also did some spiral dynamics and explored some other stuff in technology and, um, just had kind of a, uh, an opening of like, Hey, what's going on here? And at the time was really surprised that most people just kind of cocked their head and said, I don't know what you're talking about kid. Yep. And was really pleased as things started to develop recently. And then, uh, especially when John Brevecky's, um, awakening from the meaning crisis series came out, the thing that really popped for me was the frame that he used with relevance realization and the four, the four P's it's like, Oh, philosophy is reconstituted. It's not just a bunch of dead guys, um, thinking about stuff. It's like, this is how I think. And it was like, I suddenly was in a world rather than, I mean, they just, the, that, that taking off the lenses and seeing what I'm seeing through was very potent for me and going through that series. Um, and also do, um, I'm a, um, a circling facilitator. So I've been doing that practice for about seven years. Um, and has it been around that long? Wow. Yeah. It's been around since the, since late nineties for sure. It's only been more popular. Um, yeah, it's been in Austin for about nine years. Oh, I didn't know it was that, uh, you know, I learned about it from guy saying stock, but I didn't really know how long I'd been around. Yeah. He, he, he came up with it back in the late nineties. Yeah. So, um, that's a, that's a brief, um, kind of view. I'll say that, um, I grew up, um, I grew up in a Christian faith. I grew up Methodist. Um, but I off, I also was, um, a little bit skeptical as a kid. I was a very, I was an interesting kid because, um, I have a lot of curiosity and a healthy dose of skepticism and they kind of go with each other. I also can be very, um, very gullible. Right. So there's something in me that if it, if it doesn't feel right, I question it more deeply and, and I, but I don't reject it right away. So there's something that happened as a kid when either, um, minister or preacher or a teacher or a parent said something that didn't, that didn't jive with me. I would make a mental note and, and then kind of dance around and figure out how did I fit in with that? Like often there was stuff that people said that it's like, I disagree with that, but I don't know why. I mean, it's like, I can look back and say, that's kind of my reaction at the time. It was just trying to, trying to make sense of it, but like a deeper internal sense of what I knew. So if it felt like something that was being told to me completely, um, was at odds with what I felt inside of me, I would just hold it loosely. I would just like pay attention to that and continue to wait for it to resolve and to get more clear. Um, that was a really interesting kind of an example of that, that, that kind of shows really beautifully for, and as a metaphor for what kind of came to be was, um, like on a seven years old, um, neighborhood kids were riding bicycles around and wherever we were going, there weren't enough bicycles. So one of the kids who's hopped on the back of my bicycle and we were both, both riding at the same time, he had his hands on the steering wheel at same time as I did. And when we were going around the corner, I don't know if you've ever had this experience, but two people riding a bike, when we were going around the corner, there was this, this, this tension. I was like, wait a minute, what are you doing? We're, we're turning. It goes, yeah, I know we're turning. No, we're turning right. I know. It's like, well, why are you not fighting you? You're fighting me. And it's like, that's really weird. How can we, how can we be in agreement with where we're going and disagree about the turning? Obviously we're fighting each other. And it wasn't until I later on realized, Oh, the center of gravity is different with two people on the bike and it's different in the opposite direction for each of us. So we now, and the language that I'd say now as a collective agent on this bicycle, we don't agree with where our center of gravity is. And so we're fighting over it. And that is a metaphor for where our values as a center of gravity come in conflict and we wrestle over them because it's not apparent that I'm orienting to some value that you're orienting to differently. So we pull against each other in a way that distinguishes those. And it's like, Oh, that's a beautiful thing that in my mind, it stuck out as a kid and it wasn't until I grew up a little bit and started to understand it. And then apply this metaphor for development and other stuff. And it's like, that's, that's a beautiful frame for kind of getting a sense of what happens when people have disagreements about things that it seems like they agree with on the surface, but yet they fight. So, so how, so, okay. So you have this, this temperament, this quality about who you are. How did you, you know, you didn't bump into any of this stuff in Methodism. No. How, how did that, how did that happen? It's, um, well, like I, like I said, the, there was, I have, um, a range of teachers and preachers in my background and grandparents and above. Um, my, my parents, uh, both grew up in West Texas and, um, and moved to, to Houston when I was a kid, so, um, I grew up in Houston, Texas and, um, and I think I was an, a bit of an odd kid. I think I had a little bit of a head start. I have two different colored eyes that I think that's relevant because my mother, um, when my mother discovered that at three years of age, that my eyes were turning out different colors, she was really worried that people were going to make fun of me. So she, so she installed this little, uh, coping mechanism for me saying, oh, you're different from everybody. If they make fun of you, uh, it's just cause they don't understand you. And so I don't know how much that actively played a role in the way that I thought, but it certainly feels like my sense of, um, the, the permission to take other people's disagreement with me with a grain of salt was kind of installed early on. Um, I was a curious kid. Um, and, but I, but I didn't go around, I didn't follow the rules very well. Um, but I wasn't, I wasn't a troublemaker. I just was, I just let my curiosity drive my, drive my sense a lot. Um, I will say that, that, uh, the, when, when preachers would speak about something that I, that I really disagreed with, I thought it's, that's so weird. Like in the garden of Eden story and the tree of knowledge of good and evil, didn't sit well at all. I was just, when I, when I heard that, I was like, I disagree. I disagree with this notion of original sin, just at the, at my young five, six year old self was like, I don't, there's something about it that just doesn't make sense. And, um, and so I, it didn't, I didn't take it on as, as a belief, but I did, like, was just really curious, like, what is, what is that? What do we mean? Um, and so there was something like that and I, and I never felt like I. Quite belonged in Sunday school. I always wanted to ask questions that were beyond the scope of what we were supposed to ask in Sunday school. I was like, what's the teacher had volunteered for probably. Yeah, exactly. This is not. So at what age did you sort of move away from the church or did you move away from the church? Um, yeah, probably more consciously as a teenager. Um, you know, my mother went to more, um, evangelical churches, um, when I was a teenager and that especially the, um, anything that looked a little too zealous was like, eh, I, I, I need to, I need to be a little bit more grounded in this. Um, my parents reports and my father went towards a Unitarian, um, faith and my mother stayed with, um, kind of the evangelical. So I had a different perspective and in both of them, I felt a little bit at odds. Um, and like, I just didn't fit in. So it was, that was the teenagers were really, really stood out that I, that I feel, uh, felt like something I wasn't finding the nourishment and the, and the, and the feeling of like, Hey, this is, this is hitting something that I really want to explore. Um, I will say I converted to Judaism when I got married at, um, at age 30. Um, my wife was Jewish, but didn't, wasn't raised Jewish. And something about the, like we, you know, attended services a few times. And then I took a basic Judaism class. Um, and was fascinated with the way that the Jewish faith really engages with, um, with the text and with the questions and like, I was like, I like this, this really feels nourishing in a way, like I can ask questions, I can really dive into it. This, if I had, if I had had this kind of ability to delve into the topic when I was young, maybe I would have stayed with it. And it actually stood out to me because somebody in the basic Judaism class was Jewish and thinking about converting to Buddhism and was giving this, giving Judaism one last chance before they left the faith, it just dawned on me. I never even considered giving Christianity one last chance before I left the faith. Well, well, partly because in some ways, a lot of churches sort of really try to nail people down. That's sort of the goal to get everyone on the same program, to nail people down, especially in an evangelical church, kind of nail people down so you can bring more into the fold and that can really become a program in certain evangelical churches. Right. And so asking open-ended questions is just not what the program is about. Yeah. And I don't know what the program was for the Unitarians, but, um, it was much more open-ended. Um, and actually, uh, I, let me correct. I say Unitarian. It was actually the Christian, it was a Unity Church of Christianity. So Unity, uh, different. It's a different, I also attended some Unitarian services when I was in college, but Unity Church of Christianity, um, was definitely Christian, but was much more open-ended. It was in the direction of Unitarian, but not, not that far. There's one in Sacramento here too, that I know some people that have, have gone there on and off a lot of, a lot of churches like that, people sort of, they sort of breeze through and, um, a lot of breezing through a church like that, because they, they kind of want something, especially if they got kids, you know, they kind of want something a little bit churchy, but they're not, they're, they're not down for the evangelical program and maybe they're not wealthy enough or established enough for a mainline program. And so those Unity churches sort of provide a place for them. So, okay. Well, that's interesting. So it was, um, and, you know, my father, when my mother and father divorced, my father went, um, he had been very conservative and, um, um, far right Republican, um, uh, an experience, um, in the sixties, late sixties, early seventies, changed his perspective. And he went very, very much towards the hippie. I mean, there was a, there was a period of time where for over a year span, he changed his wardrobe, his outlook, his everything. Um, he actually went to several programs that had Esalen back in the, back in the day. Um, so he was really exploring, um, a lot of things like that. And that's when he was going to Unity. Um, and so he also lived in a commune and so there were, there were exposure to different ideas and it was like interesting. Um, how old were you then? 12. Okay. And did you, were you sort of splitting time with them or were you staying with mom and dad was out discovering himself? We, uh, I have, uh, three siblings and we split back and forth between both of them. Um, two with one parent and two with the other parent and then swapping back and forth and mixing up at times all at one place while in all the other time. Yeah. So, um, for the most part, it was, uh, they were amicable. Um, didn't spend a lot of time together once they were divorced, but, um, but there, there wasn't a lot of animosity with them and with occasional occasionally it did kind of blow up a little bit. Sure. Um, but yeah. So what about, so what about, oh, go, go on. Uh, it's, it's interesting because, um, it was something, this is one of the things like I'm the oldest of the four kids and I knew as a, as a kid, I'm not going to ever get divorced. Um, and I haven't, uh, don't know that I still never will, but I probably, I probably won't, but the, the, um, the sense of, um, that something I want to, I want to be sure about the, you know, I want to take those vows seriously whenever I make them, um, was very important for me. And, um, and it's interesting because, you know, my, my parents were both remarried um, they've been married four times each. I have two siblings that were married four times each and my other sibling has been, uh, divorced and married once. So it's like, huh, there's, there's something of a, something of a, uh, a lack of stability there that I saw as a kid, I was like, I don't want to do that. I want to, I want more stability. So there's an interesting aspect of this range of flexibility inside, but I want stability in some other, in some other way. That is, that's very interesting. Cause in terms of your thought world, it sounds like you're, you've got a lot of exploration, but in terms of, you know, your, you know, your day to day life, you very much want stability. So you're an interesting mix of both. Right. Right. Which is, which is, so what was college like? Did you go to college? Yeah. Um, I, I, um, took a couple of years off after high school. Um, I didn't feel I was ready for college right out of high school. It was like, I have, I don't know what I want to be kind of the same thing. I was like, I'm not, I wouldn't know what degree I would go for. Um, I finally did, um, uh, I got to college and I started off as a physics major. So I was really interested in, in studying physics and I was okay at it, but after the third semester, it really, um, kicked my kick to my back end. It was like, I was, I was not good enough at that to stay with it. So I switched over to computer science and got a CS degree. Okay. Um, mostly doing quality assurance and testing. So, um, it was an interesting, it was an interesting application of my, of the way that I thought, because, um, I took assumptions and tested them over and over and over again and like, what do I, what, what can I trust in what's not trustable? How do I ask this? And what do I think you're, what do I think you're, you want to see? And what do you, what am I actually seeing? And so really finding a good way to communicate. And it's also, um, the human development also had that kind of a same thing. Hey, it looks like we want to grow in this way and yet we're running into this place. Like in the workplace, I was always curious when it seemed like, um, individual workers had to, were at odds with the corporate structure, it's like, how do we bring that back into alignment? So it was an interesting kind of personnel development and technical aspect of like, how do we resolve this, take the big picture and look at the place where there's a, there's a, uh, friction and figure out what is that friction and can we actually know something better by looking at that friction? So, so after college, I mean, so it sounds like you've had an interesting life of one hand, someone would like to be your neighbor. Um, you hold down a job, you hold down a marriage, you have a very stable life. You pay your taxes, someone going down the road, thanks for this guy's, this guy's perfectly fine guy. And at the same time, you're also very, you do a lot of exploring. You want to know what's what's you're both curious and skeptical, as you said, and you test and so that that that's actually makes, that's really a nice combination because for a lot of people who are high in openness, it permeates the stack and what that means is a fair amount of chaos, which makes actually ongoing exploration rather difficult because the, the lower elements of the stack are not letting the upper elements, you know, see the world without a lot of shake. Right. Well, then there, there is some of that, right? The openness at times did create something like, you know, like I won't, I wouldn't stay at a job forever that didn't feel like it fit, you know? And at some point when it's like, okay, I'm not, I, I'm not able to stretch my wings here in the way that I want to. I can't, I can't keep a job like that. I have to find a way for me to, to, to satisfy the deeper parts. Uh, the last job that I took the, the, um, the CEO knew me for a while. And I actually saw me at a conference where, uh, Charles Eisenstein was speaking and I was asking him questions and some other people questions. She goes, this young man asks some good questions. Yeah, actually I'm not so young, but yeah, this guy asked some good questions when we, uh, we later ran into each other again and she kept saying, I want to bring you on, but what I don't know is can you come down off the mountain? Like, can you actually do real work? Like you, you are so far towards the philosophical end. What's your actually actual day to day work life like? And it's a good point. Um, if I can't bring some of the philosophical and, and political and, and questioning some of the deeper questions that we, that we have in, in business and, and relationally with each other, um, if that's off the table, um, and I'm going to have a limited amount of time there. So, so it is an interesting, but it's not, it's like I said, it's not so much a troublemaker, um, there was an early mode, mode of that where when I first tried that, I really felt like, um, the first job that, um, that I brought that element in, I really tried to do something like, Hey, I think that the workers could do something like there's something, there's some level of meaning in their life that they're not able to bring. Can we explore what that is? And whenever I explored it, what I found was, yeah, there's, there is a deep sense of commitment that they feel like they have to have to put aside in order to do the job, right? What they're being asked to do is in conflict with what they want to do just enough that there's a, there's a, and when I saw that I tried to take it to management as a demand and the manager was like, Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, this looks like you're trying to start a union or something. Let's calm, calm down and just go back to doing your day job. So I was like, okay, yeah, no, that's a good point. I did, I did become, um, I actually I'll say something about that. Um, because one of the things with this deep curiosity and also a deep skepticism, I learned over time to have curiosity about my curiosity and skepticism about my skepticism. I did this kind of cross. That was an interesting, it's an interesting tool set to be able to get into the nuance. And, um, when I realized that, that it was a little too, too radical for the things that I was trying to do, I was really trying to go too far. I noticed part of it was, um, I became zealous about what I saw as, as the right thing to do. I became, um, I became very strongly attached to a certain value that I felt like, um, management didn't see. And I started pulling harder on that rather than discovering what there was that we could find together. And, and the thing that I recognize is that something like when I feel, um, righteous indignation, I noticed my curiosity is not available. And I was like, I have curiosity is such a big value for me. If I can't feel it, something is up. So let me it's, and I, and I think of this kind of like, if you've ever done any sort of training for, um, lucid dreaming, one of the things they say is check the light switches. If the light, if the light switches don't work, then you're dreaming. If my curiosity is not working, then I'm, I'm, I'm running a program that's not allowing me to think the way that I normally do. So it's like a nice little, um, test for myself to say, Hey, wait a minute. I think I'm sure about something, but I'm not checking. Let me go back and see what, what assumptions am I making that I'm not checking. That's really interesting. Yeah. That's a lot of fun. Yeah. Really cool for looking at some of this, like I said, this corner of the internet, some of the conversations that are happening are really fascinating. Yeah. Um, and there's a lot that's happening right now. There's a lot that's, uh, for question and a lot of that feels like certainty in one direction, you know, it's, and, and, and places where people can, um, go a little deeper and ask some really interesting questions. Um, the, the one, so I have, I have one in mind, but I want to pause and, and uh, if you have a question here, I like where, I like where this is going. This is, this is fun. And I really like what you just said about, um, cause I was, I just started listening to the, um, the, the video with Peterson and Huberman, the, um, you know, the neuro, um, the neuro guy. And he was talking about some of these, some of these issues and questions. And so when you started talking about it, he talked about sort of the frontal cortex as sort of a rule center. And when you, when you have to, you know, there's sort of a pause and a, and a moment of silence when you have to sort of switch rules and, um, and, and talked about, you know, in a sense, you know, our brains are limited and you can sort of only run one program. And so if you are running that, right, just saying good nation indignation in you can't run the curiosity program because it's like, it's sort of like, if I'm, you know, rendering a video with my GPU, I can't play some high, highly graphic game at the same time, because right. We're sorry. We're using the GPU for the righteous indignation right now. If you, if you really want to be curious, we have to lay that program aside and put the curiosity subroutines back in. Exactly. Exactly. That's really fascinating to kind of, to notice that and pay attention. It's still, I, you know, I still get, um, tricked by it from time to time, but, but, um, the circling practice kind of like a mindfulness in relationship allows for a continued exploration of that. And also really being, allowing curiosity and empathy and witnessing where somebody is without needing to change where they're at, like really become like, oh, what is, what's that like happening for you right now? Um, so that actually is, comes to one of the, my favorite videos that have recent, um, history, um, just because of the richness of it was when Jonathan Bajaj was talking to Brett Weinstein about, um, about faith, you know, they started off talking about faith and, uh, and about evolution and about, um, evolutionary dynamics. And I love the way Jonathan started off and Brett agreed. Faith doesn't necessarily mean what we think to any scientists who says they don't, they don't engage faith. We don't, we're not talking, we need to slow down and look at what we're saying because, um, and I thought it was really nicely, clearly delineated that faith typically from the scientist perspective is belief without evidence, which is problematic, but as Pajoe says that, um, trusting the unseen, um, is a different, it very subtly, but the very distinctly different from faith or the trust without evidence, right? And that aspect was a beautiful exploration of the, of the conversation. I was, and I loved the way that, uh, Jonathan was able to give Brett the freedom to explore. Um, I wished in that conversation that Brett had given the same sort of consideration to Jonathan's perspective. I wish that there had been a little bit more of a synthesis rather than just a tour of, of evolutionary thought. Um, and, uh, specifically, I thought it was very fascinating when Brett pointed out that some of Jonathan's questions were coming from sort of a cartoon version of evolution. Ah, you, you have some ideas about evolution, but you're using the cartoon version of it, which really doesn't give you enough, enough umph to really be able to look and see what's going on. And I wanted, I wanted so badly to say, and Brett, when you're looking at religion, you're looking at the cartoon version of religion and you really can't kind of get at the umph of what religion is bringing. Yeah. And so it's a, it's a fascinating place where that, that nuanced sense that I have of, of where that tension, um, where it's grounded, where does, where do this points meet up? Um, and where's there an interesting place where we can, where we can meet? I mean, I think that they did a good job at it, but I, I had a desire for, um, something a little more, um, Congress there between them. Very interesting. Yeah. It's been a while since that conversation, but yeah. And, and, and that's, that's a perpetual difficulty when you're trying to meet across these siloed domains that we increasingly have that we, and I mean, straw manning is basically the result of that, that you only engage with the cartoon version of the other's perspective. And in some ways you have to engage with the cartoon perspective because that's the only, that's that low resolution cartoon is the only entry into their perspective. And so in that sense, the cartoon is better than nothing, but it's also worse than nothing. Right. Right. Yeah. It's, it's, um, and, and it's so clear when we're doing that, that largely what we're doing is, is, um, that straw manning the other person's perspective, um, is defending some deep value and the propositions that we're bringing don't actually get down to the participatory of where we're actually disagreeing. Um, and it's, and that's, that's one of the things that having, uh, John Verbeke's language for understanding the four, the four Ps of knowing it's like, ah, let's let that gives me, um, a more dimensional, um, perspective, a more dimensional way of looking and seeing what's happening here. Um, is this the perspectival shift? Is this a procedural shift? Is this that participatory shift in the process? This is the Tory is the one that's the hardest to see. Um, but if we can get to it, if we can, if we're, if we're, can get clarity around, um, the other three, their perspectival procedural and propositional, then participatory starts to come more into the, you actually can bring that into some sense and you almost have to, you almost have to explore it in Braille. Right. You have to feel your way through that territory. Yeah. I think that's true because if you're not in a place where you both are in a participatory space, it's just really hard to mutually engage, obviously you're not participating in the same thing. So Jonathan's participating in sort of his schema and Brett's over there in evolutionary biology land, and they're both looking at cartoon versions of each other, but for them to sort of meet and, and actually get some, some deep work done together, you sort of need a shared space and that's really hard to come by, especially in a, you know, in a, in a, in a video conversation of a few hours, perhaps having only listened to the other person via video. Whereas, um, if you actually had, uh, in real life life together, where on many more levels, you're actually sharing propositions because that's what in real life is sharing hosts of propositions, but there's also the perspectival and there's also the procedural and there is also a, an in real life participatory space that you're actually mutually engaging. You have a much better shot at getting there more quickly rather than just, you know, via these little video avatars that we talk through. Right. Well, then it's interesting too, because the flip side is also the case, right? If I'm in a community where we share propositional frames so thoroughly that we don't get very deep into that, the other layers, then I, then I can, I can get into an element of foolishness, right? This is what can happen in a, in a cult kind of a scenario where we all kind of agree, but we're not really disagreeing. Nobody is really bringing the, the, the counter position sufficiently. It's not tolerated in a way that, or, or just not even interesting, right? And so it's, it's interesting for me to watch kind of what's happening. And so the, the next piece that's happening recently, that's really beautiful for me. I really enjoy watching Michael Levin and the exploration of what he's bringing with what he's learning about cell biology and cell communication and agency and collective intelligence. That's like, wow, he's really delving into something interesting and asking some good questions. I like that he's very reticent to jump into consciousness as a frontline thing. He's like, I don't really, I can't, I have some beliefs, but they're not relevant to this thing that I'm actually studying. So I don't want to get distracted by that. Um, and it's from a place that, um, that is interesting in terms of what it means about life and about spirituality, but it's not. It's not, that's not the point. It's, it's, he can stick, he can kind of, um, in some sense, stay away from the problem to a degree. Ethically, we start to get really into some, some tricky territory here, right? Um, as we're messing with life and doing some interesting things, it's like, be very careful about that. But I like that we're starting to look at life, not from the necessarily, um, CRISPR gene editing, we don't actually have to even do that. Actually just noticing the software that, that seems to be, um, where cells are communicating with each other and what is that doing? There's some interesting questions there. So I love, I love that. And then just recently, I don't know if you've seen, you know, um, Dr. James tour, yeah. Have you seen the one that he did at Rice just recently? The, uh, you've, you've, I'm sure you've seen this stuff about, you know, the origin of life, the argument and the chemistry of it. You're you're there's a video I didn't make where I took tour and Levin. Yeah. And I started to put them together on this. So keep going because it's fascinating that this is, I mean, I actually made a PowerPoint for this video. I just never had time to make it. Yeah. It's well, I just saw the James tour video that he did at Rice a couple of weeks ago, um, it was just released earlier this month. And at first I thought I'm not going to like this guy, right? Because you've been lied to and da da da da. And it's like, I thought this guy's, I don't know what he's, I don't know what he's bringing, but it's a little too strong, strongly worded. And his, and he's definitely strongly, um, positioned. At least positioned. Um, I think he, I think he, uh, I would call foul a couple of places where, uh, where he, uh, he does do a little bit of ad hominem, even though he says he, he tries not to, um, because they cheat. Right. And it's like, yeah, okay. I get it. I know what you're, I know what you're saying and why you say that. And that, but I love overall where he, where he gets to all of that. Now I'd say that, um, what his message, right. Is that what we think we understand about the origin of life and about the possibility of chemicals just coming together and doing this on their own. Like what, how does, how does the earth get into a situation where it does that? I think he points out a really good point. It is way more complex. There is something going on that, that chemistry and physics don't account for. When biology comes into the mix, something is happening. And at what point that becomes relevant, we don't know. Um, and it, and it, and it feels like it marries beautifully with what, um, with what Michael Levin is talking about, because Michael Levin is starting from biology and going down to the level of, okay, there's something here. There's something in the chemistry. There's something in the electrodynamics or something in the physics. There's something happening there. That's beautiful. And I don't need to get into faith to look and explore what that is. And, and James Torres looking at it from the perspective of, okay, let me just, let me strip this out and just look at the chemistry. Let's just start there. You're not actually doing what you say you're doing, right? So you can't make the conclusions that you're making. And I would say that in a real way, I would, the part of what I would say that he's doing, and I think he's, he's right to point this out. The chemistry can't quite work in the, in the degree that we just take raw chemicals in their pure form and put them together and expect them to do something. I don't think it works that way. Right. We know that if you purify chemical and put it in your, in your body, it's not bio available in the same way that it is if you eat it coming from a fruit. So there's something that life does something with this chemistry that makes it more life favorable, right? So there's something happening somewhere. Um, and that origin of life question is a really interesting one. And I, I was astonished to agree with him that you're right. That where we think we are with understanding origin of life, leave evolution out of it for the moment, just origin of life. We're not where we think we are. And that's a disservice to our capacity for children and young adults and people of all ages to, to delve into this question. Wow. There's something going on here that is miraculous truthfully. Yeah. And, uh, and, and, and hidden from view, because we're not, because we characterize it in a way that it's not, that doesn't give us access to the questions. Yeah. Yeah. No, well said. Well said. Yeah. Tour is such an interesting guy and his videos. And I mean, just personality wise. I mean, he's just a very competent man out there. Just yelling bullshit. Yeah. Stop the bullshit, you know? And okay. I'm an evangelical Christian. Fine. But when I'm in the lab, I'm looking at the origin of life stuff and I'm just calling bullshit on y'all. So do the work and show me please, because right now it's a lot of hand waving and you're thinking that just ad hoc, these things came together and boop out life emerged. And from there, it just all sort of scaled up and he's just saying, no, no. And, and you know, so, so Levin is so interesting too, because he adds the dimensionality of software, because basically when you're talking, um, you know, when you're talking the electric, the electrical level, you're now we're sort of barking up the tree of the stuff that we've developed over the last 50 years. Right. Well, then it's amazing that the DNA doesn't have to change, right? You can, you don't even have to, um, you don't even have to bathe it in electromagnetic field in order to get it to do something different, just taking the frog cells and putting them together. And the xenobots is like, wow, it on its own knows how to do something other than what it does in a, in a frog overall and something agentic, right? It's doing something agentic that is outside of the context of what it normally is doing. Right. And starts to exhibit behaviors. It's like, that's, that's interesting. Really interesting. And, but, but to me that also links up with, you know, John Vervecki's idea of the transjective because those frog cells are doing this by virtue of their environment and that's of course, I mean, part of the scientific method is eliminate the variables, one in a sense, when you eliminate the variables, you sort of take it into like it, when you watch the movie, the matrix, they, they plug in and they go into this completely blank space and then they start populating it with things. Well, that's sort of what we do with the scientific method because we're trying to look for tiny little ultra reliable, discrete causal relationships. Yeah. And don't that's not found in this world. Very rarely. I mean, it does make sense when, when, when we actually start looking at, um, Newton and Galileo and planetary motion, it's pure enough in that instance, that the math actually means something. It's not, not so polluted. So you can actually start to look at it. And then it takes a little while, a couple of centuries before Einstein says, wait a minute, even here. There's some, there's some discrepancies that we have to look closer at and it starts to get very strange, right? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. No, that's. Yeah. It's, it's really, it's a lot of fun looking at it. Now I'll say with, with, uh, I want to make sure that, um, I get to this before we get to the end of the time, one of the things that just popped into my head recently, I like this as a frame. Um, so I think I've booted up enough to kind of give this as a, the orientation that I use to kind of look from where I'm at and play with these notions. When I, when I say there's, um, there's one awareness with two sides and inside and an outside, inside is subjective, outside is objective, right? That sense of subjective and objective isn't absolute, right? It, it's kind of like a Mobius strip. If you keep following it around, you'll find that, oh, wait, I'm inside. No, I'm outside. Oh, wait, where is, where am I? It kind of depends on how I'm contextualizing it. That transjective is always the inside merges into and transforms into the objective, depending on how you look at it. Right. So one awareness, two sides, three loves, Eros, Philia and Agape. And I love what John did with that in the, in the meaning crisis series and paying attention to Eros is kind of the, um, domain of the agent arena. Is, um, is the consumptive love is the, is, um, kind of a hunger and a, a, a grasping for, right? Philia is, um, brethren, you know, this, this camaraderie, the Philia part of connecting at a network layer, network and node, that nodes are networking in a way that they can establish a structure. And then Agape is something like the organization and member, something like this, this, um, this higher level organized structure, um, gives energy to, um, the lower levels. And so it's something like emergent from Eros, eminent from Agape and Philia does this interesting aspect of, um, like almost like a cell membrane, almost like being able to, within the community of peers, you know, and, and I think that, um, where two or more gathered in my name, I will be done, starts to really be a place where using that emergence and emanation with Philia starts to really bring apart, bring up to the light some things that can really be done well. So the three loves, um, also have the two sides, the inside and the outside. There's something like the Eros on the negative side is something like parasitism. Philia on the negative side, it goes from competition to cooperation, right? And Agape is like unconditional love in the positive side and conditional love on the, on the negative side. So I look at something like a venture capital capitalist who is like putting a lot of strings on the love that's poured into it. I'm going to take a lot of backup from that. And so it's an interesting notion of this balance of the, of that form from one layer of the, of the, uh, holon to another layer of the holon. That holonic layer has a, has a bottom surface, a top surface and the structural surface that allows that to, to express. Um, and then the four ways of knowing kind of play into that as well. The, the, um, the seer, the prospect, the seeing the procedural, the scene, the, is that, um, the perspective is propositional. And then I call it the scene through, which is the participatory, this frame that, that really is the substrate for that, um, that really looks at prospectival, procedural and propositional together that allows a kind of participatory in that, in that thing. So it's, you know, one, two, three, four beautifully as a frame is nicely, uh, you know, it would be something that would be possible at a fairly, you know, high school level to teach that and the exploration of some kind of questions and, um, including the subjective and objective and transjective, and the subjective and objective and transjective and some of the questions. And I see it starting to come about in conversations, right? Some of the conversations in the, in this corner are like really starting to play with that. And I could see where it, when it gets a little tight and somebody gets, you know, a little, a little bit more, um, positional, you know, some value, ah, what's the value, what, what's the value that feels being, like it's being violated and how can we hold that, um, witness what's happening in that without necessarily needing to be in the same place, right? I don't need to be in the same place, but I can kind of play, find, gently find the place where we diverge and see what can we, what can we learn by, by finding the place where we diverge and seeing if we can touch that, touch that fault line. Very cool. Very cool. Have you, so where are you, where are you participating in this little corner of the internet? Obviously you grabbed a rando slot for which I'm really super glad because this will, you know, this will get a chance to get you out there and so people can begin to engage with your ideas. Are you doing any estuary things? You've got your circling thing. I mean, where, where are you, where can you be found? I am, I am doing a circling here in Austin and, uh, I, I had taken time off from, we also do it online as well. Um, I also participated in one of the, the, uh, locus, uh, dialectic to deal locus, uh, things with Guy and John and, uh, and Christopher, uh, while back. So I love looking at that, you know, what is that? I'm also looking at really how to bring this into the workplace. It's one of the things that I have, I still have a deep desire for that. And I can still see the challenge of it. Um, a work environment is really challenging to bring this kind of intimacy and vulnerability really challenging because we have an overriding story, but it's also almost essential, right? Yeah. Post COVID, if we don't learn to, and the difference between the baby boomers retiring and the, and Jim Z and millennials coming into the workplace, we're going to have to learn how to, how to match up and, and figure out where this vulnerability and intimacy comes to line without crossing over that, without crossing over that line. So it's, it's, um, I'm working on a, I've been kind of silently working on a book, um, tentatively titled titled, um, trust is that technology. A friend of mine said, uh, make it the trust molecule. It's a little bit more, more stazzy, but there's something in the notion, notion of trust as it relates to the two different forms of faith, right? Faith that scientists typically think of and faith that religious people typically think of and seeing those as two faces of faith that aren't necessarily in conflict with another, but definitely have a different sense, right? It's the same kind of a objective subject of faith. Um, and looking at trust from that perspective of not, do I trust you from the propositional, but what does trust mean from perspectival, procedural and that participatory? Um, so I'm, I'm, uh, exploring this and seeing, uh, yeah, I was, I was really delighted, uh, when I was seeing your, the, after the thunder bay and, um, you'd mentioned again, you're kind of opening up the, uh, the rando slots. And I was like, Hey, I'm just going to check and see. And it was happy to see the one was available. Good for you. I know there's a lot of competition for those slots and people whine at me all the time. I can't get a slot. And I always tell them, don't, don't, I don't want to, I don't want to have people trying all week long. I always say Mondays. It's usually a Monday, not always, but it's usually a Monday, sometimes a Sunday that I'll, I'll, I'll look ahead at the week and say, all right, I can do Wednesday and open them up and then they usually fill in pretty quick. So, yeah, yeah, it's, it's, um, it's a lot of fun. The, the, I, like I said, back in 2005, when I first started trying to have conversations about this stuff, I didn't have a, I didn't have a vocabulary or didn't know who was thinking about this. Clearly the people that were doing stuff at Esalen for awhile were doing something like that. And I don't know if you happened to see, happened to be able to check out, uh, there, there was a conversation recently that, uh, Nora Bateson had with, uh, Daniel Schmackenberger and, uh, and she talked a little bit about, uh, she grew up, um, her father, uh, Gregory Bateson spent a lot of time at Esalen. So, uh, as a 10 and 11 year old kid, she was hanging out at Esalen. And I don't know anything about Esalen. I don't know what it is. Um, Esalen was, it's Big Sur, um, California and, uh, the, in the sixties and seventies, a bunch of the hippie people got together, um, uh, people like, um, Oh, a lot of people got together and kind of threw out the rules of convention and were cross pollinating their ideas and trying to really figure out stuff. But it was, you know, everything from sex, drugs, and rock and roll to deep philosophy and science and all kinds of things. So, um, Gregory Bateson, if you know, was, um, one of the early cyberneticists and cybernetics, not from the computer perspective, but really from that perspective of life, um, being, having a feedback mechanism, um, what is that? You know, cyber comes from the same root as government. Um, and that governance is more of a feedback loop rather than, um, control from the outside. It's the, like self-control or inter like the transjective control versus objective controllers. Subjective control. So, um, there's a lot of stuff going on there, but what she said was most beneficial for her as a kid was watching adults learn, they really got into an environment where they did a lot of things. And so a lot of the stuff that came about, came about because of that, uh, fed into, um, the stuff that's now being this corner of the internet. That was kind of the pre-internet version of this corner of the internet. Right. Interesting. Um, and it was a little more wild, right? It was, uh, you know, including the naked volleyball and stuff. It was, we haven't had any of that. Job was always concerned when we first started talking about getting together. Job's like, was it going to be shirtless volleyball? At least there we had our shorts on. So, um, no, we were, we're, we're, we're a pretty tame bunch in this little corner of the internet. Right. But I am, I am curious about what happened, what's possible, you know? So I am, I am looking for, I was glad to see, um, the Thunder Bay stuff happen. Um, fascinated also that, that this moment seems like there's some challenge there as well. I loved, uh, the fact that as y'all try to include Richard, it was like, Oh, wait a minute. How do we do this without having a shared base of language to, to bring him up to speed? Right. And interestingly, the, the stuff that I brought in kind of my, the simple frame that you and I were able to connect on is kind of a boot up sequence, right? It's not enough to actually delve deep, but it's enough to start asking some questions and like, Oh, okay, wait a minute, here's a place where let's, let's slow down and, and, and navigate this a little more slowly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I say by, by the possibility of it. And at the same time, um, I see a lot of people struggling with trying to connect worlds that are at current, um, a little too, the gap is a little too wide right now. Yeah. No, that's, that's true. That's true. And you did, you said, you know, your one, two, three, four, that was, that was really kind of a lovely, you know, quite brief sort of, here's some relationships that you can sort of, um, that you can, here they are. And obviously the relationships are profound and this is just a fairly skim skinny outline, but you can sense that, you know, they go deeper and it's, um, and the language isn't, you know, the language isn't hostile to Christianity in terms of the, um, you know, the, uh, some of the, some of the common words that we're using, understanding arrows, understanding filet, understanding agape, understanding how they're relational and, um, yeah, no, very cool. Yeah. Very cool. Well, thank you, David so much. Um, this is, this is something that you're intended that I share because, okay, good. I will. Um, because this has been, this has been, this has been very, very cool. And thank you for, thank you for sharing your story. I mean, part of the reason, I mean, sometimes people want to sort of jump into the ideas that they have, but I also know that, um, most human beings. Are not going to care anything about your ideas until they have some kind of connection with you. And that's, that's what the story gives because somewhere in your story, Oh, Oh, he's a child of divorce. Oh, his parents did this. Well, my parents did that. I mean, just that internal connection just really helps people to say, kind of settle down and say, okay, well, he's, you know, I won't have to be afraid of him. Um, he's a human being like I am, and there are points of connection. And so I'll at least give it a listen. So that's part of the reason I, I almost always do do biography. Well, I appreciate it. You're you're your format and your openness with talking to people across a wide range as exactly the kind of stuff that, you know, I'm really glad that you're doing this story stuff. And that's really bringing those like narrowing the gap to make it a little more possible for people from different domains to come together. It's beautiful. Well, well, thank you. Thank you. All right. Well, um, I will send you a link to this and yeah, I will share it on the channel, you know, in the not too distant future. Thank you so much. Thank you, David. I'll do. Bye.