https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fcUfFUh5Hys

 record this, so I'll record this. Well, how are you? I am doing well. How are you? I'm doing well. Thanks. We've never spoken. So why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Okay. My name is Andrew Tinsley. I am 25 years old and live here in Houston, Texas. And I am an investment analyst for a very small company. There are three of us in the office typically, and I'm the only one under 60 years old. So that's interesting. I'm sure you're adding some wisdom that that everyone over 60 doesn't have. What are them kids thinking these days? Andrew, you explain it to us. I hope so. They've certainly added a lot of wisdom to me. So how did you get into being an investment analyst? And what do you do with that name? So mostly what I do is I research what's going on in the stock market and make recommendations on what our investment allocation should be for client portfolios. My boss is a financial advisor. So we work together on how to put together portfolios for our clients. Okay, so you do all kinds of research and you make recommendations and... Right. Okay. Okay. Is this something you always wanted to be? I wouldn't say I always wanted to. It's kind of something I'm good at and I found my way into during college and after college. My boss's wife and my mom have been friends for a long time. So that's how I ended up getting this job. Oh, cool. Cool. And how's the weather in Houston? It has finally cooled down a little bit. So it's about 75 degrees outside right now. It was pretty brutal this summer. I've been to Houston and it's like California, it can get hot here in the Central Valley, but it gets humid in Houston. Oh, yeah. Hot and humid. Oh, yeah. Perpetually feels like you just got out of the shower. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. So what's on your mind today? What do you want to talk about? Well, I wanted to talk a little bit about some issues that I've kind of been thinking through concerning my faith. I am a Christian and doubt and how that works together. I'm a naturally very skeptical person and I've been dealing with a lot of questions and and doubt about my faith for the last year or so especially but for you. Were you raised in a Christian home? Yes, I was. Okay. And what kind of a church did you grow up going to? I grew up in Southern Baptist churches. The church that I'm now a member of is a reformed ish non denominational church. Very small new church plant has about 50 people on a Sunday and we meet in an elementary school cafeteria. Very cool. Very cool. So tell me more about these doubts. Well, I can doubt pretty much anything. So mostly, is Christianity even true has been been the main thing reading a lot about. I'm definitely a theology and biblical scholarship nerd. I read stuff like that for fun. So being exposed to a lot of the higher critical biblical scholars that I don't think a lot of other Christians that I know have read and so dealing with those kind of perspectives can be a little bit unsettling to somebody who was raised in the church. Do you think you do you think you read some of this stuff because you doubt or are you reading this stuff to address your doubts? Probably a little bit of both. I definitely read a lot of the Christian response to some of it. Okay. Like I just finished NT Wright's big book on the resurrection. What'd you think of it? I thought his arguments were generally compelling. So I enjoyed it. But one of the main things I wanted to talk through with you was the fact that you can never prove any of the doctrines of Christianity the same way you could prove a mathematical theorem. So at some point, there has to be a commitment. And there are people who are smarter than I am who go different directions. And so, so one of the main things I wanted to talk through with you was what place historical arguments like like NT Wright's and other people's can what place those should have in my life versus a more of a leap of faith. Yeah, yeah. I said, I think people a lot of people are wired in different ways. You know, if you just look at NT Wright's book, The Resurrection of the Son of God, how many people are going to read that book? I mean, the thing is this fact. And you got to really love history if you want to read that book, because it is it is a lot of history and then a lot of argumentation. And so. So, you know, people believe belief is something that is below the waterline of of a lot of belief is below the waterline of our conscious of our lived conscious experience. We don't believe belief isn't really subject to our direct volition. Now, belief might be, I think probably is more subject to a lot of our conditioning. And we can choose to one degree or another to condition ourselves in certain directions or opposed to certain things. But beliefs are again, you know, sort of below the waterline of our consciousness field. So that's, that's important. And I think also the experience of doubt then when it comes, if we if we understand that about ourselves, doubt is probably an expression of dissonance and conflicts deep within ourselves that are being expressed as emotion that we call doubt. One of one of my favorite things with respect to doubt I get from Tim Keller, who noted that we sort of conceptualize doubt as an absence of belief. And Keller notes that we were probably it's probably more accurate to conceptualize doubt as a competition between beliefs. And so it's no wonder that contemporary people have doubts given the competition of belief structures and claims that we live in the midst of, you know, it's so funny, we have this rather Pollyannaish view of diversity. And Jonathan Haidt talks about this quite eloquently that diversity is just this on, you know, this, this complete good. Well, there are many, many different kinds of diversities. And if you if you conceptualize belief as belief in doubt as a competition of beliefs, diversity at many different levels is going to produce dissonance in us again, a lot of this probably below the water line. So and part of what you know, part of what we wrestle with is say different conceptual systems, one conceptual system might be, should we be most committed to the truth? Or should we be most committed to the fidelity of a particular religious position? Well, obviously, someone who's committed to the fidelity of a particular religious tradition equates that tradition with the truth. But but again, a lot of these a lot of these things are beneath the waterline. And, and so on one hand, we sort of our bodies and our minds sort of inform us of this dissonance, usually through things like emotion. And, and they're not, we can't address these things. I mean, we kind of hold our breath and dive down and try to monkey with stuff. But the reason I use this image of waterline is we can't hold our breath very long, we come up and we find ourselves believing what we believe. And so we, you know, we wrestle with things and, and we try to engage with these things. But so then reading a book like, like NT writes, the resurrection of the Son of God will probably be just a few people for whom their salience landscape, you know, combines with their capacities and says, Yeah, this resurrection thing, that's pretty tough, because I've never seen a resurrection. And, and, and almost every case, every case that I know of, almost dead people stay dead. And then when you begin to even continue to look at the resurrection of Jesus, you begin to notice that this resurrection is kind of different from even some of the resurrections that Jesus himself did, like to Lazarus. And so maybe we shouldn't be using the same word for both of those, but we don't have another maybe resuscitation for Lazarus and resurrection for Jesus. But you know, by that point, we're already pretty deep into the weeds on these issues. And so I think that, and again, I think Tim Keller writes well about a lot of this stuff. I think actually, in many ways, for the sake of the Christian church, it's a good thing that a lot of smart, committed Christians have doubts, because your wrestling with these doubts will actually achieve for you insights and learnings and knowledge and experience that you can actually help others with. And so whereas when I was a kid, I thought about, you know, people walking away from the faith or people violating their faith. And in my, you know, sixth grade perspective, that was just a wholly wrong thing. I look at it now. And whereas I'm not saying people walking away from the faith or violating the faith is necessarily something to be celebrated. But all of this struggle that we're doing, in a sense, what we're doing is all of the diversity and pluralism that's been manifest in our context is all below the surface. And we're wrestling with that. And so, you know, hopefully, if you wrestle faithfully with it, you're going to become helpful to people. And, you know, people watch my YouTube channel, and some people say I've, I've been helpful to them. It's probably the case that the degree to which I have been helpful, has been the degree to which I have experienced doubts and suffering and struggles. And I've worked through some things that here's something that might help you. And so on the grand scheme of things, I don't see these doubts as necessarily a bad thing for the overall ecosystem of the church. And so, well, Jesus, you know, Romans 12 says, you know, you know, present ourselves as living sacrifices. Well, I guess I guess you're on the altar of doubt there. And that's part of the sacrifice that you're going to be rendering. So that might not be much fun for you. But, you know, in terms of the great scheme of things, people offer themselves as living sacrifices to lions and burning at the stake and, you know, persecution. So if doubts, it's if doubts your flavor, well, you might count yourself lucky. Maybe it's better than a spit. Oh, yeah, absolutely. And I guess it's sort of a necessity is the mother of invention type thing. Lots of lots of great theologians have wrestled with with things like this and produced works that have have helped the church and helped me. Yeah. Well, you think about, you know, Augustine, someone like Augustine, I mean, he so he's raised in the Donatist cat, you know, controversy, his mother was a Donatist, not a Catholic. He spent a long time in the Manicheans. He was deeply impacted by neoplatonism. All of that gets poured into Augustine's work and Augustine becomes especially of the Western Church, one of the chief one of the chief contributors to the Western Church. And so God, God can be very economical and use stuff that we think God can't use. Oh, absolutely. So you were talking about how lots of times our beliefs are sort of below the waterline of our of our intellect. This, that sort of brings me to another thing I wanted to get your input on, which was how how how I've been thinking about doubt tying into some of the work that guys like you and Jordan Peterson have done on meaning and I from what I've seen there are there are really two different types of people who are in the church who are doubting their faith, there are those who are looking for a way out and those who want their faith to be preserved. I'm definitely one of the latter because I can from what I can see, there's really no way to have a consistent purpose for living in a in a completely materialistic universe without any transcendent purpose outside of outside of the material world. Hope I'm making sense there. Yeah, no, I agree. I think and even in even many even many atheists have made similar observations that we simply and Peterson, I think makes these points very well. We simply are not the kind of creature that can go about their day, like my dog seems to go about his day. I mean, my dog, my dog seems to live for the moments that we come home from work and we put food in his dog dish, and we play with them and pet him and I mean, that that seems to be the sum total of my dog. We, in order to be the kinds of amazingly powerful, sophisticated creatures that we are, we, we require this vast imaginative landscape through which we develop incredible relationships with one another can manage incredibly complex social structures productively. We're, you know, it's gonna be really, really complicated for us as human beings. We live we again, I, you know, I have to really give credit to, to john vervecki and some of his work and some of this and, and Peterson, I mean, we, we, we many ways are these stories, stories don't age like my body ages. And, and our relationships are also stories. And we live in the midst of all of this. And it's tremendously complicated and difficult. And, you know, so for example, suicide is just an astoundingly telling thing about us that that people who have people who are wrestling for material survival don't kill themselves too often. It's it's a lot of the suicide we see are people who have, at least from my dog's perspective, everything to live for. And so then what is killing them? And I think, you know, in our culture, we, we have a rather self serving story that says, oh, they were depressed, as if that suddenly clears it up. You know, why, why do people get depressed when a loved one dies, or there's a stumble in a in a romantic relationship, or they lose a job, or they're, they're not, they don't perceive themselves as being respected by those other two legged, two arm, two eared people around them. I mean, we're fantastically complex creatures. And meaning is meaning is this vital system. And I think Peterson gets this, you know, he really gets this right. And I learned a lot from Peterson and that meaning it meaning is this vital system that that flows within us and between us that, that we can't live without. And so, yeah, that's how we are, which leads people to, you know, suddenly disparage people who live in rich imaginative worlds, like religious worlds, as well, that's somehow just superstition. It's like, I so agree with Peterson when he's dealing with some of these celebrity atheists. That's that just doesn't, it doesn't contend seriously with any mature observation about what people are like. And I see that all the time I listen to people talk and I think, have you met a human being? You know, you you you look like a human being? Have you sat reflectively and noticed how people relate to one another? What makes them happy? What makes them sad? What motivates them to do things? You know, yeah, you want to just sort of take all of our guts out of us and make us into these little machines? Well, good luck. You're that that seems to be the project, but you're never really going to get there. So, so. So what I was wondering is, and I, I completely agree with what you just said. So is, is the fact that I can see that possibly a means of God's grace in, in keeping me within within the faith, just how, how hollow life would seem otherwise? Because because like, like you said, it's not purely intellectual, nobody's working through these things purely on an intellectual level. No, very much so. And and here's the thing you can either, you can either learn from your own mistakes, or you can learn from the mistakes of others. And, and what you'll find is that, you know, many people come to Christianity and other religions from, from a nihilistic atheistic existence, partly because the thing the thing about the thing about materialist atheism that I don't get is on that when I when I sort of mind read myself into the future, if I were an atheist, I can't derive any ought for being an atheist. And so even if I was an atheist, knowing what I know about not being an atheist, I would rather not be an atheist. That then puts you on the horns of, well, how do I believe in a God that I really don't believe in? And I appreciate the fact that many people sort of wind up on those horns. But I, again, by virtue of how I was raised, and, and the delightful Christian witness that I received growing up, that's not my dilemma. But I sure there are many times that I want to act irresponsibly and rebelliously against the moral tenets of my faith, and sometimes do. But I, and I understand some of the burdens that that religions put on people not only in terms of how they behave, but the ways that they have to think. But I don't see the alternative as a better way. Now, obviously, some people do, and so they choose it. But I, I, I don't see what it would get me to chuck my belief in, in a loving, saving, resurrecting God. And so I stick with it. Yep, me too. So I'm kind of going back a little bit to what we were talking about earlier. So, so what place do you, what do you think for me? I apologize if I'm asking a question that I that I already did. What, what place do you think evidentialist apologetics should have in how I, in how I think through things, knowing that, knowing that it's not a purely intellectual struggle? I think if you find it helpful, you should do it. I don't, again, I've said this a number of times, I don't find many people necessarily become Christians because of apologetics. But I, I mean, I've mentioned a number of times too that I, I haven't, I haven't, I do so much, so much more apologetics now than I did before I started making YouTube videos. But I would read C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles once or twice a year. And Miracles is an apologetic book. But I would read it because, because doubts would begin to creep up in me. And I found that the book helped me. I found that in a sense, reading the book was sitting with Brother Lewis, who was a, you know, a much smarter, more learned man than I. And by reading that book multiple times, I, every time I would read it was like, Oh, I didn't really appreciate that before. I didn't appreciate that before. And, and I found that apologetics helped me deal with doubts and arguments that were bothering me. And I couldn't sort of get at them myself. I didn't know how. I might not have even understood that these are the things that were bothering me. And so, you know, what we do sometimes is, is we don't know what's bothering us. And so we self medicate. And so if, if reading NT Wright or C.S. Lewis or Tim Keller, you're finding consolation and strengthening by those, by those works, by all means, read them. One thing that Lewis notes that I hadn't really thought of, I mean, there's so much that you don't think of until you read someone who's, you know, who's, who's gone before, and has learned a few things. Lewis makes the point that the, that the Gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, these were written by Christians for Christians, for Christians edification, strengthening and encouragement. And now they are in some ways, they can be used as tools and apologetics, but they are written for our, for our encouragement. And that's what the church does. And so if if listening to William Lane Craig or, or any of these people you find really helpful, I say do it. But they're not your faith. I mean, they strengthen your faith. But and I think that's why it's also important. I think a lot of people today are rationalistic society makes people prioritize the directness of certain things and not appreciate more indirect things. And that's where I think faithful attendance at church is important. Because where, you know, if I'm reading CS Lewis's miracles, that strengthens me in some ways. But when I worship with the body of Christ and saying participate in the liturgy, take communion, you know, all of that life within the church strengthens me in other ways below the waterline. And, and also deals with my doubts. And sometimes my doubts aren't intellectual. If, if some part of my life is coming apart, you know, I just need to hear from my community, that I don't suffer alone, and others have suffered before me. And I'm not going to suffer alone. And that, you know, walking the path behind Christ is a cruciform walk. And so again, and I find so often emotionally, what helps me are so often the songs, or the liturgy, the scripture, the presence in the body. And so whereas I know a lot of people who are sort of, they're kind of on the cusp of thinking about Christianity, I encourage them start going to church because, again, our beliefs are not directly subject to our volition. But they do seem in many ways subject to our shapings. And so our beliefs and our doubts are these things below the waterline that are, are being expressed on top of it. Yeah, I definitely have found regular attendance at church, extremely helpful. And being around other believers has been probably the most helpful thing in going through this. Of course, the doubting side of me would say, well, if you hung around flat earthers all the time, you might start questioning whether the world was round. Yes, you would. That's very, very true. It's a very fair point. But then you also have to ask yourself, why would I want to do that? And so I mean, trust me, I know this game I play inside myself. And no, that's, you're very right. You're very right. So, so then we have to ask yourself, well, why do I want to be shaped by the church? Well, who wouldn't want to believe that the maker of this world is love, and that, in fact, the maker of this world knows you personally, and has yours and others best welfare in, you know, as the target of his intent. And, oh, that's, that's all really helpful things to know, but not even just selfish ways, but that, you know, also part of the package is that you will give yourself to this world, and you will love your neighbors all the way up to and including your enemies. I mean, I want my neighbor to believe this. I want my neighbor to act that way. So I, again, I look at I look at Christianity, and I haven't seen another religion that, that says to me, here's a better deal. Here's something that's more beautiful for you to believe and pursue with your life. And, and also, I want objective morality and human rights to exist. That's right. That's right. And I want them for me and my enemies. And that's a hard, that's a, that's a struggle right now in our culture. People are like, those people don't deserve human rights. Well, I don't think you quite understand what rights means. It means that our enemies get them too. And the, where we've been, I think people who can't appreciate the freedoms that we enjoy in this country should go live in other places in the world that have less freedom. And I think they would have a newfound appreciation for, you know, for for what we so easily enjoy and should try to preserve in in this country and in other countries. Yeah, I would definitely not a lot of disagreement in this video. No, not really. Sorry, if that makes it boring. Oh, that's okay. James will have to live with it. I give him I give him grief because he once said, some of those conversations are boring. And then then he says to me, my favorite channels, the randos channel now I says that's all conversation James, buddy. I give him a hard time and he complaints that I give him too hard a time, but that's okay. Now each each conversation usually brings out a lot of you know, one of the things that I think about with this channel is everyone's going to, you know, I think I think Peterson is right, it's really helpful. You have this mapped and unmapped territory, and we kind of want a you have too much unmapped territory, we get anxious too much map territory, we get bored, you kind of have to keep that balance in there. And, and there's a lot of videos where I'm doing one thing. And so I think that's one of the things that I want to do is I want to do one thing. And so I find actually doing conversations with random people, as as the people on the channel dubbed it actually a pretty good way of keeping balance because different people will come with different ideas and different things they want to talk about. And that actually, I think, makes a lot of sense. And so some conversations like this one that I think are, will perhaps be encouraging to Christians, well, I want some of those conversations on my channel too. So it's good. I'm not worried. I'm not anxious. I'm not a very anxious person. That's that's definitely a blessing. It is a blessing. It is a blessing. Can't take credit for it. So so another thing that that I've been thinking about lately is some of your listeners who may be outside the the Christian bubble may not be aware of this, but there have been a lot of I'm not sure a lot, but there have been several high profile apostasies lately, people walking away from from the faith and saying that they, they no longer identify with Christianity. So what's going on? grown up with in the church have, have left their faith. So all of that was going on at the same time that I was was dealing with a lot of these doubts, which caused me to have a great deal of fear that maybe I'm going to be next. I'm not smarter or more holy than any of these other people. So what grounds do I have for hoping that I'm going to make it to the end? Yeah, you know, it's again, I, you know, when a Gerard's observation that in Western culture, Christianity has been so in some ways thoroughly dissolved into the solution of the culture that even the enemies of it can't even the enemies of it use Christian ideas to attack Christianity is such a helpful idea. And even at looking some of looking at some of these high profile renunciations of the faith, many of these people who are renouncing and walking away from especially the practice of the faith, so often seem to do so for expressing reasons that are aligned with other aspects of the faith, which is really interesting. And I often, you know, I often remind people that, you know, you know, one of the big controversies in the church, obviously now is, is whether the church should, you know, readjust its moral expectations along the lines of same sex marriage and some of this, that the entire, the entire framework of, of concern for sexual minorities, and the attempt to afford them affirmation and legitimacy on equal footing, as you know, traditional sexuality had been afforded. That all comes from the root of concern for the weak that comes to us in our culture from Christianity. And so in many ways, people are abdicating from the faith, you know, often espousing reasons that are also rooted within the faith. And I think what they will begin to discover though, is that in our, and I think we begun to see this in our culture. Loving, loving people is a far more difficult and complex thing than our culture likes to indicate. Because our culture, in a sense, dumbs down love into kindness, and any dumbing down just simply won't have the staying power of the genuine article. And so what that, what that leads to then is, okay, so we want to, we want to love the, we want to love the oppressed, and we want to show concern for those who have been on the bottom end of the pile. And all of that is, is the fruit of deeply Christian motivation. The difficulty, however, is that Jesus, Jesus was not the kind of revolutionary that normal revolution assumes balances the scale, which is that, well, the crimes of the Romans against the Jews is addressed by the blood of the Romans. That's how humanity has addressed inequalities. So first of all, Christianity affords them an idea that the weak and the dispossessed have value, and their value ought to be regarded and protected by the entire community. That's an affordance of Christianity. But the next thing that Christianity does is not engage in violent revolution against the overlords. That's at the heart of the gospel message. And that's at the heart of the culture war within which Jesus lived. And so on one hand to say, I'm going to be like Jesus, and treat the prostitute and the sexual sinner and those who are wobbly in their religious observance with kindness and grace. Well, that is Jesus like. But then you're decidedly un-Jesus like if you're going to somehow find justice for them, bathing your hands in the blood of Romans and Roman sympathizers, or Pharisees, or other factions in the first century Judean culture war. You're very much unlike Jesus. And it was Jesus' refusal to pick up the sword in the Garden of Gethsemane that causes his disciples to flee and has Jesus crucified all by himself. And so on one hand, I very much respect Christians and their love and concern for those for whom the structures of this world have been particularly difficult and burdensome. Amen to that level. But don't forget the second move, which was that what Jesus did not do was decide that he could balance those equations with the blood of the Romans. And it was exactly that move that Jesus makes that turns the empire upside down because the formula for every empire is my wellbeing at the expense of my enemies. And Jesus flips that around and says, my enemy's wellbeing at the expense of my blood. Now, anybody who looks at that in a pragmatic way will say, now, wait a minute, that can't work. But they have to face the historical, this is what N.T. Wright writes a lot about, they have to face the historical evidence that it did. And in fact, that historical evidence is being born witness to in the lives and the arguments of those who are defecting from the faith. In other words, they really don't understand the full picture. And a number of other things have slipped in, including a sort of utopian vision, which is a regular facet of human revolution that imagines once we're in power, we'll get it right. And well, the Who has a good song about that because it just goes right. I mean, it's called revolution for a reason. It just keeps going round. And someone should say, maybe we should stop the revolution. And maybe, in fact, we should ponder the one who both tells the disciples to bring swords to the garden and then tells them to put them away. It seems abundantly clear Jesus is setting this whole thing up to teach us all something. What, you're gonna teach us something with your life? Yes. And then, of course, there's the resurrection. And the fact that I don't hear people walking away from Christianity for Christian reasons and maintaining a belief in the resurrection. And I think that's telling because if you can't believe the resurrection, you're gonna have real doubts about Jesus' program of Christians laying down their life for their enemies. Because what you've really done is absorb the materialist culture and basically said, we need to have heaven now. And as I've said before, when we try to bring down heaven, we usually bring up hell with it. Yep. Have you heard about Tom Holland's new book that's coming out? I can't wait to read it. In fact, I can't wait to read it so much, I've started reading some of his other books in anticipation of reading that book. So I listened to Glenn, I always say his last name wrong, Scrivener's interview with Tom Holland that was on YouTube. And that was tremendous. And I think Justin Briarley has some interviews with Tom Holland in the can that I can't wait to listen to. But the book is released in the United States at the end of this month. And I'm gonna buy it the day it's released. And my only question is going to be, am I going to try and so I'm currently in, what's the title of the book that I'm in? It's one on Caesar's family. And I'm currently in that one, which I'm really enjoying. And then there's the one on Islam that I'd really like to read, but I think I'll probably not be able to hold myself back from dominion. I'm going to jump in as soon as I can. Yeah, it sounds like he's going to talk about exactly what you were saying about concern for the poor and the weak didn't originate with the Greeks or the Romans that it is a distinctively Christian idea. And so I think you're right, a lot of people I've seen that have walked away from the church, it seems like their complaint is Christians aren't being Christian enough. And that's, I'm a pastor. That's my job to complain to people that they're not Christian enough. That's what I remind them of every week. And the problem is that I have to remind myself of that too. None of us are Christian enough. But that's also part of the reason that, you know, we're saved by grace through faith and not by works, lest any of us can boast because none of us are Christian enough. Yet, again, my appeal to those defecting from the faith is I think they're, I think they're setting themselves up for both disappointment and the society for the continuing revolutions of imagining that, oh, well, if we put all the victims in charge, they'll do right. And it's like, why do we have this saying hurt people hurt people? You know, it's, we are not going to get this right. We are not. We never have. I have zero confidence in our own power. We will. And I think that's partly why Christianity sees a dramatic break in history in terms of the second coming and the consummation for the commencement of the commencement of the age to come. And the New Testament frames it in the life, the present evil age and the age to come. And they overlap in our lives. And but I think, again, those who give up on the resurrection, implicitly begin to imagine out of desperation, we must use the tools at hand to advance ourselves up the power ladder to, to create the world that we want to see. And we've seen this program run again and again and again, and it, it won't work. Does it mean that we can't, that we can't, can't or shouldn't strive for a more just world? Yeah, but we're, let's do that together. And usually, it's, it's in almost every case, the, the ways that we are attempting to address injustices today, or the injustices we are trying to address today, were the previous generations remedies for injustice. And in that way, we go around and round two. And now maybe we're making improvements and, and we should continue to strive for that. But we should have a, a sincere skepticism about our capacity to initiate the eschaton under our own administration. So do you think that people adopt that, that sort of ideology because they've come to doubt the resurrection? Or does it happen in the, in the opposite order? Do they, do they doubt the resurrection because they're so focused on establishing a utopia here that, that it no longer seems that belief in, in the new heavens and new earth no longer seems necessary or a priority for them? Or, or imaginable. I think some who defect from the faith are defecting because of, again, secular influences under the water line. It's, it's simply been, it's simply the bathtub that they're sitting in. And so they're absorbing it. I, I, you know, it's interesting because when I see others, so some tend to defect towards the secular route. Others tend to defect towards the new age spiritualist, often sort of a romanticist route. And, and when I, when I watch them defect, I often find them reaching for ideas like reincarnation, which I don't find that to be an upgrade because what that means is, okay, so they're going to come back to this world and keep working on stuff in this world of frustration and pain. Oh, that I, I, you know, the, I understand some of the development of purgatory. I understand why the Protestant reformers decided to not teach that because there is a legitimate question about in this dispensation, obviously there needs to be some translation into our being better actors in the life of the age to come. And I'll trust God to work that out in whatever way God does. But again, I find defectors of the faith usually either move towards a secularist model, which will tend to make them more political. So they be, they have a, their, their politics becomes their religion or kind of a romanticist new age model where they're very fuzzy on a lot of things, but then usually just kind of grab some low hanging fruit like reincarnation or karma, karma. So I'll press them on that if, if, if the opportunity presents itself. And what I usually find that for the majority of people who kind of blithely drift that way, they don't have a lot of good answers. And at least when they were still within the church, not always, but sometimes within the church, they had been afforded the wisdom that the church had, that had been given them throughout the ages. And, and, you know, all these answers have, have limitations within them, but at least they had some fairly well thought through answers that they could deal with. Now, again, as if we go all the way back to the beginning of our conversation, I have also seen people leave the faith because basically they needed to get out of a certain box within the Christian church that they couldn't grow within. So they might leave the faith and they may come back into the faith in a different context that would afford them more growth. So, so I also want to be, I also want to be careful about being too pessimistic about those who defect that they in fact, if they come back, won't find that even in their defection, God's grace had been working towards the perfection of their life in him. So, so, so it's just the difference between leaving Christ versus leaving an unhealthy church lots of times. Yeah, well, sometimes people do leave Christ because that's the only way they seem to be able to leave an unhealthy church. But, you know, life is a long song, as Jethro Tull said, and that's, that's sometimes, you know, God uses strange ways to affect what he wants to do. And so I think part of the package is that we ought not too quickly doubt God's work in people's lives when they take turns that we can't necessarily see the end of in a happy way. So, have you ever seen someone who's, who's left the church and left Christianity solely because of encountering intellectual or scholarly objections, rather than just absorbing the sort of secular ideology of how the how the church isn't kind toward sexual centers or something like that? Yeah, I don't know that it's an either or. I think, why do we, why do the ideas that grab us, grab us? And I think it's because we find a deep, we find a correlation between what we see in the world. And so it isn't that these ourselves are, are, are in clean rooms, separate from other selves, that we're all this mix. And so when we see a certain, when we see a certain thing, and it's attractive to us, there are probably multiple factors involved. And whether that gets expressed in an intellectual argument, or that it gets expressed in a just kind of a, I feel like doing this, but has a lot to do with temperament and how an individual is wired and brought up. And so I don't know that those are things working at different levels. Well, we were just about out of time. You have one last thing you wanted to say or what's your pleasure? I don't think so. I think that's about, that's just about everything that I wanted to, to talk to you about. So I definitely appreciate you taking the time to talk to me. I've really enjoyed it. Well, I you know, is this a conversation that you would be willing to have me share? Or do you want to look at it first? Or is this something you'd rather keep between us? What's what are your thoughts on that? You certainly can post it if you want to. I'd be happy to see it. Okay, okay. Well, I'll probably post it probably this week or the next. I've got a trip coming out up out east. And I'm kind of thinking maybe I should get a bunch of videos in the can so my channel isn't empty while I'm gone. But I'll have to figure that out. So so thank you. And thank you for being here. Yeah, you're welcome. I'm looking forward to seeing it. All right. Very good. Thank you, Andrew. Bye. Have a good evening. You too. Bye bye.